Viewpoint:  Lessons Of 
The Calabasas Crash Mark Baier  December 06, 2021

In January 2020, a helicopter carrying basketball legend Kobe Bryant 
and eight others flew into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) 
during a VFR flight, leading to its crash into terrain near Calabasas, 
California, and the death of all souls onboard. Among the NTSB’s 
probable cause findings, announced in February 2021, the board cited 
an “inadequate review and oversight of [the operator’s] safety 
management processes” as a contributing factor. 

Now, 10 months later, the industry has had time to review the NTSB 
report and reflect on what it means for operators today. There are five 
key findings that apply, whether you are a helicopter charter operator or 
a private fixed-wing operator. For each of these there are real actions 
you can take to help prevent an accident like this from happening to you.

Finding 1

Had the preflight risk assessment been updated to account for changing 
weather conditions, the flight “would have required the pilot to seek input 
from the director of operations and to provide an alternative plan,” the 
NTSB said.

  Lesson 1: Risk is dynamic, not static.    Remember to 
continuously evaluate risk. 

Risk is ever-changing and not a one-time number. Evaluating risk ahead 
of time allows you to have more time to develop mitigations but 
remember this is really just an estimate. The risks faced during your 
actual operation may change as your flight approaches.

Finding 2

The NTSB noted that the flight continued in a way that was “inconsistent 
with [the pilot’s] adverse-weather-avoidance training” and that training 
using simulation devices and scenario-based training could have helped 
to improve the pilot’s ability to assess and respond to the weather.



  Lesson 2: Train for high-risk situations.    Consider both 
 likelihood and severity when ranking risks from low to high.   

For a visual meteorological conditions (VMC) helicopter operator, 
inadvertent IMC is very high-risk. Since high-risk situations are generally 
rare in occurrence, it becomes easy to let the preparation for these 
incidences slide. Use a set of procedures, such as a severity and 
likelihood matrix, to determine low, medium and high risks for your 
department.

Finding 3

The NTSB noted that the pilot-in-command’s decision to continue the 
flight may have been “influenced by his self-induced pressure to fulfill the 
client’s travel needs, his lack of an alternative plan, and his plan 
continuation bias, which strengthened as the flight neared the 
destination.”

  Lesson 3: Avoid judgment calls.    Create clear procedures so 
you and your crews don’t feel alone when having to make 
tough decisions.

Everyone wants to do their job well and deliver for their customers, but 
this can lead to clouded judgment. Documented procedures that create 
avenues for collaboration when faced with difficult decisions reinforce 
the idea that pilots have the ultimate authority on when and how a flight 
should be conducted. Additionally, safety management system (SMS) 
tools that provide a quantitative evaluation of a flight can help pilots 
make clearer decisions. 

Finding 4

The NTSB observed that the operator lacked “documented policy and 
safety assurance evaluations to ensure that its pilots were consistently 
and correctly completing the flight risk analysis forms.” They determined 
this safety issue as an “incomplete implementation of its safety 
management system.”

  Lesson 4: Practice safety assurance.    Ensure your SMS and 
operational procedures are actually working.



As we learned in Lesson 1, risk is dynamic, not static, so your SMS must 
also be dynamic. Safety assurance is the means by which you make 
sure your SMS is working. This typically involves analyzing SMS data 
and performance against safety goals to ensure targets are being met 
and things are not trending in an unsafe direction. Without safety 
assurance, you will not have the ability to learn what is and is not 
working and to know when you need to develop new mitigation 
strategies.

Finding 5

The NTSB cited issues with the operator’s safety management process, 
noting the “benefits of a mandatory SMS” and a finding that an SMS 
could have helped the operator “to manage risks.” This isn’t the first time 
the NTSB has noted that an SMS may have allowed an operator to 
identify the safety shortcomings in advance.

  Lesson 5: You need an SMS.    Take it one step at a time, but 
start now.

There were many links in the error chain that led to this accident and if 
any one of those had been disrupted, it’s possible this accident could 
have been avoided. Your SMS is precisely designed to help you break 
these links.

You do need an SMS but keep it simple. A common misconception is 
that SMS is complicated and involves dozens of reporting forms and 
tools. Your SMS must be tailored to your operation: a two-person 
department’s SMS should be different from a large flight department.

SMS, like Crew Resource Management in the 1990s, is poised to 
become commonplace and is likely to be required by the FAA for Part 
135 operators in the next few years. Regardless of mandates, now is the 
time to take the necessary actions as a department to ensure you, your 
crews and your passengers return home safely every time.

Mark Baier is CEO of AviationManuals and ARC Safety Management of 
Rockville, Maryland.



Ditching of Bristow S-76C++, Off Nigeria, 3 February 2016

On 3 February 2016, Bristow Helicopters Nigeria Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ ditched while 

en route from the deepwater ExxonMobil Erha Floating Production Storage Offloading 

(FPSO) vessel to Murtala Muhammed Airport Lagos.

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ After Salvage (Credit: AIB Nigeria)



Accident Flight
The Accident Investigation Bureau Nigeria (AIB Nigeria) say, in their safety investigation 

report (issued 25 April 2019), that on the outbound flight the Captain was the Pilot Flying 

(PF) while the First Officer was Pilot Monitoring (PM):

A few minutes into the [outbound] flight, the Captain observed an unusual vibration of the 

aircraft and made a remark about this to the First Officer. About fifteen minutes later, the 

crew also reported that the Digital Auto Flight Control System (DAFCS) and TRIM FAIL 

lights illuminated twice and were reset. The No.1 autopilot decoupled on both occasions. 

Also…a passenger seated in the middle row reported perceiving a burning smell.

The aircraft (MSN 760656 not 76056 as stated early in the AIB report) continued to its 

destination.  On the Erha helideck the Captain “conducted visual checks but could not 

ascertain the source of the burning smell”.

At 09:50 h, 5N-BQJ departed Erha FPSO for Lagos on the second leg of the flight with nine 

passengers and two crew on board, the First Officer was the PF; estimating LAG 10:40 h and  

endurance of one hour plus thirty-five minutes maintaining an altitude of 3,000 ft above 

mean sea level (AMSL).

Fifteen minutes into the flight, there were repeated illuminations of ‘TRIM FAIL’ and Digital 

Automatic Flight Control System (DAFCS) indications. The Emergency Operating Procedure 

(EOP) was consulted and it recommended that the helicopter be flown hands and feet on the 

control.



EOP (Credit: Bri
stow via AIB)

At 10:08 h, about 75 NM from LAG, initial contact was made with Lagos Approach. The Pilot  

Flying (PF) complained of the collective being heavy and the autopilot decoupling. There was  

loss of power, high rate of descent and decreasing altitude. The Captain observed a slight 

turn to the right and asked the PF to check heading and the PF reported that there was 

problem with the compass.

The instrument readings were inaccurate and inconsistent, and the aircraft started drifting 

to the right.

At about 66 NM on radial 145º from LAG, the Captain made a distress call “MAY DAY, MAY 

DAY, MAY DAY” on the Approach frequency. Afterwards, the aircraft stabilized at an 



altitude of 1,500 ft AMSL on a NE-E heading and the Captain briefed the passengers that 

they would have to ditch the aircraft.

At about 10:19 h, 5N-BQJ made a controlled landing on water at approximately 77 NM on 

radial 139º of ‘LAG VOR’.

The Emergency Flotation System (EFS) deployed.  The Co Pilot stated:

The [external] life-raft on the left was not fully deployed. This led to most passengers and 

crew utilizing the life raft on the right side.

All 11 POB exited the aircraft without any injury.  They were picked up by the Sea Trucks 

Group craneship Jascon 25.  The aircraft subsequently over turned.

Analysis
The AIB note that:

This aircraft was equipped with a dual DFZ-760 DAFCS systems that combines autopilot and  

flight director functions and requires synchronized heading input from the compass control 

among other inputs.

With the compass control panel SLAVE-FREE switches set to SLAVE, the gyro is slaved to 

the earth’s magnetic field to provide accurate heading information to the pilot’s and co-

pilot’s EHSI [Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicators].

Where inputs from the compass control are not synchronized, a flight director malfunction 

may occur as was the case in this accident…[and]…as a result, the heading information 

being fed into the Flight Director were not synchronised, hence the crew were getting 

unreliable heading information.

The company Operations Manual (Part B) checklist requires that the compasses be selected 

to SLAVE mode after take-off.



Checklist (Credit: Bristow via AIB)

During the flight from Erha to Lagos, the CVR transcript confirmed that the crew executed 

the items in the Bristow S76C++ Pre-Taxi, Before Take-off and After Take-off checklists, but 



omitted the crucial6 th item on the After Take-off/GoAround 

Checklist-Compasses…Check/Slaved

[Physical] evidence available to the Bureau indicated that the No. 1 & 2 COMPASSES were in  

FREE DG mode.

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ Switch Position (Credit: AIB Nigeria)

According to the CVR transcript, the First Officer said “Setting…., Setting…. Setting. Set the 

Compass. OK because the Compass seems to be turning by itself.” The Captain responded, 

“Turn to your Side. The Compass is Confusing.” The First Officer also remarked “yeah, what 

is going on, because I’m turning.”   The Captain said, “Are you turning…I have control…”

The comments of the Captain and the First Officer indicated that they were alarmed.

AIB strangely make no comment that an S-76C+ (5N-BGD) had been lost in a fatal accident 

only 6 months before and the crew may well have had a heightened sensitivity to 

anomalous aircraft behaviour.  AIB go on:

The crew should have confirmed the position of the Compass control switch and returned 

same to the SLAVE mode and the heading synchronized appropriately. This should have 

resolved the Flight Director malfunction and the flight would have continued normally.



Of course its easy for investigators to say what people should have done with the luxury 

of being cognisant of the full situation.

The First Officer told the Captain that the Altitude Holding was “Fine but the Heading is not 

accurate”. The First Officer went further to say “Yeah, the problem is that we don’t know the  

Heading in which we are right now. Which direction?” The aircraft deviated from the 

intended flight path.

Due to either an uncommanded control input by a degraded auto pilot or an inadvertent 

control input from PF, the aircraft went into a high rate of descent (2,100 ft/min)…loosing 

speed from 148 KIAS to 64 KIAS over the same period (60 seconds) before stabilizing at 

1,500 ft

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ FDR Trace (Credit: UK AAIB via AIB Nigeria)

The crew became very agitated, but later regained control of the flight path at 1,000 ft 

AMSL. Thereafter, the crew stabilized the aircraft at 1,500 ft. According to the CVR 

transcript the Captain said, “we are maintaining 1,500 ft this time, we lost all our 

instruments.” The PF went further to say “Yeah, the problem is that we don’t know the 



heading in which we are right now. Which direction?” At this point the crew decided to 

ditch the aircraft.

Causal Factor
The crew switched the Compass to “FREE” DG mode for Landing on the helideck at Erha 

FPSO, and did not return to the “SLAVE” mode after take-off which caused the trim fail to 

cut off consistently which in turn disengaged the autopilot as a result of the unsynchronised 

heading inputs.

Contributory Factors
1) Non-adherence to Company Operations Manual (Part B checklist) as it relates to after 

take-off checks.

2)The crew did not disengage the autopilot to fly the aircraft manually.

Safety Recommendations
Four safety recommendations were made.  Two related to FDR annual maintenance (only 

four parameters [Pressure Altitude, Indicated Airspeed, Master Caution and Autopilot 

Engaged 1 & 2] were downloaded successfully).  One was to consider reviewing a 

procedure and the fourth was that the company “should ensure that Flight Crew follow 

approved checklist items, and procedures at all times”.



S-76C+ MLG Collapsed Due to Pothole

On the 18 February 2018 Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL suffered a landing 

gear collapse during taxy at Acadiana Regional Airport (ARA), New Iberia, LA.  The 

aircraft was performing an offshore oil and gas flight for  Talos Energy with 2 crew 

and 3 passengers.

Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL at ARA, New Iberia: Note Degraded Paving (Credit: FAA via NTSB)



The Accident

In their safety investigation report, the US National Transportation Safety Board 

(NTSB) say:

The pilot reported that, while the copilot was taxiing the wheel-equipped helicopter to  

the runway for departure, he saw a “bump” on the concrete. The copilot reported that  

he attempted to stop before the “bump,” which turned out to be a pothole, but the 

helicopter struck the pothole with the right main landing gear, which collapsed. The 

pilot and the copilot both reported that the taxi speed was less than 5 knots.

All 5 persons on board escaped uninjured.  The NTSB say that:

The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the internal fuselage structure.

Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL Structural Damage (Credit: FAA via NTSB)



The operator’s accident report form describes that this was a “non-maintained but 

commonly used taxiway/ramp” that was “made up of concrete sections that are 

approximately 12′ x 12′.”

The NTSB documentation does not discuss why the surface was not previously 

identified as damaged and there is no follow up with the airport authority.  It is 

relatively unusual for an S-76 to operate from ARA so its just possible it was ground 

taxing along a route in which skidded helicopters would normally hover taxi and so 

the degraded paving was not normally an issue.  No safety actions are reported.

Probable Cause

The NTSB determined the probable cause to be:

The helicopter’s striking of a pothole while taxiing, which resulted in the right main 

landing gear collapsing.

Taxonomies of Flight Safety

The NTSB classified this occurrence as an accident as per the following US legal 

definitions:

830.2 Definitions. As used in this part the following words or phrases are defined as 

follows:

Aircraft accident means an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft 

which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention 

of flight and all such persons have disembarked, and in which any person suffers 

death or serious injury, or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage. For 

purposes of this part, the definition of ‘‘aircraft accident’’ includes ‘‘unmanned aircraft  

accident,’’ as defined herein.



Substantial damage means damage or failure which adversely affects the structural  

strength, performance, or flight characteristics of the aircraft, and which would 

normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component. Engine 

failure or damage limited to an engine if only one engine fails or is damaged, bent 

fairings or cowling, dented skin, small punctured holes in the skin or fabric, ground 

damage to rotor or propeller blades, and damage to landing gear, wheels, tires, 

flaps, engine accessories, brakes, or wingtips are not considered ‘‘substantial 

damage’’ for the purpose of this part.

However, in the Bristow annual report for FY2018 (which ended 31 March 2018) the 

CEO oddly stated that the company “finished FY18 with no Class A or B air 

accidents” (i.e. no accidents with >$500k of damage).  This is a US 

 military   designation system, not usually used in civil industry.

Background

N860AL was the first Turbomeca Arriel 2S1 powered S-76C+ delivered, to what was 

then Air Logistics, on 28 April 2003.  Almost 15 years later it had flown 9866 flying 

hours. ARA is an ex-US Navy airfield with an 8,000ft runway and a 5,000ft seaway.  

The NTSB documentation does not state which taxiway was involved but it is likely to 

be at the north end of the airport.



ARA (Credit: FAA)



Down to a sunless sea
By
 Brendan Reinhardt
 -
May 18, 2022
626

image- Adobe stock | Nightman1965
I can see clearly now the rain is gone
I can see all obstacles in my way
Gone are the dark clouds that had me blind
It’s gonna be a bright (bright)
Bright (bright) sunshiny day.

Johnny Nash

The last few hundred feet of an instrument approach require 2 things from a 
helicopter pilot: a sensitive touch – no surprise there – but also a thorough 
knowledge of the aircraft’s flight control avionics  

Many a pilot has been thankful to become visual at the bottom of an instrument 
approach – breaking into a bright sunshiny day as if the heavens have been 



parted just for your landing. However, instrument approaches to minima do not 
always result in this rapid change to perfect conditions. 

A Sikorsky S-92 helicopter in Canada found itself in poor visibility and cloud on 
the way to an oil rig in July 2019 and was required to do an instrument approach 
to get visual1. The crew had over 5,000 flying hours each, over 2,000 flying hours on 
the S92 and had received military helicopter training at the beginning of their 
careers. They belonged to a large company that had extensive experience in 
offshore operations. 

The crew attempted 2 offshore airborne radar approach procedures without 
getting visual with the oil rig. Partway through the second missed approach, the 
crew noticed they could now see the oil rig and decided to do an abbreviated 
visual approach. A quick turnaround was conducted. There was fog beneath them 
and scattered to broken cloud above them and the ocean was visible directly 
below through the fog. 

At half a mile from the oil rig, the crew disconnected airspeed hold, heading hold 
and RADALT hold and started hand flying the helicopter. The flying pilot was 
holding the force trim release (FTR) button in. Descent was started and it was 
noted that the approach was steeper than normal. Airspeed was a little high and 
up to 17 deg nose up was used to slow the helicopter on the descent. The rate of 
descent started to increase and at 250 feet was 1200 fpm with a lateral sideslip 
starting to develop. Changes in aircraft pitch and angle of bank occurred and 
progressively more sideslip occurred. 

AT 40 FEET, THE TAIL ROTOR NO 
LONGER HAD ENOUGH AUTHORITY 
TO COUNTER THE ROTOR TORQUE 

AND THE HELICOPTER STARTED 
SPINNING.

The helicopter descended through the height of the helideck with 1800 fpm and 
entered fog. The non-flying pilot realized the developing situation and puts his 
hands on the controls to level the helicopter in anticipation of water impact. At 70 
feet the collective was raised to 146 per cent, the rotor RPM decreased, and the 
low rotor horn came on. At 40 feet, the tail rotor no longer had enough authority to 
counter the rotor torque and the helicopter started spinning, going through 845 
deg over 55 seconds. Due to the low rotor RPM, the aircraft generators lost power, 
the automatic flight control system (AFCS) degraded and the primary flight 
displays went blank. 



Somehow, while flying in cloud on the standby instruments, the pilots stopped the 
yaw, avoided the ocean, recovered rotor RPM and started climbing before heading 
back to shore and a safe landing.

Most accidents have more than one contributing factor in the chain of events that 
lead to their outcome. In this case there were several, including not completing 
the missed approach and a non-stabilized approach. In this article we are going to 
review the use of the AFCS in a poor useable cueing environment.

To fly to the absolute minima of an ILS requires not only radio aid and panel 
instrument guidance, but also ground-based visual aids associated with the 
landing threshold, approach lighting [high-intensity approach lighting (HIAL)] and 
glideslope guidance [precision approach path indicator (PAPI)]. The HIAL lines us 
up with the runway and the PAPI is aligned with the glideslope, so a continuous 
descent angle can be flown to the runway. There have been previous incidents 
where large aircraft at the bottom of an ILS have made a quick dart for the 
threshold and ended up landing short. The PAPI is meant to prevent this by giving 
the pilot continued glideslope guidance once past the decision altitude. Without 
HIAL and PAPI, increased minima are required. 

Figure 1: S92 incident helicopter flight path – courtesy Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada Report.
Looking at a typical ILS approach plate, the minimum visibility can be down to 800 
m. If we check the Aeronautical Information Publication, we will see that to utilise 
this low level of visibility, the HIAL must be working and, if not, the visibility must 
be increased to 1500 m.



Further, if the aircraft is not manually flown utilising a flight director or the aircraft 
is not flown by the autopilot coupled to the localizer and glidepath, then the 
visibility is increased to 1200 m even with HIAL. From these 2 points we can see 
that in low visibility conditions, the pilot must have extra guidance to line up on 
the runway when the visibility is less than 1500 m and extra help from aircraft 
systems to keep the aircraft stable when the visibility is less than 1200 m. 

It should be clear now that in low-visibility conditions without good attitude and 
lateral cues, the pilot must rely on external horizontal and vertical guidance as 
well as automation to ensure the helicopter safely gets from the minima to having 
wheels on the runway.

Fixed-wing aircraft come down ILS finals and maintain a smooth constant flight 
path until touchdown. A small reduction in power once visual to reduce speed 
slightly to threshold speed is perhaps required. There aren’t any large changes in 
power or attitude until you flare onto the runway. Once on the runway, the earth 
holds the airplane upright using the undercarriage. 

Helicopters don’t normally run on at high speed. The helicopter at the bottom of 
an ILS must transition to visual flight while decelerating to enable a hover, air taxi 
or a low-speed run on. How the helicopter is managed from the minima to safely 
taxiing requires some thought.

At minima there may be no visual horizon. Instead, you can see the runway 
approach lighting and maybe the PAPI through the mist. There will be very little 
and even confusing cues for the aircraft attitude. The helicopter is in a low visual 
cue environment. Utilization of the AFCS and the correct modes is critical to 
reduce workload and keep the helicopter in controlled flight as it transitions from 
in cloud to a visual, low-speed run on or hovering landing. This is even more 
challenging than fixed-wing aircraft due to the greater changes in attitude and 
speed required in a helicopter.

In this incident, the S-92 was doing an approach to an oil rig, without approach 
lighting and glideslope guidance. Figure 2, from the Canadian incident report, 
shows what the useable cueing environment might have been like. 

Here we can see there are very few visual vertical cues to aid setting a pitch 
attitude and very few visual horizontal cues to indicate ground speed or lateral 
drift. Sideslip would also be difficult to detect. There are no lateral or vertical 
lights helping guide the helicopter on its approach path to the oil rig landing deck.

Remember earlier that the flying pilot was holding the FTR button in. The S-92 has 
an attitude hold system that will maintain the aircraft attitude – this does not 
function when the force trim is held in. A Canadian Air Force study found that 
pilots who utilize the attitude mode while minimizing the use of the FTR had far 
better control in a degraded visual environment than those who attempt to fly with 
the FTR depressed. Those who fly with FTR depressed: 



Figure 2: Representation of useable cueing environment on S92 visual approach to oil 
rig – courtesy Transportation Safety Board of Canada Report.

‘Often failed to interpret residual pitch or roll rates (or vertical velocities) due to 
the reduced cues and aircraft control suffered resulting in ineffective approaches 
or, in the worst case, ground impact.’

Operating in such low useable cue environments requires help for the pilot. On 
land we can have approach lighting to align ourselves and give us heading and 
drift cues. We can have PAPI to help us maintain glide path. 

Rules prohibit the use of the autopilot or flight director when the useable cue 
environment – visibility – is really low. The flying pilot did not use the correct 
AFCS mode required for flight in the reduced visibility. Holding in the FTR 
disabled the attitude hold. The pilot should not have pushed in the FTR and 
instead should have used the upper modes of the AFCS longer before 
transitioning to hand flying, utilising the trim system to keep the attitude hold 
function engaged. 

Comparing the requirements for an ILS, we can see there was no external 
guidance on azimuth or glideslope from the oil rig and the pilots were not using a 
flight director or the appropriate modes on the AFCS to reduce pilot workload. 
Because of the low useable cue environment, the pilots did not pick changes in 
attitude, sideslip, rate of descent or ground speed. This led to an excessive rate of 
descent which ultimately resulted in going into cloud very close to the ocean and 
losing control of the helicopter when applying a massive amount of collective to 
avoid hitting the ocean.



Helicopter pilots need to understand their aircraft’s AFCS. What does each mode 
enable and how is it meant to be used? Flying in low useable cue environments 
requires the use of upper modes for as long as possible and after this, use of the 
AFCS with at least attitude hold mode engaged. 

Helicopter AFCS all have subtle differences; however, approaches in low useable 
cue environments should be flown slowly and deliberately, within the trim 
system’s rate capabilities to minimize the use of the FTR. 

If the FTR is required, then it should be used quickly or momentarily and definitely 
not held in for extended periods of time. This will ensure that attitude hold is 
available to prevent excessive pilot workload and entering unusual attitudes or 
even losing control of the helicopter. 

Flying modern helicopters requires a detailed understanding of AFCS and how to 
use them – without this knowledge, pilots should be only flying on bright (bright) 
sunshiny days. 



28 May 2020

We are often asked about the main Safety Issues for the different parts of the 
Helicopter Community.  On this page you can find the latest lists for each of 
the main operational areas.  We will build on this information with a lot more 
detail to help you understand more about the top issues that are identified 
from the collaborative analysis work. 

Offshore helicopters – Safety Issues 
The most important safety issues for Offshore Helicopter 
operations are: 

 System Reliability 
 Crew Resource Management (CRM) and Operational 

Communication
 Flight Planning and Preparation
 Navigation and Airspace Knowledge
 Wrong Deck Landing
 Flight Path Management
 Helicopter Maintenance


 



Commercial ops (Other than offshore) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Commercial Helicopter 
Operations other than Offshore are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Decision Making and Planning
 Software and Configuration
 Flight Path Management
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals



 

Helicopter specialised ops (Part SPO) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Helicopter specialised 
operations are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Flight Path Management
 System Reliability
 Development and Application of Rules and Procedures
 Adverse Weather
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals
 Handling of Technical Failures
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Decision Making and Planning

 



Helicopter non-Commercial ops (GA) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Helicopter Non-Commercial 
operations are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Flight Path Management
 System Reliability
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals
 Decision Making and Planning
 Flight Planning and Preparation
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Human Performance



 North Sea Helicopter Struck Sea   After   Loss of Control on 
Approach During Night Shuttling (S-76A G-BHYB 1983) 

On 9 December 1987 Sikorsky S-76A G-BHYB of Robert Maxwell owned British 

International Helicopters, formerly British Airways Helicopters, contacted the 

sea during a night approach to the Shell Fulmar Alpha offshore installation in 

the Central North Sea.

The UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) safety investigation 

report explains that the helicopter, temporarily based on Fulmar Alpha, was 

shuttling maintenance workers between Fulmar Alpha and the Auk Alpha.  

Six 6 round trips (12 sectors) were planned that evening between the 

installations that are 6.4 nm apart.

On the fourth sector, whilst descending on an approach from a height of about  

500 feet to the Fulmar platform and at about a quarter of a mile from the 

helideck, the aircraft lost all forward speed and entered a steep descent 

towards the sea.

At a very late stage, the co-pilot managed to arrest the descent just as the 

aircraft touched the water. The flight was continued to a normal landing on the  

Fulmar helideck.

 While   this   accident   is many years in the past and much has changed, the AAIB  

report does highlight a series of threats that are still relevant to offshore 

helicopter operations.



Fulmar Alpha

History of the Flight
The flight crew had been detached to Fulmar Alpha and were working a split 

shift:

The duty day began at 0600 hrs and ended at approximately 2000 hrs, and 

included a “split-duty” rest period between 0745 hrs and 1745 hrs.

Both pilots had the rank of Captain and so “and it was decided between them 

who was to be commander”.

Because the prevailing wind dictated that all the approaches would be made 

from the left side of the helidecks, it was also decided that the commander, 

[seated] on the right side of the aircraft would be the handling pilot [to use the 

terminology of the time] throughout. The pilots remained in these respective 

roles throughout the evening’s flying.



The Aircraft Commander was 47 and had 6540 hours of flight time, 870 on 

type.  He was…

…very enthusiastic about physical fitness and had taken part, with notable 

success, in both physically and mentally demanding television and social 

competitions. During the day on which the incident occurred, he had, most 

unusually, lost several recreational games.

The Co-Pilot was 39 and had flown 5662 hours, 518 on type.

The fourth sector, with 8 passengers, commenced at 18:43.

The weather that evening was well within the requirements for a visual flight 

and approach to the platforms, the wind was 3500/11 kt, the visibility unlimited  

and the cloud 4 octas at 2500 feet. Although the sky was nominally less than 

half obscured by the cloud, it was totally dark, and this darkness was 

emphasized by contrast to the platform illuminations. On the approach from 

the south, no other platform or rig was visible to the crew and the sole source 

of visual reference was the brightly illuminated platform, with its attendant 

brilliant and pulsating flare.



AAIB observe that:

…the flare…together with the platform’s working lights, combine to produce a 

significant contrast to the otherwise dark environment.

The short cruise was conducted at about 140 kt, at an altitude of 500 feet.  

Deceleration commenced about 1 nm from the destination and abeam a Fuel 

Storage Unit (FSU) vessel moored in the field.

Up to this point, the flight had been normal and the co-pilot had been 

preparing the necessary paperwork for that sector and the next. At some point  

during the deceleration, approximately 1/4 nm from the platform, all forward 

speed was lost and a very high sink rate was established. Replay of the 

cockpit voice recorder (CVR) showed that, during this descent, the two 

automatic voice alerting device (AVAD) warnings sounded, activated by the 

radio altimeters, but the crew have stated that these were not heard.



A failure for flight crew to perceived aural alerts is not uncommon (see the 

investigation into the incident involving G-WIWI with Paul McCartney aboard) 

and is the subject of CAP1747: Class A HTAWS Warning Annunciation.

The AVAD provided “CHECK HEIGHT” and “100 FEET” warnings. 



 The former could be set by the crew but in this case, it was set, for reasons 

discussed below, to factionally below 100 feet and so the “100 FEET” warning 

came momentarily before “CHECK HEIGHT”.

The AAIB noted that while there was little relevant discussion by the flight 

crew prior to the AVAD warnings…

…the co-pilot has since stated that he noticed the speed to be very low at 

about 350 feet, but, in the 2-3 seconds before contact with the sea, the co-pilot 

queried the commander’s appreciation of the situation and then applied a 

large amount of power, by raising the collective pitch lever, thereby causing 

the impact with the sea to be so slight as to result in no structural damage to 

the helicopter.

The necessary severity of this lever application, although causing the rotor 

rpm to drop from the indicated 100% to slightly less than 79%, enabled the 

aircraft to make an almost immediate lift-off from the water.

The helicopter struck the water almost vertically, with no forward speed and 

the water contact caused no damage to either the airframe or the engines. 

However, minor bruising of the rotor spindle assemblies occurred as a result 

of the sudden and severe application of rotor pitch applied in an attempt to 

prevent the incident



Following the lift-off, the commander stated that he had become 

“disorientated” and so the co-pilot, being unsure whether the commander was  

yet fully aware of the situation and having established the aircraft in a climb, 

remained on the controls and initiated a right hand circuit to the east of the 

platform. However, as the climb progressed, he felt the commander come back  

onto the controls, saying again that he had become “disorientated” but now 

felt “fine”. Nevertheless, the co-pilot followed through on the controls whilst 

the commander carried out a normal landing on the Fulmar helideck.

On landing the Helideck Landing Officer (HLO) noticed what turned out to be 

seawater pouring from the aircraft. No one was injured.

Following the landing and the disembarkation of the passengers, the 

commander stated that he had become “mesmerized” and had seen two rigs, 

side by side.

The AAIB Safety Investigation
The S-76A was certified for single pilot operations and was being operated as 

such in the North Sea at the time.  However, Shell had contracted that there 

“be two pilots on board during all their IFR and night flights”.  The helicopter 

operator had not however developed multi-crew procedures as they reportedly 

felt” it might be dangerously confusing for a given pilot to have to cope with 

two sets of operating procedures for the same aircraft”.  There was a 

requirement for the Commander to brief the Co-Pilot prior to an approach, but 

that did not occur during these repetitive shuttling flights.  Consequently, the 

AAIB concluded that the helicopter was…



…. operated in a manner very little different from a single pilot operation.

Today, the Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) BARSOHO offshore helicopter 

Safety Performance Requirements, which align with the risk-

based HeliOffshore Safety Performance Model, contains a specific control (1.5) 

on Multi-Crew Operations and another (3.1) on Flightpath Management. These 

incorporate the HeliOffshore Flight Path Management recommended Practices.

While the operator’s Ops Manual fully documented the actions to be taken in 

the event of subtle incapacitation of the handling pilot, “there are very few 

cues” in an event such as this to alert the non-handling pilot to that possibility.

At the time a Flight Data Recorder (FDR) was not a regulatory requirement and 

none was fitted. The lack of FDR data…

…. severely hampered the capability of the investigation to define either the 

sequence of events, or possible failures. Had a fatal accident occurred, this 

lack of FDR data would have made determination of the cause unlikely.

Consequently, the AAIB made a safety recommendation that resulted in a 

change in regulations.  A Fairchild A100 magnetic tape CVR was fitted:

Analysis of the rotor rpm track showed a drop in rotor rpm from 103% just 

before the helicopter contacted the sea, to a minimum value of 78.7% probably  

due to the large collective input demanded. The drop in rotor rpm lasted for 

approximately 9 seconds before the rotor speed returned to 100% as the 

helicopter climbed away.



From the CVR it was not possible to identify exactly the point at which the 

helicopter contacted the sea, however a change in the amplitude of the signal 

on the area microphone track occurred 2.5 seconds after the chimes [that 

immediately preceded the aural AVAD warnings] were heard, and this is 

thought to be the point at which impact took place.

The recorded rotor speed had been 100 to 101% until approximately 23 

seconds before the chimes were heard, when a gradual increase in rotor 

speed occurred, with a maximum of 103%, indicative of a power-off condition.

The AAIB comment that:

Approaches to helidecks, particularly at night, require a very high degree of 

 precision .    Standardizations of approaches is a clear objective and, despite 

the many factors of weather and visual assessment which work against it, 

training is carried out with this in mind.

However, each pilot interviewed, formally or otherwise, during the 

investigation…declared his own method of approaching a helideck, and there 

appeared to be little standardization of planned approach paths.



A number of Mandatory Occurrence Reports (MORs) had been raised those 

highlighted occasions when….

…the heat generated by the platform’s flare has produced a micro weather 

system in the form of a heat engine. The very strong downdraughts which can 

be produced by this mechanism can persist over a considerable distance 

down wind of the flare, in the area from which most approaches to land are 

made. On one occasion reported, the downdraught exceeded the helicopter’s 

climb capability.






Another difficulty [is that an installation] may be the only light source in an 

otherwise totally dark environment. The single light source phenomenon has 

long been recognized by the aviation community as one which contributes 

nothing to the pilot’s judgement of distance from it. In this context, although 

the rigs and platforms have considerably more than one light, when viewed 

from a distance, they may be considered as a single light source. The usual 

effects of this phenomenon are that the pilot is deprived of the visual cues 

normally associated with daylight vision:

(1) The relationship of the object to the horizon;

(2) Other objects and the surface texture between himself and the object in 

view;

(3) The use, for ranging, of the angle subtended at the viewer’s eye by the 

object, because;

     (a) The absolute size of the object is uncertain and;

    (b) The judgement of this angle when it is very small is difficult.

However, as the approach to the Fulmar platform was initiated at a little over 1 

nm and beside the well-lit FSU and tanker, it is unlikely that this phenomenon 

had any appreciable effect during the night in question.

Finally, whilst the brilliance of the flare might be slightly dazzling to the pilot, it  

does provide a quite bright illumination of the whole structure and the sea 

surface immediately surrounding it.



This accident is cited by UK CAA as one of three accidents 

(including AS365 G-BLUN and EC225 G-REDU) that justify the development 

and implementation of helideck circle and H lights as described in CAP1077: 

Specification for an Offshore Helideck Lighting System

Medical examination of the Aircraft Commander…

…did not suggest any pre-existing mental or medical condition likely to cause 

the commander’s disorientation. However, the tests did reveal a latent 

tendency to squint but, whereas this was so slight and normal as to have no 

effect upon his suitability to exercise the privileges of a flying license, it could 

possibly contribute to the occurrence of double vision in certain 

circumstances of reduced mental awareness.

To better understand the circumstances of the accident two flights to Fulmar 

Alpha in another S-76A were conducted, first with an AAIB Inspector and then 

with the Head of the Flight Skills Section of the RAF Institute of Aviation 

Medicine (IAM) in the co-pilot seat. These were to…

…investigate the effects of various types of approach, with the intention of 

finding one which, as closely as possible, matched that of the incident aircraft.

A number of abnormal approaches were then made. When the undercarriage 

selection point was delayed, only a few seconds of delay had an appreciable 

effect on the degree of power reduction needed to arrive alongside the 

platform at the speed required to achieve a landing. The same effect was also 

noted when the descent was either delayed or steepened. In most of the 

abnormal approaches demonstrated, the torque had to be reduced to nearly 

zero in order to achieve the desired arrival at the helideck.



It was also apparent that considerable anticipation of the large amount of 

power needed to regain level flight was required in these circumstances. 

Furthermore, any delay in its application produced a more rapid onset and 

greater degree of downwards vertical acceleration.

It was also observed that visual assessment of distance from the platform was  

very difficult, but that the visual cues as to aircraft height, with reference to 

that of the helideck, was not. The prime reason for this is that the platform is 

built in storeys, well illuminated by linear rows of lights. When looking along 

the side of the structure, particularly from below the level of the platform, the 

sight of passing downwards, from being aligned with one storey to the next 

lower one, provided a strong clue to descent and descent rate.

AAIB Analysis: Conduct of the Flight & AVAD
The AAIB highlight three key factors:

1.  the loss of speed 
2.  the loss of height
3.  the delay before either crew member noticed these. 

The flight tests showed that, for the aircraft to have decelerated from its 140kt 

cruising speed to the final maneuvering speed alongside the platform in about 

0.75 nm, the collective lever must have been lowered almost completely. 

Therefore, as the speed reduced, the power should have been restored in time 

to anticipate the consequent loss of lift, and thus to reduce the rate of descent.



A significant observation was that:

[Main rotor speed] was increasing for 14 seconds before the sudden lever 

application. With the lever down or nearly down, this increase in rotor rpm 

could be caused by either a flare manoeuvre or an increasing rate of descent 

in autorotation. However, as both pilots have stated that no such flare 

occurred, it is most likely that the increase in rotor rpm occurred as a result of 

autorotational forces, which therefore marks the beginning of the severe 

accelerating descent rate, 17 seconds before impact with the water.

As no evidence was found to suggest any malfunction of the aircraft or its 

systems, the reason for the descent rate demonstrated in the incident must be 

attributed to either a downdraught which exceeded the helicopter’s climb 

capability, and/or to the actions of the handling pilot. Had a significant 

downdraught, caused by the flare, been the only reason for the descent, firstly 

it is unlikely that all forward speed would have been lost and secondly, it is 

almost certain that the commander would have made some comment to the 

co-pilot, which he did not. However, the possibility that it contributed to the 

rate of descent cannot be ruled out.

 The   AAIB comment that the   Ops Manual contained no procedures for the use 

 of the   AVAD   during visual approaches and the system “was not being used in 

a manner advantageous to flight safety”.

Given the environmental workload that is typical of oil field Shuttle flights, it is 

surprising that crews should have arranged their handling of this system such  

that it could provide no effective warnings at all.  



The subject incident would, most likely, not have occurred had the co-pilot’s 

altimeter bug, to which the AVAD was slaved, not been set at a height below 

that of the helideck [which was 215 ft].

The declared reason for this usage was that the repetitive warnings, 

occasioned by ‘bugging’ a height greater than that of the helideck, were more 

of an irritation than a safeguard.

AAIB Analysis: The Crew
It is probable that when the commander used the terms “mesmerized” and 

“disorientated”, he did so in a conversational way, rather than as a clinical 

description… However, the fact that he did suffer such an event is supported 

by other evidence.

Firstly…he remembered…he was able to see a double image of the rig with 

both images in clear focus, but had no visual memory of the descent to the 

water.

Secondly, the fact that he failed to respond to the AVAD warnings and, finally, 

the statement of the co-pilot that, during the short descent to the water, the 

commander appeared “frozen” and unresponsive.

As the neurological, ophthalmological and medical examinations revealed no 

significant abnormalities, it is left to analysis of the psychology behind his 

behavior to try to explain the events which occurred.  



The report on this examination,…although unable to identify any specific 

cause for it, strongly suggests that he did suffer a 

temporary incapacitation [and so] the uncontrolled descent and the absence 

of forward speed can be attributed only to a lack of anticipation of the required  

power increase as the aircraft reduced speed.

The French Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses (BEA) recently reported on a 

case where the Pilot Flying of Airbus A350-900 F-HREV, operated by French 

Bee, suffered a cognitive incapacitation on approach to Paris Orly.   We 

recommend their VIDEO.

The S-76A’s non-handing pilot was expected to monitor the flightpath to detect 

deviations.

In this case, the monitoring was successful only to the extent that the severity 

of the impact was considerably reduced by the actions of the co-pilot.

The co-pilots observation of low speed when passing through 350 ft was 

 described by AAIB as ‘peripheral’ rather than    flightpath monitoring as such.    

The available…

…indications of departure from the normal flightpath…were the decrease in 

height shown on both radio and pressure altimeters, an increasing rate of 

descent on the vertical speed indicator, an indicated pitch attitude dissimilar 

to that of normal flight, an airspeed unlikely to be normal except when directly 

abeam of the platform (when the latter is definitely in view) and finally, the 

relationship between this lack of airspeed and the absence of engine torque. 



Nevertheless, it would appear that during the 14 seconds before power was re-

applied these indications passed unnoticed.

The AAIB observer that certification requirements assumed one second for 

recognition of a problem and a further one second for action to be taken.  

Hence, a 12 second delay “does seem to be rather a long time”.  They 

postulate that “the co-pilot may well have felt disbelief upon seeing what was 

happening and thus taken longer than expected to rationalize and act upon it”.

The co-pilot’s subsequent actions however were considered to have prevented 

a major accident and the AAIB recommended the UK CAA consider requiring 

two crew.

 AAIB   Conclusions 

1.  The Commander suffered a temporary incapacitation. 
2.  The co-pilot’s response to the emergency situation was delayed partially  

by insufficient flightpath and instrument monitoring and partially by the 
 difficulty of appraising the situation.  The proportion of each is not 
known.

3.  The company Operations Manual contained no procedures for the use 
of the Automatic Voice Alerting Device during visual approaches



Footnote 

Curiously, this helicopter, when registered as C-GIMR, was destroyed while 

being operated as an air ambulance in Ontario by Canadian Helicopters on 8 

February 2008.  The Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB Canada) 

concluded in their safety investigation report that:

1.  The pilot flying (PF) was likely affected by visual spatial disorientation 
and perceived the approach height of the helicopter to be too high. 
While correcting for this misconception, the helicopter descended into 
trees 814 feet short of the helipad.

2.  The pilots were likely distracted during the critical phase of the 
approach and did not identify that the helicopter had deviated from the 
intended approach profile and recommended descent rates.

Wreckage of Sikorsky S-76A C-GIMR in a Scrapyard in 2015 (Credit: Pete Webber CC BY-SA 2.0)



NTSB Report on Bizarre 2012 US S-76B Ditching
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has reported on an unusual 2012 

offshore accident where a Sikorsky S-76B ditched while attempting to land on a 

drilling rig in the Gulf of Mexico.  This accident raises a wide range of questions…

Rear View of Wreckage After Recovery (Credit: NTSB)

History of the Flight
According to the NTSB:

On April 17, 2012, about 1155 central daylight time, a   Sikorsky    S-76B helicopter, N56RD, 

was substantially damaged during a forced landing in the Gulf of Mexico near the Joe 

Douglas oil drilling rig ([in block] Vermilion VR376A [117 nautical miles south of the 

refuelling point at Acadiana Regional Airport (ARA), New Iberia]). The pilot, the airplane 



pilot-rated passenger in the copilot seat, and the five passengers seated in the cabin were  

not injured.

The pilot reported that he made a visual approach on a 190 degree heading to the landing 

platform. He reported that the wind was from 220 degrees at 5 to 6 knots, according to 

the Garmin 500 GPS that was installed in the helicopter. He was flying directly towards the  

platform while decelerating from 60 to 45 knots while maintaining a 12 degree approach 

angle. The helicopter was about 60 feet from the landing pad and about 15 to 20 feet 

higher than the landing pad with a nose high attitude in the flare when a loss of engine 

power occurred. The pilot was unsure which engine had the loss of power. With the loss of 

power, the pilot reported that the trajectory of the helicopter would place it short of the 

landing pad. The pilot reported that the helicopter was going to hit the platform, so he 

pulled collective pitch, banked aft and to the left to avoid contact with the platform. Once 

clear of the platform, he attempted to lower the collective and gain airspeed, but the 

helicopter was in a high rate of descent with low airspeed. He pulled collective pitch and 

flared the helicopter before water impact. The pilot reported about 3 to 4 seconds 

transpired from the time he tried to avoid hitting the platform to when the helicopter 

impacted the water.



N56RD After Ditching (Credit: Click2Houston.com)

Inexplicably, rather than shut down and evacuate the aircraft, the pilot kept power 

on and after inflating the floats [emphasis added]:

…attempted to water taxi toward the oil platform, but there was no directional control 

since the tailboom was partially separated from the fuselage.

The pilot continued to keep engine power on the helicopter as a rescue pod [presumably 

a   Billy    Pugh style transfer basket]  from the Joe Douglas was lowered to the water. The 

passengers in the cabin were preparing to deploy the life rafts as the rescue pod was 

being launched. When the rescue pod was near the helicopter, the pilot shut down the 

engines. The passengers deployed the life rafts as the helicopter began to list to the left. 

All six passengers and the pilot got into the rafts, and then transferred into the rescue 

pod, which was then winched back up to the deck of the platform. None of the occupants 

reported any injuries.

Sometime after the occupants egressed, the helicopter inverted in the water with the four  

floatation bags keeping it from sinking. However, the bags were compromised during the 

initial recovery effort and the helicopter later sank in about 310 feet of water.



The Rowan Joe Douglas Jack-Up Drilling Rig was commissioned in 2011 (Credit: Drilling Contractor)



NTSB Conclusions
The NTSB identified the Probable Cause as:

The intermittent loss of engine power due to a “stuck” stepper motor in the No. 2 engine’s 

fuel control as a result of an inadequate overhaul.

Contributing to the accident…

– was the pilot’s decision to continue flying the helicopter with a known defect,

- his decision to depart with the helicopter over its maximum gross weight, and

- his decision to fly the approach to the oil platform at a high gross weight in a direction 

that provided limited go-around potential.

The Background
The operator, RDC Marine, appears to be the flight department of the rig 

owner, Rowan, and the cabin fit below suggests it may have been used for 

management visits rather than routine crew changes.   Rowan used to own offshore 

operator Era Helicopters, so should have had some appreciation of the risks of 

offshore helicopter travel, especially as their personnel were aboard for a fatal S-76A 

CFIT accident in 2004.

The pilot had worked for the operator for 23 years held an ATPL with ‘helicopter and 

single-engine land rating’s. He had a total flight time of 16,000 hours, 677 hours in the 

S-76B helicopters.  In the co-pilots seats was an airplane pilot-rated ‘passenger’ who 

was a fixed wing pilot for the operator. He had not formal helicopter training, but had 

about 25 hours of “left seat” time in helicopters.  Only having one helicopter pilot 

aboard no doubt influenced the sub-optimal approach as it would have been more 

sensible for the left hand pilot (if he were qualified) to have made the approach (see 

below).

A few days earlier [emphasis added]:



The pilot reported that on Friday, April 13, 2012, he was flying the accident helicopter from  

an oil platform to Port Fourchon, Louisiana, when the helicopter had an apparent loss of 

power from the No. 2 engine during cruise flight.

The pilot described the event as an engine rollback, but he was unsure about how much 

reduction in power the engine actually experienced….

He reported that the No. 2 engine was still operating because the N1 speed indicator (gas 

producer turbine) indicated that the engine was operating, but the pilot was unsure what 

the N1 needle read. He thought it might have been in the idle range, but he was not 

certain….

He reported that the No. 2 engine came back on line by itself. When it did, the No. 1 

engine had a decrease in power, and the torque and temperature gauges matched up. He 

reported that the entire event lasted 10 to 20 seconds. After that, the No. 2 engine worked  

normally during the flight back to Port Fourchon.

Once at Port Fourchon, the pilot shut down the helicopter and checked for any electronic 

engine control (EEC) system fault codes that might have been recorded when the loss of 

engine power occurred. The pilot reported that there were no EEC fault codes recorded. He  

restarted the helicopter and performed hover and power checks. The helicopter appeared 

to be operating normally, so the pilot decided to continue with scheduled missions, which 

involved two more flights out to the oil rigs.

The pilot telephoned the mechanic and left a message about the loss of power to the No. 2  

engine. The mechanic was gone for the weekend and did not check his phone messages 

until Sunday night. The pilot flew three flights out to the oil rigs on Saturday…

On Monday, the mechanic checked the EEC fault codes but there were none recorded. He 

checked the torque sensor cannon plugs and sprayed them with corrosion 



preventative. No engine runs or test flights were performed. No entries were made in the 

engine or airframe logbooks concerning the intermittent loss of power on April 13, 2012.

UPDATE: In the NTSB Public Docket the NTSB summary of the interview with the 

mechanic states:

 1. He did not make a write-up in the engine or airframe logbook about the maintenance 

he had performed. He didn’t think it warranted a write-up. It was not unusual for him to 

not put such maintenance in the engine logbook.

2. He did not know what caused the engine rollback on Friday, 4/13. He cleaned the canon 

plugs because that seemed to work before. He felt he had to do at least something.

3. They have not been doing power assurance checks since the received the S-76B. They 

used to do power assurance checks when they had the Bell 222, but not on the S-76B.

4. There has been no trend monitoring of the engines by the mechanic.

5. About 2 months ago, the mechanic stopped rinsing the engines every day. Evidently, he 

was injured or sick, and since then he didn’t rinse the engines.

6. He washed the engines every 300 hours based on the fuel nozzle cleaning schedule.

On the engine failure, NTSB explain there was a maintenance error during 

overhaul that resulted in:

… an anomaly within the stepper motor for the No. 2 engine’s fuel control. The 

examination revealed that the end of the output shaft of the stepper motor had 

overstress fractures and that the shaft was bent. During the overhaul of the stepper 

motor 8 years before the accident, the pin that attaches the flapper valve lever to the 

output shaft was pressed onto the output shaft. The force applied to the external lever 

was sufficient to both crack and bend the output shaft. This condition eventually resulted 

in a “stuck” stepper motor which limited the fuel flow to the engine and resulted in an 

intermittent loss of engine power. The EECs did not monitor the performance of the 



output shaft or the flapper valve lever; therefore, no fault codes were generated by the 

EECs.

The records of the overhaul by Pratt & Whitney Canada were not available “due to an 

internal computer records system not migrating them to the current system”.

Wreckage After Recovery – Note Evacuation Appears To Have Occurred Through the RH Cabin Door Only and 
Floats Were Probably Removed on Recovery (Credit: NTSB)

The helicopter cabin also did not have an offshore fit.  The executive  seats have no 

upper torso restraints and, block the forward cabin windows, through there do not 

appear to have push out widows or illuminated exit lighting either.



Front (Rear Facing) Cabin Seats (Credit: NTSB)



Rear (Front Facing) Cabin Seats (Credit: NTSB)

The NTSB calculated that the aircraft took off on its final flight at 12,215 lbs, about 

515 lbs over maximum gross weight.  Additionally:

…the helicopter landing pad was located on the north side of the oil platform. An 

approach heading of 190 degrees, as reported by the accident pilot, put the approach path  

aiming for the center of the oil platform super structure. This approach angle provided 

limited clearance for a go-around. Likewise, an approach angle between about 160 to 220 

degrees heading provided limited clearance for a go-around due to the location of the 

super structure. An approach path heading from about 060 to 140 degrees, or from about 

230 to 320 degrees, would have provided good go-around capability since there was no 

super structure behind the landing platform on those headings.



The NTSB also report that the weather at the Joe Douglas was recorded only 

recorded daily around 1730 and not on an hourly basis. So the only record was from 

the day before the flight.

It is also stated in the NTSB record of witness statements that:

Another helicopter was scheduled to land on the rig later, so he was going to land toward 

the right edge of the landing zone.

This would have put the S-76B clearly in the 210 degree obstacle free sector and 

further complicating the approach for the second aircraft and leaving insufficient 

clearance for that size of deck (see CAP437 Chapter 3 Section 6).  The deck is 

apparently a 22m D-value deck.  The S-76 a 16m D-Value aircraft.

Joe Douglas Helideck (Credit: NTSB)



BFU Investigate S-76B Descending to 20ft at 40 kts En Route in Poor 
Visibility

The German safety investigation body, the BFU, is investigating a serious 

incident that occurred to Sikorsky S-76B D-HHNH on 23 October 2017.

History of the Flight
In an interim report they describe that the flight was on a return 

to Emden from the  DolWin Alpha High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) platform 

in the North Sea, which helps transit power from offshore wind farms ashore.

At 0842 hrs the helicopter took off now with four persons on board [2 crew. 2 

passengers] for the return flight…[and]…climbed to 2,000 ft AMSL which 

remained the same up until right abeam of  Borkum Island.

At 0854 hrs the flight crew established radio contact with the Flugleiter at 

[the uncontrolled] Emden Airfield and requested information regarding the 

prevailing weather conditions.

They were told:

“Right now it is raining, cloud base few one thousand, overcast thousand 

five hundred and wind south-west 10 to 15 gusts 20 kt, QNH 1,010 and 

visibility here visual reference point 2.5 to 3 km.”

At 0857 hrs the crew informed Bremen Radar of passing way-point JUIST.



However:

Before reaching way-point JUIST the helicopter began to descend. The 

descent ended in low altitude with reduced speed near the coast line.

S-76B Flight Profile (Credit: BFU)

Then the helicopter climbed again to about 500 ft AMSL and continued the 

flight to Emden. At 0901 hrs the crew again requested information regarding 

the prevailing weather at Emden Airfield.

They were told:

“Right now it has decreased a little bit few seven hundred, broken one 

thousand, overcast one thousand eight hundred, the rain is gradually slowing 

down”.

The aircraft landed safely at 0911 hrs.



The Aircraft Commander (PIC) had a total flying experience of 11,461 hours, of 

which 3,025 hours were on type.  The First Officer (co-pilot) had 910 hours 

flying experience, of which 359 hours were on type.

Investigation

The BFU examined the events leading to the period between 0957 and 0901 

when the aircraft lost speed and altitude over the Wadden Sea, the tidal mud 

flats between the outer island and the mainland.

…during the two legs (outbound and return) the co-pilot in the left-hand seat 

acted as Pilot Flying (PF) and the Pilot in Command (PIC) in the right-hand 

seat as Pilot Non Flying (PNF). After take-off from the converter station 

DOLWIN ALPHA the helicopter had been operated using the Flight Director 

(FD) coupled in the Upper Modes ALT and NAV.

Between the way-points UTIRA and HW751 the FD had decoupled without 

reason. The two autopilots had changed from Attitude Retention (ATT) Mode 

to Stability Augmentation System (SAS) Mode. This resulted in the PF having 

to actively control the helicopter manually.

Subsequently, the PNF tried to find and eliminate the cause for the FD failure. 

Both in vain.

After they had enquired about the prevailing weather conditions at Emden 

Airfield they decided to reduce the flight altitude before reaching the coast 

line. During descent the helicopter had suddenly encountered heavy rain and 

significantly reduced visibility. At about 500 ft AMSL the co-pilot had handed 

over controls to the PIC.



Notably:

He had instructed the co-pilot to extend the landing gear because he wanted 

to be prepared for a possible off-field landing due to the unexpected bad 

weather.   According to the Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) recording the PIC 

allowed the helicopter to continue the descent because no visual contact 

with the coast line had been established.   At that time even in low altitude 

there was no visual contact with the coast line.

At about 0900 hrs the co-pilot said “100 ft GND”. A few seconds later the 

computer voice from the radar altimeter [Audio Voice Alerting Device (AVAD)]  

announcing “One Hundred Feet” and an acoustic signal were recorded. There 

was no verbal comment about the altitude warning. The helicopter continued 

to descend.

Significantly (emphasis added):

Both pilots looked outside searching for the coast line or a brighter place in 

the grey clouds ahead of them.

The co-pilot recognized the low altitude and read the radar altimeter “20 ft 

GND“. He advised the PF accordingly. At the same time the airspeed had 

decreased to approximately 40 kt.

The PF stopped the descent and increased the airspeed. A short time later in 

low altitude the pilots had the coast line in sight. The flight was continued 

towards Emden under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) with reduced cruise speed 

and in low altitude. Due to the limited visibility and low clouds it was decided 

to fly an approach to runway 07.



When the engines were shut off the pilots noticed that the cyclic stick trim 

switch was not pushed in, i.e. the function was disengaged.

The PIC stated that the heavy shower and the therefore reduced visibility had  

occurred totally unexpectedly. He had not considered to changing flight rules 

and conducting the instrument approach RNAV (GPS) Y RWY25 to Emden due 

to the unclear situation with the FD.

Flight Data Recorder (FDR) data was not available to the investigators as the 

FDR was faulty.  They do have radar and Flightradar 24 data.  The two 

passengers, who were facing aft were interviewed:

Then the helicopter had descended in stages until the main rotor generated 

spray. The passenger estimated the lowest altitude was 5 to 10 m. At the 

same time the helicopter had had a nose-up attitude. Then the coast line had 

been reached and they had flown over land slightly above the wind turbines to  

Emden.



The BFU explain that:

The helicopter was equipped with a Honeywell SPZ -7000 Digital Automatic 

Flight Control System (DAFCS). This system consists of an autopilot function 

for attitude stabilization (SAS or ATT modes), and a flight director function for  

roll and yaw control (ALT, IAS, VS, HDG, Nav or ILS modes). During automatic 

flight control one or several flight director modes (upper modes) are coupled 

with the autopilot in ATT mode. If the cyclic stick trim function is disengaged 

the AP changes from ATT mode to SAS mode. It is not possible to couple the 

FD in SAS mode.   Prior to departure the DAFCS has to be self-tested with a 

two-level test (Level 1 and Level 2) with running engines. The crew stated 

that at the day of the occurrence the two test levels had been without fault.   

[Additionally] the helicopter was equipped with a Flight Management 

System (FMS) Universal UNS 1K and a fixed installation Garmin GPS 500W 

with Moving Map indication.

[At Emden] both runway directions (07 and 25) are equipped with RNAV (GPS) 

and instrument approach and departure procedures. For helicopters 

approaching from the north way-point JUIST is the Initial Approach Fix (IAF) 

for RNAV (GPS) Y RWY 07/25 approaches.

[On] the day of the occurrence between 0800 hrs and 1000 hrs three more 

helicopters and one airplane departed for VFR offshore flights and one 

helicopter for an IFR offshore flight.



They also note that:

The serious incident occurred at a time where the [operator] was in the midst  

of reorganization. It encompassed the postholder positions, the revision of 

the procedures, the training, and internal reporting.   Deployment of the S-76B 

[by the operator] was only planned until the end of 2017 / or the beginning of 

2018. As a result the number of crews for commercial flight operations was 

reduced to three (three PICs and three co-pilots).

In relation to the wind farm support sector:

Since 2010 with the construction and operation of offshore wind energy 

convertors a new field of activity has developed for helicopter operators in 

Germany. In the beginning there were just a few flights, by 2016 the number 

had increased to about 14,000 per year. Due to the aeronautical regulations 

and the airspace and procedure specifications these flights have so far 

essentially been conducted in accordance with Visual Flight Rules (VFR). In 

the European neighboring states the offshore flights in connection with oil 

and gas production are essentially conducted in accordance with Instrument 

Flight Rules (IFR) due to the unpredictable weather or often marginal visual 

meteorological conditions.

…a way-point and route system including stipulated vertical separation and 

communications procedures were compiled on the initiative of several 

operators and in agreement with the  Deutsche Flugsicherung  (German Air 

Navigation Services, DFS). Since September 2014 a majority of the offshore 

companies are committed to adhere to this way-point grid and the 

procedures. 



In October 2017 the Deutsche Flugsicherung published the AIP AIC VFR 03/17 

Reporting point network and special alerting service for helicopters in the 

North Sea of the Bremen Flight Information as information and 

recommendation [only].

The helicopter had been equipped with an emergency flotation system for Sea 

State 4 (up to 2.5 m significant wave height).  The significant wave height 

at 0830 hrs at DolWin Alpha was 3.1 m.  This would have precluded operations 

in some countries, such as the UK.  The water conditions in the Wadden Sea 

would have been significantly calmer.

We will update this article when the final report is published.



In-Flight Flying Control Failure: Indonesian Sikorsky S-76C+ PK-FUP

Sikorsky S-76C+ helicopter PK-FUP (MSN 760582), operated by Hevilift Aviation 

Indonesia, crashed on 21 March 2015. The final report of Indonesian safety 

investigators confirms that control was lost after a main rotor servo push rod 

connection failed after a loss of torque and progressive wear to the point of separation 

from the rod end.

Inverted Wreckage of Heavilift Sikorsky S-76C+ PK-FUP (Credit KNKT/NTSC)

History of the Flight
PK-FUP was conducting a daylight pipeline inspection for Total E&P 

Indonesia from Sepinggan Airport, via the Handil helipad, with eight occupants 

(two pilots, one engineer, one flight operation officer and four passengers). The 

Indonesian Komite Nasional Keselamatan Transportasi (KNKT) state in 

their  safety investigation report    that:

After reached the cruising altitude of 1,000 feet the PIC [Pilot in Command] handed 

over the control to the SIC [Second in Command].



 The SIC engaged the autopilot and flew maintain cruise altitude and speed of 95 

knot. The weather was clear, wind condition was westerly at speed of 5 knots and 

visibility approximately 8 km. At position approximately 8 nm from CPU [Central 

Processing Unit facility] the PIC asked the SIC to descend to 600 feet with the rate of 

200 feet/minute. While passing 800 feet the helicopter attitude became un-

commanded [sic]. The helicopter rolled to the left and pitch up then rolled to the 

right and pitch down. The SIC lowered the collective and reduced the helicopter 

speed with intention to recover the helicopter attitude with no success. The PIC took 

over the control to recover the helicopter until [it]...crash[ed] into swamp.

The wreckage came to rest inverted in a tree just over 30 seconds after the first 

un-commanded movement.  All eight occupants survived, one with serious 

injuries and the others miraculously with no or only minor injuries.

Safety Investigation and Analysis 
Analysis of the FDR (a Penny & Giles solid state Multi-Purpose Flight Recorder 

[MPFR])…

…. showed that the helicopter attitude was stable when reaching the altitude of 

1,000 feet with heading of 038 degrees. Five minutes later, during descent, the 

helicopter entered [an] un-commanded attitude. A second after the helicopter 

started to bank to the left, there was pilot input recorded in the MPFR to counter the 

aircraft attitude however, the flight control did not respond as expected. The 

helicopter entered the un-commanded attitude for 31 seconds before ground 

impact. The MPFR recorded the roll to the left up to 77 degrees, roll to the right up to  

52 degrees, pitch up to 45 degrees and pitch down up to 61 degrees.



During the un-commanded attitude [sic], unusual sound  were] recorded [on] video 

media [a passenger was using a video camera as part of the pipeline survey] and 

MPFR. The sound spectrum analysis concluded that there was no evidence or 

progressive damage of propulsion system except there was NR instability observed 

during the last 35 seconds of the flight.

Examination of the wreckage:

…revealed that the engines were rotating during impact and no evidence of engine 

abnormality. The investigation concluded that the engines did not contribute to the 

un-commanded attitude.

Examination of the flying controls however showed that the rod end of forward 

main rotor servo push rod had separated.



Disconnected Forward Main Rotor Servo Push Pull Rod and Rod End Bearing from Heavilift Sikorsky S-76C+ PK-
FUP (Credit via KNKT/NTSC)

The S-76C has three servos, each receiving inputs to a vertical push-pull rod via 

a bell crank.

Sikorsky S-76 Flying Controls (Credit: Aerossurance)

The rod end bearing connects “to the push rod via threaded shank and locked 

by mean of jam nut” (highlighted in red in the above illustration).  The design 

does not use a locking device “to secure the jam nut to prevent loosening from 

the push rod during the operation” explain the KNKT. A torque stripe had been 

applied on installation.

Visual inspection on the push rod found that the internal thread of the forward push  

rod and the rod end bearing thread were deformed…



Thread Deformation Found on Heavilift Sikorsky S-76C+ PK-FUP (Credit KNKT/NTSC)

Upon sectioning the push rod “most of the threads” were found “missing in the 

worn area” and “asymmetric deformation was also observed on the edge of 

push rod internal thread”.



Thread Deformation After Sectioning: Heavilift Sikorsky S-76C+ PK-FUP (Credit KNKT/NTSC)

Continuous operation with such condition led to deterioration of the engagement of 

the forward push rod and the rod end bearing which subsequently the rod end 

bearing detached from the push rod.

The torque stripe on the lateral servo push pull rod and rod end bearing was 

broken too, indicating an in-service loss of torque on that rod end as well 

(although there was no significant internal damage in that case).  The aft servo 

push rod and the rod end bearing were found in good condition. PK-FUP had 

been imported into Indonesia from Canada in October 2014.



The forward servo actuator was installed on 5 February 2014 by a previous 

operator… [as the] forward servo actuator was due for overhaul.   There was no 

maintenance activity related to loosening the jam nut since the installation.

The servos themselves were examined, tested in accordance with 

the Component Maintenance Manual (CMM) and found serviceable according to 

the KNKT.  However, the US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 

commented in response to the draft report that: “The piston velocities indicated 

that they were not operating normally” and recommended further testing and 

the servo OEM, which does not appear to have been done as yet.

The detached rod end bearing from the forward push rod led to un-commanded 

servo movement to the main rotor. This supported by the result of the audio analysis  

of the recorder video which indicate instability of the main rotor. The un-

commanded servo movement resulted in the helicopter entering un-commanded 

attitude and uncontrollable main rotor. The pilots attempted to recover the 

condition with no success as the flight control system became uncontrollable.

Another Accident During the Investigation
The KNKT state that:

During the course of investigation, on 12 August 2015  [a] similar occurrence 

involving [an] Sikorsky S-76C+ happened in Nigeria.

That helicopter, 5N-BGD (MSN 760540) ……. crashed into the lagoon at 

Oworonsoki area of Lagos, Nigeria. The two flight crew members and four of the ten  

passengers were fatally injured.



Disconnected Forward Main Rotor Servo Push Pull Rod and Rod End Bearing from BHN Sikorsky S-76C+ 5N-BGD (Credit  
via Nigerian AIB)

The investigation found that the push rod tube separated from rod end bearing. The  

jam nut was loose and was not seating against the push rod.

It is worth noting that those connections had also been torque stripped with a 

slippage mark on installation (a good practice but not a maintenance manual 

requirement at the time [see below]). The NTSB comment that the PK-

FUP investigation only found the push rod / rod end separation on 22 August 

2015, which they note was ten days after the Nigerian accident.  The NTSB say, 

without further elaboration “it should be noted that a more efficient and rapid 

investigation could have prevented the accident in Nigeria, which occurred 144 

days after the Indonesian accident”. The KNKT had previous issued an 

undated Preliminary Report on PK-FUP.  This appears to have been before the 

detailed examination of the wreckage.  At that time a reported revision to the 

Operation Manual on automation use and changes to the recurrent training 

syllabus might have erroneously given the reader the impression that a pilot 

handling issue was involved. The Nigerian investigation has yet to issue a final 

report. On 12 August 2017 the Nigerian AIB issued an interim statement:



AIB has virtually completed all investigative actions and has initiated a follow-up 

action on interim safety recommendations-2015-009 with Sikorsky through National  

Transportation Safety Board, NTSB. The draft report will soon be sent to 

stakeholders for review and comments within 60 days.

That Nigerian AIB Safety Recommendation, in their Preliminary Report on 5N-

BGD issued on 21 September 2015, was:

Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation should consider a redesign of the affected control push  

rod assembly by introducing additional wire locking safety features between the 

jamnut and  the push rod to enhance better security.

Continued Airworthiness Actions
On 10 September 2015, Sikorsky issued Alert Service Bulletin ASB 76-67-57 for 

a……one-time inspection of installed forward, aft and lateral main servo input 

control push rods and jam nuts and tail rotor servo input control push rods and jam  

nuts for proper installation, condition, and security followed by application of 

slippage mark on all main and tail rotor servo input control push rod jam nuts.

A US FAA Emergency AD 2015-19-51 followed four days later.

On 19 November 2015, Sikorsky issued the revision of aircraft maintenance manual 

chapter 5 to re-inspect of the jam nut [sic] every 300 hours. The inspection includes 

the re-torque [of] the jam nut to 140 inch-pounds if it [is] loose.

The KNKT state that Heavilift have adopted a 100-hour periodicity for that 

check. When drafting their report KNKT had considered recommending “the 

installation of locking device to the jam nut or other method to prevent 

loosening of the jam nut”, similar to Nigerian AIB Safety Recommendation 2015-

009. 



In response to the draft report, the NTSB commented that “through extensive 

testing” (not otherwise described in the report) “Sikorsky determined that using 

a higher torque and applying a torque mark” and presumably then crucially 

having a repetitive inspection of that torque mark, “is sufficient to ensure the 

integrity of this connection”. We will update this article once the Nigerian Final 

Report is published.
S0-76C+ 5N-BGD 
UPDATE 22 October 2018: The Nigerian AIB issue their final report on the loss 

of S-76C+ 5N-BGD  in Lagos Lagoon on 12 August 2015.

Wreckage of BHN S-76C+ 5N-BGD Recovered from Lagos Lagoon (Credit: AIB – Nigeria)

The investigation revealed the following:
1. The flight crew were licensed, medically fit and adequately rested to 

conduct the flight.
2. The crew and passengers’ life vests were not activated.
3. The crew did not declare emergency.
4. There were twelve persons onboard including two crew members at the 

time of the accident.
5. The aircraft crashed into the Lagoon at the Oworonsoki area of Lagos 

State



6. There was no evidence of fire outbreak before and after the crash.
7. The life rafts on the helicopter were observed deflated and floating on 

the water but were not deployed.
8. The main wreckage of the helicopter was confined to a small area while 

other debris were scattered and floating around the crash site.
9. The main wreckage was submerged.
10.The helicopter was maintained in accordance with approved 

Maintenance Program.
11.No records of any deferred defects in the tech log.
12.The Forward Servo Clevis Rod separated from the bearing and the Jam 

nut.
13.The Jam nut was loose and was not seating against the Forward Servo 

Clevis Rod end.
14.The rescue was promptly carried out by fishermen operating their 

boats around the crash site.
15.The surviving passengers reported the flight was normal until the 

helicopter suddenly spiraled, descended and impacted the waters.
16.Field examination suggested that No. 2 engine suffered an 

uncontained failure post impact.
17.The combined Solid-State Voice/Flight Data recorder only 

contained information of the flight data.

The forward and aft servo clevis rods assemblies and associated bell crank 

assemblies were removed and replaced on the 9 March 2015, 414 flying hours 

before the accident (and 12 days before the accident in Indonesia).

Causal Factor

The separation of the Forward Servo Clevis Rod Assembly from the bearing and Jam 

nut (Bell Crank Assembly) which is part of the Cyclic Control System responsible for 

stabilizing the attitude of the helicopter made the aircraft uncontrollable.

Contributory Factors
1. The absence of a secondary mechanical locking system (lock-pin or wire-

lock) in the design of the Forward Servo Input Control Rod assembly 



contributed to the separation of the Forward Servo Clevis Rod from the 
bearing and Jam nut.

2. The wear that was prevalent at the Forward Servo Clevis Rod end fitting 
shank, which made the Jam nut rotate freely when force is applied.



South Korean Fire-Fighting Helicopter Tail Rotor Strike on Fuel 
Bowser (Heli Korea Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661)
On 25 April 2020, fire-fighting Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661 of Heli Korea suffered a tail rotor 

strike on a fuel bowser landed at a forward operating base at the edge of the Yeongsan 

River, South Korea.  There were no casualties of loss of containment of fuel but the 

helicopter received substantial damage.  The Korean Aviation and Railway Accident 

Investigation Board (ARAIB) safety investigation report was published on 29 June 2021 (in 

Korean only).

Approach of Heli Korea Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661 to Landing Site & Tail Rotor Strike on Bowser (Credit via ARAIB)

The Accident Flight
The flight crew of two had been on duty since 08:30 at the forward operating base.  One 

licensed aircraft engineer and a fuel bowser driver were also on site.  The pilots had gone 

for lunch at 11:35, but they were called out at 11:52 to tackle a mountain forest fire.  The 

helicopter took off at 12:12 and was on scene at 12:25.

After an hour of fire-fighting with an underslung fire-fighting bucket the crew decided to 

return for fuel.  At the operating base, the wind was 35 knots gusting 45.  Due to the wind 

direction the approach was in the opposite direct to normal.  The helicopter flew over the 

fuel bowser and placed the fire-fighting bucket on the ground next to the engineer and 

bowser driver.



The accident investigators then suggest the wind caused the helicopter to drift backwards, 

although it seems reasonable to expect that after placing the bucket on the ground the 

helicopter would manoeuvre aft to land with the bucket and sling ahead of the nose.  What 

is known is that the aircraft commander “felt the aircraft’s nose turning to the right with a 

thump and quickly lowered the collective”.

The tail rotor had in fact contacted the upper deck of the bowser.

Damage After Heli Korea Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661 Tail Rotor Strike on Bowser (Credit via ARAIB)

The helicopter rotated 450° before coming to rest.



Heli Korea Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661 (Credit via ARAIB)

Fragments of broken tail rotors were widely scattered around the site.

Damage to Heli Korea Sikorsky S-76C+ HL9661 After Tail Rotor Strike on Bowser (Credit via ARAIB)



The ARAIB Safety Investigation
There is no mention of any flight data recorder data being available.  The investigators note 

that in Heli Korea’s procedures:

There was no information about the parking location of the feeling vehicle [and] here was no 

information about the [aircraft] parking position when a refueling vehicle, which is 

fundamentally important for operational safety, was waiting for refueling.

The investigator state the co-pilot should advise the aircraft commander of obstacles, and 

mention the importance of Crew Resource Management (CRM) but then say rather harshly 

in this case “it is judged that there was no active action or advice” by the co-pilot.  They also 

complain of the weeds growing on landing site.

However, matters not discussed in the accident report:
 The approach briefing
 The decision to pass over the bowser rather than an offset approach and crab 

sideways
 Communications with the ground crew before or during the approach
 The positioning of the ground crew (which may have influence where the bucket 

was laid down)
 A recent prior accident involving the operator: On 18 March 202o Heli 

Korea Bell 214B1 HL9171 crashed into trees in strong winds during firefighting. with 
one fatality

 Another accident that occurred prior to the report being published: On 21 April 
2021 Heli Korea S-76C+ HL9285 crashed into a lake during firefighting. with one 
fatality



ARAIB Conclusions
The cause of the accident was landing in strong winds, and unable to maintain position 

the helicopter was pushed backwards, and the tail rotor impacted the top of the rear end 

of the fuel bowser.

Contributing Factors:
 A refueling vehicle was parked close to the helicopter landing site.
 Landing procedures were not clear.
 There was no proper communication between the pilots about the helicopter going 

backwards.



Safety Lessons from a Fatal Helicopter Bird  Strike: Sikorsky S-76C++ N748P, 
4 January 2009
We look at a fatal accident that happened on 4 January 2009 that highlights a range of 

certification, modification, crew alerting, training and emergency response lessons. 

We also discuss current activity on helicopter bird strike certification requirements.

Wreckage of PHI Sikorsky S-76C++ N748P (Credit: NTSB)

The Accident Flight
Sikorsky S-76C++  N748P of PHI took off from a heliport in Louisiana, destined for 

a Shell offshore installation in the Gulf of Mexico with two crew and 7 passengers aboard. 

The helicopter “established level cruise flight at 850 feet mean sea level and 135 knots 

indicated air speed” according to the US National Transportation Safety Board 

(NTSB) investigation report and:

About 7 minutes after departure, the cockpit voice recorder recorded a loud bang, followed by 

sounds consistent with rushing wind and a power reduction on both engines and a decay of 

main rotor revolutions per minute. Due to the sudden power loss, the helicopter departed 

controlled flight…

The helicopter crashed in marshland just 12 miles from the heliport.



Wreckage of PHI Sikorsky S-76C++ N748P (Credit: NTSB)

The  Caledonian   Airborne Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) activated.  While there is 

normally a short delay until the COSPAS/SARSAT satellite system alerts the appropriate 

Rescue Coordination Centre (RCC), the USAF RCC only made contact with the operator 31 

minutes after impact according to their accident report form.  It was not until the wreckage 

had been visually identified (54 minutes after impact) by another of the operator’s 

helicopters that a US Coast Guard helicopter was dispatched. Miraculously one passenger 

was found alive, albeit very seriously injured.



Wreckage of PHI Sikorsky S-76C++ N748P (Credit: NTSB)

The NTSB N748P Accident Investigation
The NTSB identified that the helicopter had suffered a bird strike:

Examination of the wreckage revealed that both the left and right sections of the cast acrylic 

windshield were shattered.



Reconstruction of the Canopy and STC Acrylic Windshield of S-76C++ N748P (Credit: NTSB)

Feathers and other bird remains were collected from the canopy and windshield at the initial 

point of impact and from other locations on the exterior of the helicopter. Laboratory 

analysis  identified the remains as coming from a female red-tailed hawk;

Red Tail Hawk (Credit: Snowmanradio CC BY 2.0)

The females of that species have an average weight of 2.4 pounds [1.1kg].

The acrylic windshield had been fitted in place of the production windshield after delivery 

(discussed further below). Located about 100mm behind the windscreen of the S-76C++ 

are two engine fire extinguisher T-handles.  These…

…are normally in the full-forward position during flight, and each is held in place by a spring-

loaded pin that rests in a detent; aft pulling force is required to move the T-handles out of their 

detents. If the T handles are moved aft, a mechanical cam on each T-handle pushes the trigger 

on the associated [engine power control lever] ECL out of its wedge-shaped stop, allowing the 

ECL to move aft, reducing fuel to the engine that the ECL controls.

The investigators determined:

The impact of the bird on the canopy just above the windshield near the engine control 

quadrant likely jarred the fire extinguisher T-handles out of their detents and moved them aft, 

pushing both ECL triggers out of their stops and allowing them to move aft and into or near the 

flight-idle position, reducing fuel to both engines.



A similar incident occurred on November 13, 1999, in West Palm Beach, Florida, when a bird 

struck the windshield of an S-76C+ [HEMS] helicopter, N276TH, operated by Palm Beach County.

13 Nov 1999 West Palm Beach, FL S-76C+ Birdstrike (Credit: via FAA)

The bird did not penetrate the laminated glass windshield, but the impact force of the bird 

cracked the windshield and dislodged the fire extinguisher T-handles out of their detents; 

however, in that case, the force was not great enough to move the ECLs.

Shortly after the accident it was noted there has been wear in the engine control quadrants 

on some S-76C++ and Sikorsky issued an Alert Service Bulletin to address.
The NTSB Conclusions
The NTSB determined the probable causes as:

1. The sudden loss of power to both engines that resulted from impact with a bird 
(red-tailed hawk), which fractured the windshield and interfered with engine fuel 
controls, and

2. The subsequent disorientation of the flight crewmembers, which left them unable 
to recover from the loss of power.

Contributory factors were:
1. The lack of Federal Aviation Administration regulations and guidance, at the time 

the helicopter was certificated, requiring helicopter windshields to be resistant to 
bird strikes;

2. The lack of protections that would prevent the T handles from inadvertently 
dislodging out of their detents; and

3. The lack of a master warning light and audible system to alert the flight crew of a 
low-rotor-speed condition.



The NTSB raised 12 safety recommendations to (discussed below) in November 2010.  Only 

a few have resulted in any action to date.
Further Discussion
We will now examine ten aspects in more detail:

1. Windshields: Rotorcraft Windshield Bird Strike Certification Background
2. Windshields: US Army Research
3. Windshields: The Retrofit Cast Acrylic Windshield
4. Windshields: Safety Actions
5. Bird Strike Avoidance
6. Future Bird Strike Policy / Rule Making
7. Low Rotor Speed Warning Systems
8. Flight Crew Training for Simultaneous Dual-Engine Failure
9. NTSB Safety Recommendations
10. Our Observations

1. Windshields: Rotorcraft Windshield Bird Strike Certification Background
The NTSB quote a 2006 study by Dolbeer, Wright and Cleary, (“Bird Strikes to Civil 

Helicopters in the United States, 1990-2005“) which concluded that:
1. helicopters were significantly more likely to be damaged by bird strikes than 

airplanes,
2. windshields on helicopters were more frequently struck and damaged than 

windshields on airplanes, and
3. helicopter bird strikes were also more likely to lead to injuries to crew or 

passengers.

The NTSB comment:

The authors concluded that the “high percentage of windshields damaged for helicopters, 

combined with the disproportionate number of human injuries, indicates that improvements are  

needed in windshield design and strength for these aircraft.”

However, the S-76A was certified on 21 November 1978 to a Federal Aviation 

Administration (FAA) Type Certification Basis (TCB) of FAR Part 29 Amendments up to 29-11 



(issued 5 February 1975). There were no FAA bird-strike requirements at that time, 

though 29.775 Windshields and windows did require:

Nonsplintering safety glass must be used in glass windshields and windows.

In 1990 the FAA changed the 29.775 Windshields and windows requirement (in 

Amendment 29-31) to remove the specific reference to glass and cover all material types:

Windshields and windows must be made of material that will not break into dangerous 

fragments.

In 1991 the FAA certified the S-76C. Then finally, in 1996, the 29.631 Bird 

Strike requirement was introduced by the FAA (for new helicopter types):

The rotorcraft must be designed to ensure capability of continued safe flight and landing (for 

Category A) or safe landing (for Category B) after impact with a 2.2-lb (1.0 kg) bird when the 

velocity of the rotorcraft (relative to the bird along the flight path of the rotorcraft) is equal to 

VNE or VH  (whichever is the lesser) at altitudes up to 8,000 feet. Compliance must be shown by 

tests or by analysis based on tests carried out on sufficiently representative structures of similar 

design.

However, while the US requirements for the S-76 were minimal until 1996, the UK Civil 

Aviation Authority (UKCAA) did have bird strike requirements long before FAR 29.631 was 

introduced.  These had already been adopted in the European Joint Aviation Authorities 

JAR-29 certification standard. Consequently, Sikorsky developed a bird strike resistant glass 

laminated windshield to meet additional British Civil Airworthiness Requirements Section G 

(BCAR Section G) requirements when seeking to introduce the S-76A into the UK. BCAR 

Section G required the windshield resist penetration of a 2lb bird at 160 knots. Testing was 

conducted on a glass-plastic laminate windshield in 1978 and on a glass-glass laminate in 

1982. Both designs passed the BCAR requirements at impact speeds of 160-173 knots. 



Then for the UK certification of the S-76B, six glass-glass laminate windshields were also 

subject to 2lb / 160 knot bird strike tests in August 1985 at a range of temperatures (20°F to 

72°F).  All passed. Not only did Sikorsky develop a bird strike resistant windshield 

designs, but to their credit they also made a bird resistant windshield the production 

standard:

All S-76C++ model helicopters are delivered with laminated glass heated windshields that are 

0.30-inch thick with a 0.12-inch thermally tempered glass ply outboard, a 0.12-inch chemically 

tempered glass ply inboard, and 0.06-inch polyvinyl butyral interlayer between them.

N748P had therefore been delivered with such windshields on 25 September 2006. 

Although the average weight of a red tailed hawk is 2.4lbs, as N748P was operating at a 

lower speed that the test case, the test case approximates to being able to resist the 

energy of a 2.8lb bird at N748P’s cruise speed of 135 knots. However, the windshields of 

N748P had been replaced after delivery with lighter cast acrylic windshields that had never 

been bird strike tested (discussed further below).
2. Windshields: US Army Research
The NTSB say the US Army generally no longer uses cast acrylic windshield (except for 

example where it is necessary for an ejection seat to be able to easily break through the 

canopy).

One U.S. Army study (“UH-1 Ballistic and Bird Impact Test Study,” Report AMMRC CTR 75-7, April 

1975) reported on bird strike tests of Bell UH-1 helicopter windshields made of different 

materials. The UH-1 windshield materials tested included cast acrylic, polycarbonate, and a 

composite constructed of a layer of polycarbonate bonded to a layer of chemically tempered 

glass. The report concluded, in part, that the polycarbonate and the polycarbonate bonded to 

glass both offer far greater bird strike protection than a standard cast acrylic windshield. The 

report further indicated that a cast acrylic windshield at a cruising speed of 90 knots is 



incapable of defeating a bird strike, and that the Plexiglas breaks into large fragments that 

could cause serious injury to the flight crew. Another U.S. Army report (“Design, Test and 

Acceptance Criteria for Helicopter Transparent Enclosures,” Report USARTL-TR-78-26, 1978) 

documented a study of the low-energy impact response of a number of different windshield 

materials. The materials tested included a tempered-glass laminate, a laminate of glass and 

stretched acrylic, monolithic stretched acrylic, monolithic cast acrylic, and monolithic 

polycarbonate. The report concluded that the cast acrylic needed to be three times as thick as 

the stretched acrylic or the polycarbonate to provide a similar level of protection against impact.

3. Windshields: The Retrofit Cast Acrylic Windshield
N748P had been retrofitted after delivery with a 0.312 inch monolithic cast acrylic 

replacement windshields supplied by a third-party manufacturer, Aeronautical Accessories 

Inc (AAI).  The NTSB say:

Installation and use of the replacement windshields was approved by the FAA under 

Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) SR01340AT, which was issued to AAI on April 16, 1997. The 

FAA also issued a Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA) to AAI on August 3, 1998, for the 

manufacture of the replacement windshields.

As they were not certified for use in the UK there were no bird strike requirements applied. 

The NTSB say:

No records of the tests and analysis have been located by the NTSB or provided to the NTSB by 

either the FAA or the STC holder, AAI.

Starting in the late 1980s the operator had started replacing glass laminated windshields 

on its S-76 fleet.  As the cast acrylic windshields were unheated the operator was also able 

to remove “the main gearbox-mounted AC generator that provides power for the 

windshield heaters”.  The combination of the lighter windshields and generator resulted in 



a weight saving and a payload improvement, which would prove attractive to customers 

unaware of the certification background. With respect to in-service experience:

The NTSB is aware of an additional bird strike incident on April 19, 2006, involving an S-76A++ 

helicopter operated by PHI that was equipped with a cast acrylic windshield identical to the one 

in the accident helicopter.

Bird Stike in 2006 on a PHI Sikorsky S-76A++ with the STC Acrylic Windshield (Credit: NTSB)

The examination revealed a near-circular hole with radiating cracks near the top center of the 

right windshield. The bird [a Seagull] penetrated the windshield and pushed the right throttle to 

idle. The trapped remains of the bird prevented the right throttle from being re-engaged, but the  

pilot was able to land the helicopter safely.

4. Windshields: Safety Actions
The NTSB say:

On May 19, 2009, Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation issued a safety advisory (SSA-76-09-002) to all 

S-76 operators regarding the reduced safety factor of acrylic windshields (both cast and 

stretched) as compared to laminated glass windshields. According to the advisory, the S-76 

laminated glass windshield demonstrated more tolerance to penetrating damage resulting from  



in-flight impacts (such as bird strikes) compared to acrylic windshields. Sikorsky expressed 

concern that the presence of a hole through the windshield, whether created directly by object 

penetration or indirectly through crack intersections, may cause additional damage to the 

helicopter, cause disorientation or injury to the flight crew, increase pilot workload, and create 

additional crew coordination challenges.

To aid operators the safety advisory also included guidance on determining the type of 

acrylic windshield installed by using two sheets of polarised film (stretched acrylic will still 

let some light through). By September 2009 the operator had fitted “OEM-type glass 

laminated windshields” to all their S-76Cs.
5. Bird Strike Avoidance
The Helicopter Safety Advisory Conference (HSAC) Gulf of Mexico helicopter industry 

association published Recommended Practice 2010-03 on Brid Strike Avoidance. A number 

of bird strike avoidance measures are also contained in the offshore helicopter version of 

the Flight Safety Foundation’s (FSF)  award winning Basic Aviation Risk Standard   (available 

to download on the FSF website) which we discussed here: FSF Launches Offshore 

Helicopter Standard (BARSOHO).  A update of BARSOHO (Version 3), fully aligned with 

the HeliOffshore Safety Performance Model (SPM) (discussed here: Offshore Helicopter 

Safety Performance: 2016 HeliOffshore Conference Report), is due out shortly.  UPDATE 1 

February 2017: SPM aligned V3 is issued and available.
6. Future Bird Strike Policy / Rule Making
At the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) 10th Rotorcraft Symposium in December 

2016 there was a discussion on the topic of bird strikes. EASA is a participant in 

the Rotorcraft Bird Strike Working Group, tasked by the FAA after this N748P accident to 

provide the FAA Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) with recommendations 

on rotorcraft bird strike protection, rulemaking, policy and guidance by October 2017. EASA 

is expected to release shortly a new certification memo, to clarify EASA’s expectations when 



showing compliance to  bird strike requirement.  This is expected to include the following: 

EASA do comment that based on their current analysis of occurrences, bird strikes are not a 

major cause of accidents but are “a growing safety and economic hazard” and that: 

They also comment of the future risk of drone/UAS/RPAS strikes.  Aerossurance has 

previously discussed the EASA Drone Safety Risk Portfolio and Analysis.



7. Low Rotor Speed Warning Systems
The S-76, like most modern rotorcraft, has a relatively low rotor inertia and the NTSB say:

Based on the main rotor speed decay information provided by Sikorsky, the flight crew of N748P 

had about 6 seconds or less to react to the decaying [main rotor speed] Nr condition.

Some helicopter types are equipped with an audible alarm and/or warning light to alert the 

crew to low Main Rotor Speed (Nr).

When the S-76 was certificated in 1978, 14 CFR 29.33 did not require an audible alarm or 

warning system for low Nr conditions. The subsequent revision to 14 CFR 29.33  in 1978 required  

a low Nr warning system in single-engine helicopters and in multi-engine helicopters that did 

not have a device that automatically increases power on the operating engine if one engine fails.  

Since the S-76 has a system that automatically increases power on the operating engine in order  

to maintain Nr, the accident helicopter would not have required an alarm or warning system 

even if the latest revision did apply. The NTSB is aware that both the Sikorsky S-92A and 

the S-76D… have an audible low Nr warning, even though these aircraft are equipped with a 

system that automatically increases power in the working engine.

The NTSB specifically note that in July 2009 the FAA issued a Notice of Proposed 

Rulemaking (NPRM), on introducing a new  Flight crew Alerting  requirement for large 

airplanes.

The NPRM proposes to incorporate redundant sensory cuing (such as aural and visual) into 

alerts for conditions requiring immediate flight crew awareness. The revisions are based on 

human factors principles [to] facilitate flight crew performance. In a letter [to the FAA]…the NTSB  

recognized the importance of providing salient, recognizable cues through at least two different 

sensory systems by a combination of aural, visual, or tactile indications.



The resulting  14 CFR 25.1322  was issued in 2011. The FAA have yet to initiate similar rule-

making for rotorcraft, and  29.1322 is far more basic, something discussed at length at two 

recent  Royal Aeronautical Society conferences on offshore helicopter automation. 

However , as we have discussed previously, a Special Condition has been proposed for 

the Bell 525 for its sophisticated Crew Alerting System:

The novel design includes the integration of audio and visual alerts, tactical sensors, and CAS 

message consolidation. The new technologies associated with integrated visual, aural, tactile, 

and alert messaging are more effective in alerting the flightcrew and aiding them in decision-

making than the discrete colored lights for warning, caution, and advisory alerts prescribed in § 

29.1322 alone.

8. Flight Crew Training for Simultaneous Dual-Engine Failure
The NTSB say:

A review of the accident flight crew’s training records indicated that both pilots had fulfilled all 

training requirements and had completed Sikorsky S-76C++ emergency initial and recurrent 

training in ground school and in the simulator. The emergency procedures section of the 

Sikorsky S-76 flight manual describes the dual-engine failure procedure while hovering, during 

takeoff and initial climb, and during cruise. Upon dual-engine failure, the helicopter will yaw to 

the left due to the reduction in torque as engine power decreases. An immediate collective pitch 

reduction would be required to maintain Nr within safe limits. In most instances, if dual-engine 

failure occurs a safe autorotation landing could be made. According to PHI, prior to the January 

4, 2009, accident, line oriented flight training (LOFT) for dual-engine failure was conducted in 

both ground school and in a simulator for visual and instrument flight rules conditions. Training  

was conducted so that one engine failed at a time, ultimately resulting in autorotation. Training 

for simultaneous sudden failure of both engines was part of initial training but was not part of 



annual recurrent training. Since the accident PHI modified LOFT to include sudden simultaneous 

dual-engine failure training both on the ground and in the simulator during initial and annual 

recurrent training. A review of NTSB data indicates that from 1982 to present [2010] the NTSB 

has investigated 52 accidents involving loss of engine power in dual-engine helicopters, 23 of 

which resulted in substantial damage. In general, the causes of the dual-engine loss of power 

were due to fuel exhaustion, fuel contamination, and operational errors, among other factors.

Such failures with simultaneous loss of all power are rare however (for example most fuel 

systems are designed so that one engine fails slightly earlier than the other in the case of 

fuel exhaustion).
9. NTSB Safety Recommendations

  A-10-136 to the FAA: Require that Sikorsky redesign the S-76C++ model helicopter fire 
extinguisher T-handles and/or engine control quadrant to ensure that the T-handles do 
not inadvertently dislodge out of their detents due to any external force on the canopy or  
windshields that could cause unintended movement of the engine power control 
levers. This was closed by a Sikorsky redesign of the overhead engine control lever, 
incorporating a damper and a positive detent for the ‘FLY’ position, made 
mandatory by FAA Airworthiness Directive (AD) 2012-22-13.

  A-10-137 to the FAA: Evaluate other helicopter models with engine control quadrant 
designs similar to the S-76C++ model helicopter and require modification, as necessary, 
to ensure that any external force on the canopy or windshields does not cause 
unintended movement of the engine power control levers. This was closed by the FAA 
stating they had reviewed other, unspecified, types.

  A-10-138 to the FAA: Issue a certification policy to require that operators of helicopters 
with windshields with demonstrated bird-strike resistance not be permitted to replace 
those windshields with ones that have not been demonstrated to be resistant to bird 
strikes. This was closed 5 years after it was made as ‘reconsidered’ by NTSB.  No 
action has been taken however.

  A-10-139 to the FAA: Evaluate the feasibility of retrofitting helicopters manufactured 
before 1996 with windshields that meet the current bird-strike requirements. This 
was closed after the FAA started this was “neither justifiable nor economically 
feasible”.



  A-10-140 to the FAA: Evaluate the feasibility of requiring manufacturers to equip new 
helicopters, built under the old certification requirements, with windshields that meet the  
current bird-strike requirements.  This was also closed when the FAA responded that 
this was potentially impractical.

  A-10-141 to the FAA: Require helicopter manufacturers to develop helicopter-specific 
guidance (based on the helicopter’s demonstrated capability to withstand a specific level 
of bird-strike impact energy) that will assist pilots in devising precautionary helicopter 
operational strategies for minimizing the severity of helicopter damage sustained during  
a bird strike, should one occur, when operating in areas of known bird activity.   This 
remains open awaiting the Rotorcraft Bird Strike Working Group mentioned above.

  A-10-142 to the FAA: Require Sikorsky to design an audible low rotor revolutions per 
minute (Nr) alarm system and master warning light that will alert the flight crew of S-76 
model helicopters of rapidly decaying Nr.   The FAA rejected this proposed action, 
which the NTSB closed and classified as ‘unacceptable’.

  A-10-143 to the FAA: Once an audible low rotor revolutions per minute (Nr) alarm 
system and master warning light are designed as requested in Safety Recommendation 
A-10-142, require operators of Sikorsky S-76 model helicopters to install the audible low 
Nr alarm system and master warning light that will alert flight crews of rapidly decaying 
Nr. The FAA also rejected this proposed action, which the NTSB again closed and 
classified as ‘unacceptable’.

  A-10-144 to the FAA: Revise 14 Code of Federal Regulations 27.33 and 29.33 to require 
an audible low rotor revolutions per minute alarm system and master warning light for 
all dual-engine helicopters, even those that are equipped with a device that 
automatically increases power on the operating engine when the other engine fails. This 
remains open awaiting progress on wider changes to FAR27 and FAR29, although 
an update promised by the FAA for February 2016 has not been recorded in 
the NTSB database.  UPDATE 16 February 2017: This was 
subsequently closed ‘unacceptable action’.

  A-10-145 to the FAA: Require operators to include simultaneous dual-engine power 
loss scenarios in both initial and recurrent ground and simulator training for pilots of 
dual-engine helicopters. This remains listed as open by the NTSB awaiting a 
promised change FAA Order 8900.1 to include this training. An update promised by 
the FAA for January 2015 has not been recorded in the NTSB database.





  A-10-146 to the FAA: Update the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 29 transport-
category helicopter bird-strike standards so that they are consistent with the latest 
military and civilian bird-strike database information and trends in bird populations.  
This remains open awaiting the Rotorcraft Bird Strike Working Group mentioned 
above.

Overall the response to these recommendations was uninspiring.
10. Our Observations
The fatal N748P S-76C++ accident highlights some of the complexity of interpreting TCBs 

and the equivalent level of safety by both air operators and their customers as the State of 

Design’s certification requirements may not be the most stringent applied.  We are aware 

of safety studies, albeit conducted without the benefit of rotorcraft certification expertise, 

that have been flawed by ignoring this point.

Fortunately, an analysis, which is now a requirement of the FSF’s BARSOHO standard, is 

likely to become easier with greater harmonization of regulations and their application, 

however actual designs may still exceed the applicable certification requirements (as in the 

case of Sikorsky’s production windshield). This also shows the importance of careful 

consideration of modifications and comparison of bids from different operators so that 

payload/range and cost are not inadvertently prioritized without due regard to safety.

The importance of sharing and monitoring in-service experience is demonstrated as there 

were both a previous 1999 S-76 incident when a bird strike on the stronger glass laminate 

windshield resulted in a throttle movements and one in 2006 that involved a penetration 

on an STC acrylic windshield that retarded one throttle to idle (both discussed above).  We 

are aware of at least one similar incident that had occurred on another medium helicopter 

type in Nigeria. Despite 12 NTSB recommendations, only a few have resulted in any action 

to date.

It is also surprising that the NTSB did not examine in more detail the effectiveness of the 

accident alerting, search and rescue.



UPDATE 15 January 2017: Power of Prediction: Foresight and Flocking Birds looks at how a 

double engine loss due to striking Canada Geese had been predicted 8 years before the US 

Airways Flight 1549 ditching in the Hudson (which was just days after the Louisiana 

helicopter accident).

UPDATE 2 April 2017:  NTSB Recommendations on JT15D Failure to Meet Certification Bird 

Strike Requirements

UPDATE 14 June 2017: This accident features in  the   first FAA Rotorcraft Lessons Learnt 

report.

UPDATE 6 December 2017: In a presentation on behalf of the RBSWG to the 11th EASA 

Rotorcraft Symposium it was revealed that in the US 94% of the current helicopter fleet is 

made up of types that never needed to meet a bird strike requirement. This accident and 

the Hudson A320 ditching, both in January 2009, were likely causes of a big increase in all 

wildlife strikes reporting across the US helicopter fleet.

While fixed 

wing aircraft predominantly strike birds during take-off and landing, two thirds of 

rotorcraft strikes occurred during the en route phase (where kinetic energy is highest). 

Only 8-9% occurred during approach and 9-10% during climb.  The presentation went on:



The largest single component struck by birds is the windshield with 47% on Part 27 and 40% on 

Part 29.   84-85% of all bird strikes occurred on components forward of the main rotor mast. 

This includes the main rotor which experienced 30%-33% of the strikes reported. Not one single 

record exists for windshield penetration on Part 29 rotorcraft certified to the FAA bird strike 

airworthiness standard established over 21 years ago.     This is statistically significant. For newly 

manufactured and existing rotorcraft, the RBSWG proposed to use a Risk-Based Safety-Tiered 

approach that scales the bird strike regulation based on the maximum number of occupants 

onboard. As the number of occupants increases, so does the risk exposure.

They also recommend:
 Reduce airspeed when practical
 Increase altitude as quickly as possible and practical
 Use taxi and landing lights

They also say:

The location of bird concentrations during seasonal migrations and the local bird nesting and 

roosting habitats, should be made available to the rotorcraft operator/pilot for preflight 

planning to minimize the potential for bird strikes.   Air carriers and general aviation operators 

working with the Flight Safety Programs and Flight Service Briefing should identify and publish 

the known locations and probability of bird concentrations.   This information on bird 

concentrations should be incorporated into alert bulletins, flight service notice to airmen 

(NOTAM) and other systems presently used to inform flight crews of flight hazards.

The RBSWG submitted its final report to the ARAC on 10 November 2017.  The ARAC was 

due to meet on 14 December 2017 to review the report.  It is expected to be made public in 

2018.

UPDATE 2 March 2018:  Swedish Military NOE Helicopter Bird Strike

UPDATE 15 April 2018: Wildlife strikes add to US Air Force and Navy’s mishap count

UPDATE  5 October 2018: FAA: 665 helicopter bird strikes over the last 3 years



Of the eight injuries reported, four were to pilots, and four were passengers. The incidents 

typically involved medium to large birds, with some penetrating into the aircraft. The more 

minor injuries were typically the result of flying debris caused by the strike — particularly broken  

glass.

In terms of the impact on the aircraft, 79 strikes (12 percent) resulted in at least some damage. 

Of these, 41 (six percent) produced “substantial damage” — defined as damage to an aircraft’s 

structural integrity, performance, or flight characteristics, normally requiring major repairs or 

the replacement of the entire affected component.

In all, 28 incidents resulted in over $10,000 in damage/repair costs, four of which exceeded 

$100,000. For the three-year period, bird/wildlife strikes to helicopters resulted in a total of over 

$3.7 million in repair and damage costs — not including the revenue lost to an aircraft being 

out of service while in repair.

UPDATE 9 November 2018: The NTSB report that Air 

Methods HEMS Bell  407  N620PA suffered an in-flight loss of control due to multiple bird 

strikes from a skien of snow geese (typically 4lb+) on 19 November 2017 while cruising at 

1240ft AGL (all3 POB died).



Wreckage of Air Methods HEMS B407 N620PA after Striking Geese (Credit: NTSB)

UPDATE 28 December 2018: Final Report Issued on 2008 B737 Bird Strike Accident in 

Rome

UPDATE 3 January 2019: USAF HH-60G Downed by Geese in Norfolk, 7 January 2014

UPDATE 13 June 2019: UK AAIB report on a Bell 429 birdstrike.



Bell 429 M-YMCM Birdstrike (Credit: AAIB)

UPDATE 7 November 2020: Deadly Dusk Air Ambulance Bird Strike

UPDATE 30 December 2020: AS350B3/H125 Bird Strike with Red Kite 

Aerossurance is pleased to sponsor the 2017 European Society of Air Safety Investigators 

(ESASI) 8th Regional Seminar in Ljubljana, Slovenia on 19 and 20 April 2017.  Registration is 

just €100 per delegate. To register for the seminar please follow this link.  ESASI is the 

European chapter of the International Society of Air Safety Investigators (ISASI).



CFIT Gangnam Style – Korean S-76C++ and Decision Making
Despite poor visibility the crew of an executive helicopter pressed on and collided with a 39 

storey building in Seoul.

The Korean Aviation and Railway Accident Investigation Board (ARAIB) have issued their 

report into the accident that took place on 16 November 2013 when, a Sikorsky S-76C+

+ HL9294, operated by LG Electronics, crashed into a residential tower block in the 

Gangnam district of Seoul.

Impact Site at Condominium Building, Gangnam, Seoul (Credit: ARAIB)



Wreckage of LG Electronics Sikorsky S-76C++ HL9294 at the Foot of the Condominium Building (Credit: ARAIB)

Preparations for the Flight
LG Electronics has a Business Support Office under which there is a Private Jet Team and a 

Helicopter Team (effectively two separate flight departments).

The helicopter was scheduled to position from Gimpo Airport to pick up six passengers, 

including a Vice Chairman and CEO of LG Electronics, at the downtown, riverside Jamsil 

Heliport at 09:00 and take them to a company factory.

This flight had been booked with 23 hours notice.

Investigators say:

…on 16 November, about 06:06 and 06:08, the captain called Gimpo Airport Weather Office and 

Seoul Airport Weather Office at home and checked out weather conditions, respectively.

About 06:25, he called the [First Officer] FO and said, “Let’s cancel the flight because it will be 

difficult.” Subsequently, about 06:30, the FO called LG Electronics’ Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office 

and notified no-go due to bad weather conditions, and according to the statement of the Office, 

about 06:32, the Office called the Helicopter Team’s pilot in charge of operation and said, “The 

FO notified no-go, so please, accurately assess a situation once again.”



On the day of the accident, passengers were actually considering two transportation options, 

high-speed train (KTX) and helicopter…

…[the] passengers [had] already purchased tickets for a high-speed train and thus, were all 

prepared for a no-go situation…

In subsequent interview it is suggested that:

The reason why LG Electronics’ Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office asked the pilot in charge of 

operation to reassess a no-go situation is that there was time before the departure of an 

alternative transportation means, KTX, and that the pilot in charge of operation usually did this 

job whereas the FO was newly hired.

The pilot in charge of operation  suggested in a subsequent call with the pilot and other: 

“How about taking off at Gimpo Airport if the weather conditions are poor since takeoff is 

possible (at Gimpo Airport)”?  He also gave the deputy general manager the pilots phone 

number.

…when [the captain]  talked with the Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office’s deputy general manager 

over the telephone at 07:12, he overturned his initial decision and deferred it until 07:40…

As that time approached:

…the captain decided to go forward with the operation as originally scheduled and notified this 

to the deputy general manager by telephone about 07:38 as well as the pilot in charge of 

operation through the [First Officer] FO.

The FO checked weather conditions with the Jamsil Heliport’s manager by phone four times 

(at  07:08, 07:10, 07:52, and 08:13).  He was reportedly told: “Due to fog, Cheongdam Bridge 

(about 1.1 km) is not visible from the heliport, and nor is the Hangang’s water (about 90 m)” 

…

…but this was not taken into account in the captain’s decision-making process.



About 08:20, the captain went to the ramp for flight where the FO was standing by after the 

preflight inspection.

At 08:43:53…the captain requested the Tower to clear the flight for takeoff…, and at 08:44:01, 

the controller advised him that visibility was 700 m. Accordingly, the captain made a request 

for Special VFR at 08:44:10, and the clearance for takeoff was issued at 08:45:17.

ARAIB report that in post accident interviews at LG it was stated that:

Before the event, the captain had past experience of flying below the allowable limits of weather 

conditions before the accident.

When other pilots found that the captain decided to fly below the allowable limits of weather 

conditions before the event, they thought that “the Team leader (captain) was able to conduct a 

flight under these weather conditions since he had more flight experience and better pilot 

proficiency than other pilots.”

A final go/no-go decision lies with the captain, and the captain’s decision is fully followed.

 The Accident Flight
The helicopter took off at 08:45:31 with the intention of routing down the Hangang River to 

the city centre heliport.

At 08:46:33, the controller asked, “How’s flight visibility?” The captain said to the FO, “Tell him 

over 500 is 7 miles!” The FO replied to the controller, “7 is maintained over 500,” adding “We are 

heading to Jamsil Heliport along the Hangang.”



Flight Route (Credit: ARAIB)

From then on, the captain and the FO sustained a conversation like “Hangang in sight?,” “Not in 

sight,” etc. and piloted the aircraft at about 1,170 – 1,350 ft at a speed of about 130 kt on a 

heading of 120° in the autopilot mode, to Noduelseom (Isl.), along the Hangang.

According to Seoul Airport’s radar data, however, HL9294 started to fly straight after passing by 

Noduelseom at 08:50:34…

It is at this point the aircraft started to deviate from the planned route close to the south 

edge of the Hangang.

Then, it turned left and flew in parallel with the Hangang, about 1 km south of  the south edge.



Radar Track (Credit: ARAIB)

As the captain decreased speed for landing, about 3.6 km west of Jamsil Heliport, the FO ran the 

before-landing checklist and extended the landing gear at 08:52:15.

At 08:52:47, the helicopter over flew the Dosan Park Intersection at 1,360 ft at a speed of 97 

kt.  The helicopter then slowed, started to descend and turned right.

…at 08:53:32, the flight track of HL9294, maintaining at 800 ft at a speed of 68 kt, disappeared 

from the radar screen of Seoul Airport.

Last Moments: Radar and EGPWS Data (Credit: ARAIB)



Then, 11 seconds later at 08:53:43 (based on FDR data), the left side of HL9294 crashed into the 

north side of the 25th floor (97 m, 320 ft) of Condominium A’s building 102.

The 39 storey building in the I-Park Complex was 179 m, 590 ft high.  Both crew were killed, 

the aircraft destroyed and 13 apartments damaged.  Fortuitously no third parties were 

injured.
Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System (EGPWS) 
The helicopter had been voluntarily fitted with a Honeywell EGPWS.  As ARAIB explain:

EGPWS displays terrain and obstacles in proximity of the aircraft, in a grid shape, on the cockpit 

instrument panel. It denotes in colors, the difference between height of the highest obstacle in a 

grid and aircraft altitude.

Obstacles of the EGPWS data are marked by different colors according to their heights, on the 

cockpit instrument panel, i.e. an obstacle higher than the aircraft is displayed in red. EGPWS 

provides an aural alert to flight crews when the aircraft reaches a distance in danger of crash.

In addition, the computer installed on EGPWS compares its 3D terrain and obstacle data with 

the aircraft’s altitude, speed and direction, thereby predicting a danger area, and 20 seconds 

before the aircraft reaches the danger area, it provides aural and visual alerts by changing 

colors on the pane

The EGPWS did not alert as the helicopter flew towards the 39 storey building.  So why did 

it not alert?  Simple say the KARAIB:  The database contained the earth surface and 

electricity pylons, but no other man-made obstacles, like the 179 m, 590 ft building!



I-Park Condominium Complex (Credit: Unknown)

Analysis of Go/No-Go Decision Making
The ARAIB say:

…the head of the Business Support Office stated that “the captain makes a final go/no-go 

decision, and that he respects and fully accepts it.”

In reality, however, when the captain made a no-go decision in consideration of weather 

conditions at the time and notified it to LG Electronics’ Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office,

① the Office did not implement the contingency plan of transporting passengers by land;

② the Office, notified of “no-go” by the FO, requested the pilot in charge of operation to reassess 

a no-go situation;



③ when asked to reassess a no-go situation by the Office, the pilot in charge of operation 

personally checked weather conditions, instead of asking the captain or the FO about the 

grounds for the “no-go,” and recommended a takeoff at Gimpo Airport; and

④ although the captain already made a no-go decision, he reversed it and decided to go over a 

telephone conversation with the Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office’s deputy general manager.

In light of these factors, it seems that ①, ②, and ③ exerted an influence on the captain and 

finally resulted in ④. However, it cannot be verified how much influence was exerted since the 

captain and the FO were fatally injured.

At that time, LG Electronics’ Vice Chairman & CEO’s Office stated that it made a request of 

reassessing a no-go situation since some time was left before the departure of a high-speed 

train.

Analysis of the Fight
The ARAIB say:

Review of the CVR transcript revealed that the flight crew piloted the aircraft although they were  

unable to identify their location and the ground in adverse weather conditions. Also, the captain 

likely knew the minimum weather requirements for Hangang Corridor flight since he had a lot of  

experiences of such a flight. Nevertheless, the pilots failed to return.

…the FO gave [the captain] navigational advice based on the aircraft position displayed on the 

cockpit GPS equipment although he could not identify the outside terrain.

Yet the GPS equipment used only for reference during flight does not support accurate 

identification of the aircraft position including waypoint since it displays only topographical 

characteristics of the terrain in colors on the screen, without showing in detail the Hangang and 

its tributaries, buildings, roads, and bridges.

Thus, the ARAIB concludes that it was an inadequate operation for the pilots to depend on this 

equipment under low visibility conditions with the ground out of sight and use location 



pinpointing to navigate when flying over close-packed high-rise buildings or obstacles scattered 

in the downtown area.

Analysis of Safety Management, Organisational Factors and Culture
ARAIB Comment:

ARAIB concludes that, when the Helicopter Team made a go/no-go decision in consideration of 

weather conditions, it failed to perform flight control and safety management properly:

① Weather conditions confirmed by the FO and other pilots in the Team were not considered in 

the decision-making process;

② There was nobody who advised no-go although all pilots were aware of weather-related 

regulations or the minimum weather requirements for Hangang Corridor flight; and

③ There was an organizational culture in which the captain’s initial go/no-go decision was not 

accepted

…a strong bond and reinforced hierarchy may naturally exist in the [Helicopter] Team. However, 

it is not probably easy for them to make a suggestion about correcting wrong practices or risk 

factors…

A rigid organizational culture likely resulted in the following: weather conditions confirmed by 

the FO were not considered in the captain’s decision-making process; the pilots failed to suggest 

no-go under no-go weather conditions; the FO failed to advise the captain to return in a no-go 

situation; and the pilots have customarily conducted flights under low visibility conditions.

Therefore, it is necessary for LG Electronics to implement a flight control system and a safety 

management system, which support both Private Jet Team and Helicopter Team…. In particular, 

the organization…needs to be strengthened in such a way that a safety officer independently 

performs his duty but reports directly to the head of the Business Support Office.

LG Electronics should realize that fostering a safety culture within the pilots is a way to ensure 

the safety of its CEO and main customers and thus, should do its best to establish it. To this end, 



first of all, safety consciousness of the CEO (including the management and the Vice Chairman & 

CEO’s Office) should be raised, the importance of regulation compliance rather than convenience  

should be stressed to airmen, and the related system needs to be reinforced so that regulation 

violation can be impossible.

Accident Causes and Contributing Factors
The Aviation and Railway Accident Investigation Board determined the causes as follows:

1. While flying in Hangang Corridor, the flight crew failed to return and proceeded with the 
flight in adverse weather conditions, where they were unable to identify the ground due to 
a dense fog.

2. The flight crew crashed into a ground obstacle during a descent although they should not 
have descended due to their inability to identify their location and the ground in adverse 
weather conditions.

Contributing to this accident was as follows:
1. The captain’s go decision although weather conditions failed to meet the allowable limits; 

and
2. The flight crew’s inadequate CRM skills, including a failure of the captain and the FO to 

discuss a return, and the flight crew’s inadequate communication, evidenced by the fact 
that the FO and the Helicopter Team’s pilot in charge of operation failed to suggest no-go 
to the captain in his decision-making process although they became aware of a no-go 
situation after checking out weather conditions.
Safety Recommendations
To LG Electronics

1. Adopt an independent flight control and safety management system which supports 

both your Private Jet Team and Helicopter Team under the Business Support Office. 

(AAR1307-1)

2. Seek measures to improve your rigid safety culture in the following ways: enhance your 

training for and supervision over airmen affiliated with the Business Support Office so that 

they can voluntarily comply with regulations; and institutionalize measures to let the 



department in charge of protocol to actively accept pilots’ go/no-go decision for the 

purpose of assuring passenger safety. (AAR1307-2)

3. Consider measures to combine and apply Operations Regulations of the Private Jet Team 

and the Helicopter Team and revise them by adding the following content: (AAR1307-3)

ㅇ The roles and responsibilities of related departments and the persons concerned when a 

go/no-go decision is made

ㅇ When, how, and who to make a go/no-go decision, what to consider in a decision-

making process, and notification procedures, etc.

ㅇ Detailed implementation procedures for ensuring airmen’s good communication

To the Office of Civil Aviation

1. Make regulations restricting the operation of rotorcraft under limited visibility conditions 

due to a dense fog. (AAR1307-4) Note: Measures already taken to set the minimum flight 

visibility as 1,500 m on 15 July 2014.

2. Supervise rotorcraft owners’ (including airlines) development and the implementation of 

in-house regulations including a specific method of checking out weather conditions. 

(AAR1307-5)

3. Seek measures to install and utilize an automatic meteorological measurement system in 

heliports, like Jamsil Heliport, which are located in a downtown area, frequented by 

helicopters, and stationed by safety guards. (AAR1307-6) Note: The meteorological 

measurement system installed in Jamsil Heliport in February 2014.

4. Considering the fact that ICAO Annex 14 and the Korean Aviation Act classify structures 

not less than 150 m high as obstacles, consider measures to enter data on high-rise 

buildings into GPWS and update the GPWS data regularly. (AAR1307-7)



LG Electronics Sikorsky S-76C++ HL9294 departing Gimpo International Airport on 10 Sept 2009 (Credit: Choi Jae-
moon)

https://youtu.be/4MUBW88hSlw



Helideck Heave Ho! (BHS Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI)
On 16 February 2014 Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI of CHC‘s Brazilian Helicopter 

Services was damaged when landing on the bow deck of the drillship Aban 

Abraham while on charter to Brazilian state oil and gas company Petrobras.

CHC/BHS Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI on the Helideck of Drill Ship (Credit: CENIPA)

According to the Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos 

(CENIPA) safety investigation report (finally released 16 November 2021 in 

Portuguese only) the helicopter had departed Cabo Frio Airport (SBCB) at 07:12 

Local Time.  It was to route to Aban Abraham NS07 (9PDA), then the 

Petrobras P-63 FPSO (9PHD), back to the Aban Abraham and then returning 

to Cabo Frio.

Details of the helideck pitch, roll and heave (P/R/H) was not available when the 

aircraft departed Cabo Frio but were to be radioed by each vessel no later than 20 

minutes before landing.



Vessel Motion (Credit: UK CAA)

During the third sector from P-63 to Aban Abraham the drillship’s radio operator 

reported the P/R/H was “within the limits for landing”.   The data came from the 

vessel’s Helideck Monitoring System (HMS) and limits had been set that “were 

known to the [helicopter] crew and [drillship] radio operator”.  However, CENIPA do 

not detail the limits in use in their report.

According to CENIPA:

…minutes before,  there had been variations in P/R/H greater than the maximum 

permissible for the operation of the aircraft, which were not reported.

No document or standard was found that contained instructions for the 

radio operator about the time interval to be considered when reading the maximum 

P/R/H values of the helideck on the HMS…

Indeed CENIPA state that the HMS also showed “several peaks of heave above the 

limits” shortly before the landing.  However, the CENIPA report unhelpfully includes 

no HMS or FDR data.

The flight crew “performed a direct approach for landing” and perceived “some more 

prominent movements of the helideck” once they were below 500 ft.  They 

“considered the possibility of a go-around…about one minute before the occurrence” 

but decided to continue.



Ultimately there was a heave that ‘surprised them”, followed by a second one about 

2 seconds later that resulted in an abnormal contact between the helideck and the 

right main landing gear, which collapsed.

CHC/BHS Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI on the Helideck of Drill Ship (Credit: Unknown)

The helicopter was shut down and all 12 occupants safely disembarked.  The 

helicopters was subsequently removed as an underslung load by a Kamov Ka-32.



CHC/BHS Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI as Underslung Load of a Kamov Ka-32 
(Credit: Unknown)

CENIPA Analysis

Firstly, CENIPA state:

…the lack of a time interval [defined in regulation] to be considered by the radio 

operator for reading the P/R/H data on the HMS…in order to determine a safe 

condition for landing inside operating limits, contributed to the occurrence, as it 

allowed the crew to proceed to the landing at the helideck with  information different 

from that actually found by the aircraft at the time of landing.

While this is a sound systemic focus, the investigators decided with hindsight bias, to 

use the crew’s candour against them by determining…



…the piloting judgment of the crew also contributed to the event, since despite 

having perceived more relevant movements of the helideck and having 

been considered a go-around, the pilots decided to proceed with the landing, judging  

that the conditions were favorable, thus highlighting a deficiency in the assessment 

of the scenario…

This is a classic case of Catch 22 in a safety investigation.  A statement that 

indicated the crew had failed to notice high levels of heave would have resulted in a 

determination that lack of attention was contributor, while
Safety Actions

CENIPA report that:

In May 2014, at a meeting involving Petrobras and offshore air taxi operators, 

a Technical Order was updated…   …it was established that this relevant 

information should be the peaks of pitch/roll/heave in the last 20 minutes.

Its not clear why this had not been addressed previously. In the UK 

both CAP437 and industry guidance at least 10 years before the incident earlier had 

required the peak values to be from a minimum of 10 minutes of observations to be 

reported (since extended to 20 minutes).  This had actually be shared by a 

industry oil and gas industry association that Petrobras are a member of in January 

2002!



CHC/BHS Sikorsky S-76C++ PR-CHI on the Helideck of Drill Ship (Credit: CENIPA)

However, there is even more to this…
Wider Background: Helideck Safety Standards Progress and Implementation Inertia

The helideck heave limitation was actually replaced by in the UK by heave rate in 

November 2010.  The UK CAA explain in CAP437 that:

Heave rate is considered to be a more appropriate parameter and has been used in 

the Norwegian sector for many years.

This is explained further in UK CAA  Paper 2008/03   Helideck Design Considerations 

 – Environmenta l   Effects.

The Helideck Certification Agency (HCA) Standard Measuring 

 Equipmen t   for   Helideck Monitoring System (HMS)    and   Weather Data, now at Rev 

9b, is referenced by UK CAA and has been adopted as a standards by Bristow, 

CHC, NHV and  OHS  (formerly Babcock Offshore) for use on moving helidecks in 



Europe.  This includes a requirement for repeater lights on the helideck to directly 

warn flight crews of deteriorating conditions both before and after landing.

More significantly, on 17 December 2020 the UK CAA issued Safety 

Directive  SD-2020/003   Offshore Helicopter Helideck Operations  that states:

From 1 April 2021, a specified operator must not conduct commercial air transport 

offshore operations to an offshore location if the helideck motion exceeds stable 

deck conditions unless that location has a Helideck Monitoring System (HMS) 

meeting Rev.9 or later version of the HMS standard published on the Helideck 

Certification Agency’s web site, or provisions as are approved by the CAA.

A stable deck is defined as helideck pitch or roll of 1° or less, and a heave rate of 0.4 

m/s or less.  In most cases this would be a highly penalizing limitation for vessels 

needing to conduct routine offshore helicopter operations.   There have been major 

practical implementation issues to this safety directive, partly because each HMS’s 

software needed to be independently assessed and partly in supply of suitable deck 

lights, but the UK CAA has pragmatically issued extensions to vessel owners who 

have been proactive and placed purchase orders for upgrades.

UK CAA Safety Directive SD-2020/003 also applied fire-fighting requirements and a 

need to implement the so called Circle and H lighting upgrade for night operations.  

The latter incorporated a lighting scheme described in the 2013 CAP1077: 

Specification for an Offshore Helideck Lighting System.  The Safety Directive was 

also linked to the final closure of safety recommendations from the AAIB reports into 

the rollover of AS332L G-BKZE on the drillship West Navion on 10 November 

2001 and the water impact of EC225 G-REDU on approach to the ETAP Central 

Production Facility on 18 February 2009.



These safety improvements by the UK CAA, which apply retrospectively to existing 

too (as well as new build facilities), are disappointingly yet to be adopted by 

international oil and gas industry associations.



Loss of Control, Twice, by Offshore Helicopter off Nova Scotia (CHO 
Sikorsky S-92 C-GICB)
On 24 July 2019 Canadian Helicopters Offshore (CHO) Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB suffered 

a loss of control during a visual approach to the ExxonMobil Thebaud Central Facility 

(TCF) in the Sable gas field off Nova Scotia.

A high-rate-of-descent and low-airspeed condition developed in low-visibility 

conditions.  As the helicopter descended below 250 feet it was in a steep, 800 fpm 

descent, at very low airspeed. When the Pilot Flying (PF) instinctively increased the 

collective, the helicopter’s rate of descent rapidly increased to 1800 fpm.  At just 40 

feet the helicopter yawed through 845° and the offshore helicopter, with 13 persons 

on board, came within just 13 ft of the sea before starting to climb.

Descent LOC CHO Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB (Credit TSB)

There was then a second loss of control during the subsequent ascent with the 

aircraft unintentionally descending from 1350 ft to 480 ft.



The Serious Incident Flight: First Two Approaches

The Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (released on 27 April 2021) that the flight had originally been scheduled for 22 

July 2019, but was postponed due to low clouds and poor visibility at the destination.

CHO Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB (Credit: Ryan Sharpe)

The crew reported at 0545 on 24 July 2019 for a 0700 scheduled departure 

from Halifax/Stanfield International Airport (CYHZ).   Low clouds and poor visibility 

resulted in a further delay.



Weather reports issued for the ExxonMobil Thebaud Central Facility on the day of the occurrence (Credit: TSB)

The flight finally departed at 1154 to TCF, approximately 155 nautical miles to the 

east-southeast.  On board were the two flight crew and 11 passengers.  The aircraft 

commander had flown 6713 hours, 2242 on type.  The co-pilot was also a captain and 

had flown 7742 hours, 3196 on type.  Oddly the TSB refer to the co-pilot as a ‘first 

officer’ throughout.

At approximately 1240, the weather observer on the TCF informed the pilots that the 

winds were approximately 300° true (T) at 8 knots, the visibility was 1 statute mile (SM), 

and there was an overcast ceiling based at 300 feet above ground level (AGL); however, 

the cloud layer and visibility were fluctuating rapidly.

Two instrument [Airborne Radar Approaches (ARA)] approaches were attempted at the 

platform but both were unsuccessful due to low clouds and poor visibility.



For these two approaches, the captain (occupying the right seat)*** was the pilot flying 

(PF) and the first officer (occupying the left seat)*** was the pilot monitoring (PM).

Thebaud Complex in Good Visibility (Credit ExxonMobil via TSB, with TSB annotations)

The Serious Incident Flight: The Visual Approach and Loss of Control
Approximately 15 seconds after initiating the second missed approach, at approximately 

300 feet RADALT, the helicopter exited the cloud, horizontally.

The PM informed the PF that the helideck, which is 174 feet above the water, was visible 

above the ragged layer of fog beneath them.   Although the TCF was in sight, there was no 

discernible horizon. As the helicopter climbed away, the PF looked across the cockpit [to 

the left] *** and also observed the helideck above the fog layer.

…the pilots levelled off (engaged RADALT hold at 500 feet) and commenced a right-hand 

turn, using the heading hold autopilot mode, to assess the feasibility of conducting a 

visual approach. While the aircraft was in the turn, the airspeed, which was coupled to 80 

KIAS in the climb to 500 feet RADALT, was reduced to 66 KIAS.



At 1332:15, approximately 1.1 nm from the TCF, the helicopter rolled out on a heading of 

182°M and the crew planned their third approach.

As the wind was light the flight crew agreed that rather continuing to orbit and come 

out on a inbound track of 320°M they would turn right early to roll out on an inbound 

track of approximately 240°M. Since the TCF would be on the left-hand side of the 

 helicopter it was decided the co-pilot would be PF    for this approach.  The crew also 

decided to remain at 500 feet RADALT.

There was a ragged layer of fog below the helicopter and a scattered-to-broken layer of 

cloud at least several hundred feet above it. The pilots could see the water through the 

fog, directly beneath the helicopter.

Flight Path CHO Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB (Credit TSB)



At approximately 1332:23 the helicopter commenced a right turn and the aircraft 

commander, stated he would be ready to transition to instrument flight if fog rolled 

in and the co-pilot lost sight of the helideck.

At 1332:55, when the helicopter was 0.6 NM from TCF, it rolled out on final approach, on a 

heading of 271°M. The helicopter was level at 46% engine torque, coupled to RADALT at 

500 feet and 61 KIAS. The airspeed and groundspeed were approximately the same.

Because the first officer was seated in the left seat it was only now, he had visual 

contact with the TCF.  As the   helicopter rolled out,   commander   transferred control to 

 the   co-pilot.

The helicopter was still flying above the fog layer, and both pilots had a clear line of sight 

to the helideck. The estimated flight visibility was approximately 3 statute miles in the 

direction of the TCF; however, there was no discernible horizon behind the TCF.

At 1333:02, when the helicopter was 0.5 NM from the TCF, the captain (who was now the 

PM) disengaged the airspeed mode, then the heading hold mode at the PF’s request.



At 1333:04, the PF depressed the cyclic autopilot disengage button to disengage the 

RADALT hold, then depressed and held the cyclic trim release button to hand-fly the 

approach. At the same time, the PF lowered the collective (decreased from approximately 

45% engine torque to 27% engine torque), using the collective trim release trigger, to 

commence the descent.

Representation of a degraded visual environment on final 
approach

Figure F1. Representation of a degraded visual environment on final approach 

(490 feet RADALT)



Representation of a degraded visual environment on final approach (380 feet 

RADALT)

 Representation of clear weather conditions on final approach (490 feet RADALT)



Representation of clear weather conditions on final approach (380 feet RADALT)

TSB explain that:

The descent commenced when the helicopter was 0.43 NM from the TCF, on a 7.1° 

approach angle to the helideck. The PM recognized that the approach was steeper than 

the company’s standard 4.7° approach angle; however, it did not alarm the PM because 

some company pilots preferred flying a steeper visual approach profile.   The PF asked the 

PM for the helicopter’s groundspeed, to which the PM replied it was approximately 60 

knots.

However, 7.1° is less than the maximum in the S-92A RFM procedure for landing on an 

elevated helideck.  That specifies a maximum rate of descent of 600 fpm at 40 knots 

indicated airspeed (KIAS) i.e. a maximum approach angle of approximately 8.4°.

At 1333:06, when the helicopter was 0.4 NM from the TCF, its rate of descent was 500 feet 

per minute (fpm) and increasing. To reduce the helicopter’s forward speed, the PF applied 

aft cyclic, causing the helicopter’s pitch attitude to increase to 12° nose-up.



 The PM informed the PF that the groundspeed was about 40 knots, which he considered 

to be slightly high given the light winds and the helicopter’s proximity to the TCF.

The PF did not acknowledge this call. At the same time, left cyclic and right pedal inputs 

were being progressively applied, creating lateral drift to the left (i.e., south) of the 

intended track and right yaw, which kept the nose of the helicopter pointing in the 

direction of the helideck (so that the helicopter was side-slipping left).

At 1333:14, when the helicopter was within 0.3 NM of the TCF, at 415 feet RADALT, its pitch  

attitude increased to 15° nose-up. Two seconds later, the pitch attitude increased to 

almost 17° nose-up, and the helicopter briefly banked 6° to the right.

During that time, the PF’s attention was focused outside, looking at the helideck. The PM, 

who had been primarily focused on the helideck, shifted his attention inside the helicopter  

and onto the flight instruments because he was losing sight of the helideck, (given that he  

was occupying the right-hand seat). The PM recognized the nose-up pitch attitude and, in 

accordance with company SOPs, called “15 degrees”. As this was happening, the airspeed 

decreased below 40 KIAS.   The rate of descent was 670 fpm and increasing. Neither pilot 

was aware of the increasing rate of descent, the low engine torque setting of 27%, or the 

increasing left sideslip.

At 1333:20, the PF increased collective to 36% engine torque and the pitch attitude 

decreased to approximately 12° nose-up, even though the PF was applying increasing aft 

cyclic. Pedal input moved momentarily toward neutral, then increased to the right again. 

The PM continued to monitor the helicopter’s pitch attitude as it was reduced. The 

helicopter was at 350 feet RADALT, at low airspeed (i.e., less than 30 KIAS), descending at 

approximately 850 fpm.

Below 35 knots airspeed indication is considered unreliable*****



At 1333:26, at 250 feet RADALT with the helicopter at approximately 12° nose-up, all 

forward motion had been lost, and the rate of descent was 1200 fpm, and increasing. The 

sideslip angle reached approximately 40° nose right, with 18 knots lateral groundspeed.

The PF recognized the helicopter was getting low and slowly increased collective to 45% 

engine torque, then rapidly increased to 103% engine torque, and applied cyclic opposite 

to the right bank (caused by sideslip), peaking at 22° right bank. As engine torque 

increased from 45% to 103%, at low airspeed, the rate of descent increased from 1200 to 

1800 fpm as the helicopter descended below the helideck height; about 3 seconds after 

the engine torque reached 100%, the descent rate began decreasing (below 1500 fpm).

The PF did not verbalize that he had lost visual contact with the helideck***. 

The PF shifted his attention to the flight instruments and observed the low airspeed and 

high rate of descent. The PM, who was initially unaware that the helicopter had 

descended into the fog and that the PF had lost visual contact with the helideck, observed 

the increasing rate of descent and informed the PF. At that point, the PM recognized that 

the helicopter was in the fog. The PM was just about to call for a go-around when the PF 

stated that he was commencing a go-around. During this time, the helicopter’s pitch 

attitude increased to almost 17° nose-up. The PM directed the PF to position the nose of 

the helicopter on the horizon, using the attitude indicator on the PFD.

The PM became aware of the proximity to the surface as they descended below 100 

feet.  Recognizing the severity of the situation he “placed his hands and feet on the 

flight controls and made control inputs to help the PF establish a wings-level attitude 

in anticipation of water impact”.

At 1333:33…. passing through 70 feet RADALT, the collective lever was rapidly raised to the  

full up position and engine torque increased to 146% [so called 'Blowaway power’] ***



Descent LOC CHO Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB (Credit TSB)

The “LOW ROTOR” aural alert activated at 95% Nr (main rotor rpm). Nr drooped 

to 77% and was below 95% for 20 seconds.  The low Nr also resulted in a reduction of 

tail rotor thrust so directional control was lost.  At just 40 feet the helicopter yawed 

right through 845° over a period of 55 seconds, despite full left yaw pedal input.  The 

peak yaw rate was about 80°/second. In this perilous situation the low Nr had 

another side effect, namely the main generators dropped offline…

…causing the automatic flight control system (AFCS) to revert to stability augmentation 

system (SAS) mode, the helicopter’s attitude and heading reference system (AHRS) to drop 

offline, and the helicopter’s centre and left-side (first officer) multi-function displays 

(MFDs) to display blank screens. As a result of these system failures, both pilots reverted 

to using the standby flight instruments.

At 1333:39, with the helicopter yawing to the right (greater than 60°/second), and Nr 

slowly increasing through 89%, the generators came back online and the pilots were able 

to arrest the descent within 13 feet or less of the water…

Water spray was visible on the helicopter’s windows.



Second Loss of Control: Ascending
The captain, who could see the water and the TCF to the right of the helicopter, formally 

took control of the helicopter and began a near-vertical visual climb up to 150 feet 

RADALT, crosschecking with the standby instruments due to reduced visibility in fog. Some  

right yaw persisted during the climb and gradually reduced as the helicopter continued to 

climb. The aircraft flew in a widening right turn away from the vicinity of the upset and 

toward the northeast, accelerating from 30 KIAS to 80 KIAS.

A high-power setting (110–120% engine torque) was maintained during the initial climb 

and the Nr slowly increased, generally returning to 105% Nr at around 375 feet RADALT. As  

the helicopter climbed above 650 feet RADALT, engine torque was reduced to 100%, and 

continued steadily downward to approximately 70% as the helicopter reached 1350 feet 

RADALT.

At 1334:55, the helicopter’s altitude peaked at 1350 feet RADALT, then it began descending  

and the airspeed increased to 125 KIAS. While this was happening, the pilots attempted to  

engage barometric altitude hold twice; however, in both instances it failed with a master 

caution light. They also pressed the AFCS mode reset button on the AFCS control panel 8 

times, without success.

Unbeknownst to the pilots, airspeed had increased to 148 KIAS, while descending through 

650 feet RADALT at 1700 fpm. The PF recognized and arrested the descent at 

approximately 480 feet ASL (463 feet RADALT) as the helicopter was passing over the 

northwestern tip of Sable Island [ c 10 ft AMSL].

The captain then increased collective to regain the lost altitude. The pilots were unaware 

that the helicopter had overflown Sable Island. The helicopter was levelled off at 1500 feet  

ASL and the pilots assessed their options. Knowing that there were low clouds and 

visibility in the vicinity of the TCF and Sable Island, the pilots decided to return to CYHZ, 

where weather conditions would permit a visual flight rules (VFR) approach to landing.



Once the helicopter’s systems returned, several minutes later, the pilots observed the 

“APU GCU FAIL”, “DCU MISCOMPARE”, and “LIMIT EXCEEDED “caution lights… The pilots 

recognized the AFCS was degraded, which made the helicopter more difficult to fly 

accurately [but] did not detect any other unusual controllability problems with the 

helicopter. The pilots believed that the cautions were related to the engine torque during 

the descent, so they elected to continue back to CYHZ without additional troubleshooting.

The captain coupled the helicopter’s autopilot to airspeed, heading, and altitude for the 

transit back to CYHZ. The flight crew elected not to declare an emergency***. The aircraft 

then returned to Halifax/Stanfield International Airport without further incident.

Plot showing CHO Sikorsky S-92A C-GICB’s approach paths (Credit: TSB)

However, shortly after the occurrence, CHO ceased operations***.  The TCF was 

decommissioned in 2020 after a 3-year plug and abandonment project, with 

the  Heerema Marine Contractors heavy life vessel Thialf removing all 

the installations.



The TSB Safety Investigation
TSB Safety Investigation: Loss of Cockpit Voice Recording & Lack of Cockpit 
Video
While Flight Data Recorder (FDR) information was available, the TSB investigation was 

hampered by a lack of Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) data:

Due to the APU GCU FAIL condition, the pilots could not start the APU in accordance with 

the normal shutdown procedure. After some delays, the shutdown was carried out 

23 minutes after landing, 96 minutes after the inadvertent descent.

In order to preserve the recording for the investigators and in accordance with the 

CHO Operations Manual:

One of the pilots, in conjunction with a technician, removed power from the system by 

pulling the CVR/FDR circuit breakers. The aircraft was moved into the hangar and 

placarded to indicate that it was quarantined.

However, seemingly without the permission of the TSB, the next day….

…the manufacturer requested that CHO provide them with the FDR and HUMS data for 

analysis. This was to be done remotely by the company that owns the occurrence 

helicopter. A representative from that company told CHO maintenance personnel that 

electrical power would have to be applied to the helicopter to carry out the required 

downloads.

CHO maintenance personnel questioned those instructions, out of concern for the 

preservation of CVR data; however, they were assured by the representative that only 

FDR/HUMS data would be downloaded.   The circuit breakers were pushed in and the 

remote FDR/HUMS download was carried out.



Unfortunately, while doing this:

The CVR was powered for 54 minutes during, and after, this process. During that time, the 

CVR was overwriting itself and all CVR data for the occurrence were lost. When the TSB 

received the recorders for download, the CVR audio started approximately 30 minutes 

after the occurrence, while the helicopter was in level flight, on the return portion of the 

flight.

TSB also note that:

Although not required by regulation, the occurrence aircraft was equipped with a 

lightweight recording system. The [ Outerlink IRIS] system is “a comprehensive, 

lightweight, monitoring, recording and next generation satellite communications system 

providing voice, video, analog and digital aircraft system information.”   The unit provides 

a continuous recording loop of at least 30 hours, which is stored on a secure digital card. 

It records information from up to 3 high-definition internet protocol cameras and 5 audio 

sources.

For reasons that are not elaborated, this system…

…was not operational at the time of the occurrence flight.

TSB Safety Investigation: Organisational Background, SMS and FDM
CHO was a division of Canadian Helicopters Limited (CHL). In 2015, CHO (then doing 

business as Helicopters (New Zealand) Global under CHL) began operating in Halifax, 

Nova Scotia, providing offshore helicopter transportation to the offshore oil and gas 

industry. In 2018, the company began operating under the trade name Canadian 

Helicopters Offshore.



At the time of the occurrence, CHO operated 2 Sikorsky S-92As out of CYHZ, and 

employed 10 pilots, 9 maintenance personnel, 16 support personnel, and 8 

management staff (pilots, engineers, safety and quality, and administration).  CHO 

ceased operations in 2019, shortly after the occurrence***

CHO had a Safety Management System (SMS) but as an SMS is not a regulatory 

requirement for operators like CHO, it was not audited by Transport Canada.  

CHO had also implemented a helicopter flight data monitoring (HFDM) program too:

A review of the parameters monitored revealed that there were several offshore 

approach parameters; however, the distance for the final leg of a visual approach, or 

the glide path angle flown were not parameters that were monitored.  As a result, the 

company had no way of determining if its pilots were adhering to the visual approach 

procedure, and adhering to the CHO’s stabilized approach criteria.

The investigation determined that some pilots did not always adhere to the 

prescribed visual approach final distance, nor was the 4.7° glide path always followed. 

The company’s HFDM program did not actively use available…data to detect these 

types of deviations from company SOPs***.

TSB Safety Investigation: Dynamic System Condition Not Assessed

The rotor and rotor drive system components from, C-GICB were sent to Sikorsky 

for examination to assess their condition after this serious incident but remarkably 

during an active safety investigation:



Because the helicopter was no longer required by CHO (which was leasing the helicopter), 

the owner of the helicopter elected not to conduct further inspections and the 

manufacturer did not complete an engineering analysis of the rotor and drive system 

components. As a result, the extent of the damage resulting from the over-torque was 

unknown at the time of [TSB] report writing.

TSB Safety Investigation: Crew Background, Decision Making and Sterile 
Cockpit Procedures
The flight crew…

…. had known each other for several years and flew together periodically. Both pilots had 

a considerable amount of confidence and respect in each other’s abilities as a pilot. The 

investigation determined that there was a strong sense of team and alignment of mental 

models throughout most of the occurrence flight. The pilots interacted and coordinated 

activities with considerable ease and efficiency. At no time did either pilot feel that he 

was being put in an uncomfortable situation. There were no indications of issues related 

to trans-cockpit authority gradient.

Confidence in each other, experience in operating offshore in fog and the goal (i.e. 

landing on the TCF’s helideck) suddenly appearing achievable during the second 

missed approach as the helideck suddenly became visible may have all contributed to 

the decision to attempt the third approach say TSB.  Additionally…

…the lack of comprehensive visual approach briefing criteria may have played a role in 

the flight crew’s decision to attempt an offshore visual approach to a helideck sitting 

above a layer of fog and surrounded by cloud***.

As might be expected CHO had a sterile cockpit policy that…



…. required pilots to refrain from non-essential activities during critical phases of flight or  

during any operational task. [It] stated that “the PM actively monitors the flight profile.

However, CHO pilots…

…interpreted this to mean that heading, altitude, airspeed, or torque information was not  

communicated by the PM unless there was some type of unplanned deviation, or it was 

specifically requested by the PF.

TSB also say:

Although not contributory to the occurrence, the investigation identified discrepancies 

and overlapping information in CHO’s SOPs that could have led to confusion in the cockpit.

TSB Safety Investigation: Unstable Approach and First Loss of Control
The TSB concluded that, undetected by the crew, the S-92A entered a ‘low-energy 

state’*** during the visual approach, namely:

…it was flying at low airspeed with a high rate of descent, a nose-up pitch attitude, and at  

a low power setting***.

A performance study showed that:

…at the helicopter’s weight and in the environmental conditions at the time of the 

occurrence, an engine torque setting of 48% would have been required to maintain 

altitude at 60 KIAS on final for the visual approach.   A 500-fpm descent (the maximum 

rate of descent per the stabilized approach criteria) at 60 KIAS would require a reduction 

of engine torque setting to 39%.



TSB annotations on the Sikorsky S-92A RFM cruise performance chart for the CHO C-GICB occurrence conditions (Credit:  
TSB)

However, as airspeed continue[d] to decrease…more torque would be required as the 

helicopter slows down, to maintain a constant rate of descent (i.e., maximum 500 fpm). As  

a result, the 27% engine torque used in this occurrence was significantly lower than the 

minimum power required to remain below the maximum rate of descent of 500 fpm, 

during the final approach.

The investigation determined that the pilots were unaware of the torque setting (27%) 

during the final descent, before entering the fog bank.

The crew were focused on the helideck***, which was above the fog but in an area 

without a discernible horizon.

The TSB determined that this degraded visual environment (DVE) made it difficult to 

recognize that this was an unstable approach due to ‘attention narrowing’.



Research has shown that the accuracy of pilot judgement is diminished in a 

 DVE*** .   When the terrain is obscured by phenomena such as fog, pilots may have 

difficulty assessing height, speed, and distance due to the lack of terrain features and 

reduced optic flow. Likewise, without additional references such as the horizon or other 

structures surrounding the helideck (i.e., peripheral visual cues), a pilot’s judgement of 

attitude and height can also be diminished, and vertical or lateral deviations can go 

undetected, increasing the risk of spatial disorientation.

If the sight picture of the helideck is the only external visual reference, pilots can become 

fixated on it***. However,  if pilots become fixated on the outside cues “…changes on 

instruments can be missed. These missed changes can lead a pilot to believe that their 

knowledge of their position and trajectory in space is accurate. This belief leads to a 

reduction in the search for new information or information to the contrary.”

As outside visual cues diminish, workload increases  , pilots must progressively rely on 

their flight instruments and/or stability systems, backing up visual manoeuvres by cross-

checking flight instruments to ensure the accuracy of visual perception.

TSB comment:

The lack of explicit direction [in the CHO Operations Manual] with regards to operating in 

a DVE may have made it difficult for pilots to fully understand the risks associated with 

attempting the visual approach in IMC.

TSB explain:

CHO’s SOPs identified 6 conditions for a stabilized approach. Of those 6 conditions, the 

only 2 criteria that could be objectively applied to a visual approach were that the 

helicopter must be configured for landing, and it must have a maximum rate of descent of  

500 fpm, unless a higher rate had been briefed.



Unlike some operators that specify minimum torque values during the approach (e.g., 

minimum 40% by 300 feet above the landing spot), CHO’s SOPs made no reference to 

energy state in its stabilized approach criteria. As a result, CHO’s procedures did not 

address one of the critical elements of a stabilized approach identified by HeliOffshore, an 

organization of which CHO was a member.

According to the company, a constant-angle (4.7°) descent was flown until just prior to 

reaching the helideck. When conducting a visual approach to the TCF, the SOPs required 

the helicopter be established on final 1 NM from the facility, at 675 feet RADALT, at a 

speed of 75 KIAS, depending on the winds.

In

 

this occurrence, the visual approach began at 500 feet RADALT. Six seconds after the 

descent commenced, the helicopter was 300 feet above the landing elevation and the rate 

of descent was 520 fpm, increasing up to a maximum of 1800 fpm. Based on these descent  

rates, the occurrence flight exceeded CHO’s stabilized approach criteria.

The investigation determined that some CHO pilots flew steeper visual offshore 

approaches than CHO’s standard 4.7° descent angle. A comparison of the occurrence 

descent profile with the SOP descent profile is shown below.



At 0.7 NM, while in the turn to final, the occurrence helicopter flew through the 4.7° 

descent angle; however, the descent was not commenced until the helicopter was 0.43 NM  

from the TCF, resulting in an initial approach angle of 7.1°.

Also:

…by levelling off at 500 feet RADALT and beginning the right turn to assess the conditions, 

the pilots lost sight of the TCF behind them during a portion of the turn.

This resulted in the helicopter rolling out at approximately 1 nautical mile (NM), with the 

TCF off the helicopter’s right side. When the turn to final was completed and the descent 

commenced, the helicopter was at 0.43 NM from the TCF at a higher-than-normal 

airspeed. This significantly reduced the time available…to ensure a stable approach.

When the descent was initiated, pilot workload increased quickly as more aggressive 

handling was required to acquire the appropriate sight picture in close proximity to the 

TCF. Shortly after commencing the descent, the rate of descent exceeded 500 fpm, 

indicating an unstable approach according to CHO’s SOPs. The approach remained 

unstable until the helicopter descended into the fog bank.

Furthermore:

Contributing to the difficulties encountered, CHO standard operating procedures (SOPs) 

made no reference to energy state in its stabilized approach criteria, increasing the risk of  

a low-energy state developing and going undetected***. Unlike some operators, CHO’s 

stabilized approach criteria did not include formal nose-up or nose-down pitch attitudes 

when in VMC or IMC.   Additionally, CHO had not adopted the [HeliOffshore] recommended 

practice of requiring crews to check and verbally confirm that the approach was stable at 

specific intermediate progress targets (typically referred to as gates) on final approach.



As a result, the SOPs provided flight crew with insufficient guidance to ensure that 

approaches were being conducted in accordance with industry-recommended stabilized 

approach guidelines.

TSB explain that:

As the helicopter descended below 250 feet RADALT, it was in a steep, 800 fpm descent, at 

very low airspeed, with power being applied.   When the pilot flying (PF) instinctively 

increased the collective to reduce the helicopter’s rate of descent, that action exacerbated  

the situation and the helicopter’s rate of descent rapidly increased to 1800 fpm***. This 

left the pilots with very little time (about 3 seconds) to recognize what was happening and  

to attempt to recover before the helicopter descended into the fog.

During the approach the Pilot Flying had depressed and held the cyclic trim release.

Neither the S-92A rotorcraft flight manual (RFM) nor CHO’s SOPs warned of the potential 

hazards associated with, or offered recommendations for, the use of the trim release 

button under conditions such as DVE***.



Sikorsky S-92A cyclic stick, trim release (solid circle); trim beeper switch (dashed circle) (Credit: Sikorsky RFM via  
TSB, with TSB annotations)

Pressing and holding the cyclic trim release button disengages the magnetic brake, which 

provides artificial feel. This allows the pilot to move the cyclic with very little resistance. 

However, it also eliminates the flight control’s referenced detent to the trimmed pitch and  

roll attitude***. As a result, with the button depressed, the stick will not return to its 

previously trimmed position if the pilot reduces pressure on the cyclic***. In essence, 

depressing and holding the cyclic trim release button reduces the level of AFCS 

augmentation, since the pilot is required to interpret the external visual cues and/or 

instrument indications and then manually manipulate the controls to make any attitude 

changes, without the benefit of any type of attitude hold function.



CHO…considered this a pilot technique issue, and allowed pilots to decide whether or not 

they wanted to make maximum use of ATT mode and the beeper trim switches or to 

depress and hold the cyclic trim release. Some CHO pilots preferred to conduct non-

coupled visual manoeuvres with the trim release button depressed. Others preferred to 

make maximum use of the force trim as a way of reducing pilot workload during visual 

approaches. Some of the pilots using the force trim would set an attitude of 

approximately 7.5° nose-up, using ATT mode, then either make small inputs against the 

force trim force gradient, or use the beeper switch for minor adjustments during the 

descent.

As seen in previous occurrences [e.g. AS365N G-BLUN in Morecambe Bay 27 December 

2006,   S-92A C-GQCH departing Sea Rose     23 July 2011 and AW139 G-LBAL in Norfolk 13 

March 2014], this technique reduces the overall effectiveness of the automatic flight 

control system (AFCS)***. In this occurrence, the helicopter reached a nose-up attitude of 

17°, an excessive rate of descent, and an increasing left sideslip while on final approach.

Flying the visual approach in a DVE while depressing and holding the cyclic trim release 

button increased pilot workload and contributed to control difficulties that resulted in an 

unstable approach***.

TSB also postulated that:

The PF was likely subtly incapacitated due to spatial disorientation following the 

helicopter’s rapid, unexpected descent into the fog layer. As a result, recovery action was 

initially delayed until the pilots acquired visual contact with the water and the collective 

was rapidly increased to arrest the descent.



TSB Safety Investigation: Recovery and Second Loss of Control
Both pilots were making control inputs during the final portion of the descent***.

Despite this, the crew was able to successfully arrest the descent, avoiding impact with 

the water.  However, from a crew resource management [  CRM ] standpoint, it is important 

to recognize that a positive transfer of control reduces the risk of pilots making opposing 

control inputs***. This is particularly important when one pilot may be suffering from 

some type of incapacitation, where it could interfere with or prevent the appropriate 

flight control inputs being made.

As the helicopter climbed…

…a second inadvertent descent occurred as the helicopter reached 1350 feet radar 

altitude (RADALT). At that time, the flight crew was attempting to reconcile what had just 

happened and determine what systems had been lost during the event. Because of this, 

the flight crew experienced a momentary lapse of attention that allowed an inadvertent 

descent rate to develop. As the flight crew established that the helicopter was still 

controllable, the pilots recognized the inadvertent descent and corrective action was 

taken.

TSB Safety Investigation: Absence of Terrain Avoidance and Warning 
System (TAWS) Warnings
When helicopter descended with a very high rate of descent the  TAWS  fitted, 

a Honeywell Mk XXII Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System (EGPWS), did not 

alert the crew even though EGPWS Mode 1 was designed “to detect when the aircraft 

is descending toward terrain at a high rate for its relative altitude above terrain.”



 So why did the original Mode 1 not alert the crew?       Simple, it is inhibited on all 

S-92As***.

According to Sikorsky, Mode 1 was prone to nuisance alerts on the S-92A during initial 

certification testing in 2002.   Consequently, Sikorsky asked Honeywell not to include Mode  

1 in the S-92A configuration of the Mk XXII EGPWS. The Mode 1 envelope was subsequently  

updated in 2003 [Honeywell software version EGPWS-020] to address previous concerns 

about nuisance alerts; however, Mode 1 remained inhibited on the S-92A.   The 

investigation determined that the Mk XXII is installed in many different helicopter types; 

however, the S-92A is the only Mk XXII-equipped helicopter with Mode 1 inhibited.

It was only 16 years later, that after simulator evaluation, did Sikorsky decide to 

begin the process to enable Mode 1 according to the TSB.  This is not the only 

significant safety compromise made during the development of the S-92A in 2002.  

Another, replated to loss of lubrication testing featured in the fatal loss of an S-92A 

and 17 people in Newfounland in 2009.

In March 2020, Honeywell issued a Service Bulletin to introduce software version 

EGPWS-036 that addresses recommendations made by the UK Civil Aviation 



Authority (UK CAA) that will dramatically improve warning performance, including 

Mode 1 for offshore helicopters (where it would provide a warning 9 seconds 

earlier).  TSB state:

Sikorsky plans on incorporating EGPWS-036…when it installs version 11 of the avionics 

management system (AMS), anticipated for U.S. and worldwide release in late 2021 and 

early 2022, respectively.   The manufacturer did not specify how long it would take for AMS  

version 11 to be installed across the S-92A fleet.

In relation to those modes that were enabled, by design they were suppressed at low 

speed with the gear down so didn’t activate, disabling what should have been a 

valuable safety net.

TSB Findings as to Causes and Contributing Factors
1. At the time of the occurrence, instrument meteorological conditions existed. This 

created a degraded visual environment that was highly conducive to spatial 
disorientation and provided inadequate cues to permit a visual approach to the 
Thebaud Central Facility.

2. In an attempt to complete their assigned task within self-imposed time 
constraints, the pilots’ decision-making process was influenced by their past 
experience and comfort with each other. As a result, the pilots attempted a non-
standard visual approach in a degraded visual environment, without thoroughly 
considering the risks or alternative options***.

3. Canadian Helicopters Offshore’s standard operating procedures provided flight 
crew with insufficient guidance to ensure that approaches were being conducted in  
accordance with industry-recommended stabilized approach guidelines.

4. Depressing and holding the cyclic trim release button, while operating in a 
degraded visual environment, increased pilot workload and contributed to control 
difficulties that resulted in an unstable approach that developed into vortex ring 
state.

5. The helicopter’s approach became unstable, due to an inadvertent low-energy, 
high-rate-of-descent flight profile.



6. The pilots experienced attentional narrowing due to increased workload while 
attempting a non-standard offshore visual approach in a degraded visual 
environment. This led to a breakdown in the pilots’ instrument cross-check, which 
prevented the timely recognition that the approach had become unstable.

7. The S-92A’s enhanced ground proximity warning system provides no warning of an 
inadvertent descent at airspeeds below 50 knots indicated airspeed when the 
landing gear is down. As a result, the enhanced ground proximity warning system 
did not alert the flight crew of the impending risk of controlled flight into terrain.

8. The pilot flying was likely subtly incapacitated due to spatial disorientation 
following the helicopter’s rapid, unexpected descent into the fog layer. As a result, 
recovery action was initially delayed until the pilots acquired visual contact with 
the water and the collective was rapidly increased to arrest the descent.

9.  The application of power while in a steep, low-airspeed, high rate of descent 
condition caused the helicopter to enter vortex ring state***. This contributed to 
the helicopter’s rapid descent into and through the fog layer, bringing the 
helicopter to within 13 feet of the water.

https://www.tsb.gc.ca/eng/rapports-reports/aviation/2019/A19A0055/
A19A0055.html 

Postscript
UPDATE 30 July 2021: Lawsuit filed by passengers on helicopter that came within 4 

metres of crashing into ocean

UPDATE 11 January 2022: WARNING: It has been drawn to our attention that this 

incident (and indeed our article) is being used to market what is being described as 

‘animated software’ [sic] .  Aerossurance’s team includes former air accident 

inspectors, safety, HUMS & FDM managers and two helicopter test pilots. 

We strongly recommend that any reader in the market for flight data analysis 

products does a thorough due diligence to ensure the technical accuracy, integrity, 

usability and functionality of such software and verifies the aeronautical credentials 

of the product developers. Further: animations alone can be very misleading, 

especially to the unskilled and those with an expectation bias and consequently 

lead to misdiagnosis (in one classic case VRS rather than a flying control failure).



Taiwan Night Medevac Helicopter Take Off Accident (NASC UH-60M Black 
Hawk NA-706)
On 5 February 2018 Sikorsky UH-60M Black Hawk helicopter NA-706 of the 

Taiwanese Ministry of the Interior National Airborne Service Corps (NASC), 

conducting a nighttime air ambulance medevac flight, departed Lanyu 

Airport on Orchid Island off the South East coast of Taiwan.

Contact was lost with the helicopter approximately 81 seconds after take off as 

it crashed into the sea.  The 6 persons on board (two flight crew, one rear crew, 

a medical passenger, the patient and a family member) were killed.

Wreckage of NASC Sikorsky UH-60M NA-706 Ashore After Salvage (Credit: Taiwan TSB)

History of the Accident Flight
In their safety investigation report (issued on 24 September 2019 and only 

available in full in Chinese) the Taiwan Transportation Safety Board (TTSB), 

which recently replaced the Aviation Safety Council (ASC) of Taiwan, explain 

that the aircraft had displayed ‘FD COUPLE FAIL’ and ‘FLT DIR FAIL’ warning 

captions on the outbound flight to Lanyu.  The crew did not discuss these and 

they extinguished before landing (at 23:38 LT).  The crew did a briefing on the 

take off during a quick turnaround, departing at 23:48 LT.  



The environment featured ‘black-hole’ conditions.  These conditions “typically 

occur over water or over dark, featureless terrain where the only visual 

stimuli are lights located on and/or near the airport or landing zone”.  They 

are conducive to spatial disorientation.

The  ‘FD COUPLE FAIL’ and ‘FLT DIR FAIL’ warnings briefly reappeared about 

19 seconds into the flight and again were not discussed before they 

extinguished again after 3 seconds. It appears (based on our translation from 

Chinese) that an airspeed hold autopilot mode was engaged.  The aircraft was 

now climbing at around 95 knots.  The helicopter encountered an increasing 

tailwind about 23 seconds after taking off, that reached 40 knots.  

The crew mention windshear and turbulence.   It appears the autopilot 

dropped out in the turbulence but the Pilot Monitoring commented “Now is a 

positive rate of climb, it doesn’t matter”.  However, the TTSB state that while 

the aircraft was now at 197 ft and 106 knots 44 seconds after take off, the rate 



of climb had dropped to 192 ft/min. 

FDR Trace for NASC Sikorsky UH-60M NA-706 (Credit: Taiwan TSB)

Furthermore the nose starts to pitch up (peaking at 22.2º), speed decreases and 

climb rate slows and then the aircraft starts to descend.  At 78 seconds after 

take off the aircraft is at 133 ft but the rate of descent is now 2.100 ft/min.  

Moments after the CVR/FDR stop recording.



NASC Sikorsky UH-60M NA-706 Flight Path (Credit: Lanyu Airport Airport CCTV annotated by Taiwan TSB)

The aircraft impacted water that was 1000m

 
deep.

Wreckage of NASC Sikorsky UH-60M NA-706 Underwater with Orientation Photo (Credit: Taiwan TSB)



Digital Reconstruction of the Wreckage of NASC Sikorsky UH-60M NA-706 Recovered (Credit: via Taiwan TSB)

The aircraft was not equipped with an Emergency Flotation System (EFS).
TTSB Analysis
The TTSB note that the NASC “do not provide the complete Standard Operating 

Procedures (SOPs)” nor did the flight crew totally follow the SOPs that were in 

place.  Additionally:

The NASC failed to plan the appropriate training of the flight crews. [Specifically 

they] did not properly arrange the training resources of the UH-60M aircraft, 

and did not plan the suitable ground course for the advanced models.   [T]raining 

hours of the simulators were insufficient  [too].   The NASC does not define the 

minimum requirements related to night flight and instrument flight time, has no 

specific complete training material for Crew Resource Management [CRM] 

training and and did not define the weather standards for night EMS…

TTSB Conclusions
The TTSB conclude that:

The flight crew’s threat management, situation awareness, communication and 

decision-making capabilities as well as the understanding of the aircraft system 



were not sufficient. They did not choose the appropriate takeoff mode at takeoff 

under the night circumstance and unsteady wind condition.

During the take-off process,  [the helicopter] failed to maintain a safe climbing 

attitude and speed, and in the event of turbulent flow, it was not possible to 

immediately interpret the aircraft attitude and maintain the control correctly, 

and may [have been] accompanied by the phenomenon of space disorientation.

Finally, when the Pilot Flying pitched down the aircraft at low altitude to correct  

the low airspeed, both of the flight crew were not paying attention to the low 

altitude, resulted in the aircraft controlled flight into the sea.

TTSB Safety Recommendations
The TTSB made 7 safety recommendations:

To the National Airborne Service Corps, Ministry of the Interior
1. Enhance the training of flight crew in threat management, situation 

awareness, communication decision-making, and understanding of the 
aircraft system, and establish the requirements and standards for instrument 
flight and night flight training.

2. Examine the integrity and training resources of the UH-60M aircraft flight 
crew training program to implement the training effectiveness of the flight 
crew.

3. Review the consistency and integrity of the flight operation manual and 
mission procedures to facilitate the safety of related flight missions.

4. Consider to define the weather standards for conducting the EMS mission at 
night and the necessity of the UH-60M standard operating procedures to 
facilitate related missions.

5. Plan an appropriate crew resource management training material to facilitate 
the implementation of the flight mission.

6. Review the correctness of related parameters recorded in IVHMS to facilitate 
the readiness of flight data [Note: Collective Trim and Yaw Trim was judged 
suspect by investigators].



To Civil Aeronautics Administration, Ministry of Transportation and 

Communications:
1. Re-evaluate the demand for emergency medical service at night in Lanyu 

Airport and enhance the runway light identification and guidance functions. If 
the requirements for runway construction cannot be improved, the planning 
and operating procedures for the night mission should be strengthened.



The Top 10 Ways You Can Prevent Helicopter Accidents

CHICAGO - The International Helicopter Safety Team (IHST), a worldwide 
organization leading a multi-year effort to reduce the civil helicopter accident rate, has 
developed 10 key recommendations aimed at reducing accidents and injuries. These 
proposals can help owners, pilots, instructors, mechanics, and all members of the 
helicopter community.

1. Install cockpit recording devices. 
2. Improve Autorotation Training. 
3. Add Advanced Maneuvers to Simulator Training. 
4. Emphasize Critical Issues Awareness in Training. 
5. Enhance Aircraft Performance & Limitations Training. 
6. Strengthen Emergency Procedures Training. 
7. Implement a Personal Risk Management Program. 
8. Establish a Mission Specific Risk Management Program. 
9. Follow and Confirm Compliance of ICA Procedures. 
10. Implement a Strong Quality Assurance Maintenance Program. 

EQUIPMENT

Install cockpit recording devices. Develop and install flight data monitoring 
equipment to record the actions of the flight crew. Data can be used as local 
immediate feedback to trainers, operators and flight crews. The data also could aid in 
the event of accident investigation to support a more complete analysis and future 
safety recommendations.

TRAINING

Improve Autorotation Training. Improve autorotation training in both primary and 
advanced flight training and develop simulator programs to improve autorotation skills.

Add Advanced Maneuvers to Simulator Training. Incorporate simulator programs 
into training program that would include dynamic rollover, emergency procedures 
training, ground resonance, quick stop maneuvers, targeting approach procedures and 
practice in pinnacle approaches, unimproved landing areas, and elevated platforms.

Emphasize Critical Issues Awareness in Training. Establish training programs 
that train and evaluate proficiency of critical issues such as systems failures, impending 
weather concerns, effects of density altitude, and wind and surface conditions that 
could be critical to safe flight.

Enhance Aircraft Performance & Limitations Training. Operators should provide 
robust training and continual evaluation of their pilots on aircraft performance. This 
training should include the effects of density altitude, gross weight and flight manual 
limitations.

Strengthen Emergency Procedures Training. Encourage the use of emergency 
procedures trainers with the emphasis on Loss of System, Recognition and Recovery 
training.



SAFETY MANAGEMENT

Implement a Personal Risk Management Program. Encourage the 
implementation and use of a personal risk management program and also utilize the 
IMSAFE personal checklist.

Establish a Mission Specific Risk Management Program. A formal Safety 
Management System (SMS) requires training for specific missions, the establishment 
and enforcement of standard operating procedures, provisions and training of 
personnel to use risk assessment tools, and most importantly, changing the safety 
culture to ensure that all personnel put “Safety’ first.

MAINTENANCE

Follow and Confirm Compliance of ICA Procedures. Ensure that maintainers and 
operators are aware of the importance of following the manufacturer’s maintenance 
manuals and practices.

Implement a Strong Quality Assurance Maintenance Program. Encourage operators 
and maintainers to implement a robust Quality Assurance program that ensures the 
use of manufacturers maintenance manuals, service bulletins, and procedures.

With a cooperative effort co-chaired by a government member (the FAA) and an 
industry member, the IHST’s mission is to reduce the international civil helicopter 
accident rate by 80 percent by 2016. Major industry participants include 
AgustaWestland, the American Helicopter Society International, Bell Helicopter, Bristow 
Helicopter Ltd, CHC helicopter, Eurocopter, the Flight Safety Foundation, the Helicopter 
Association of Canada, the Helicopter Association International, Shell Aircraft, and 
Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation.

More information about the IHST, its reports, its safety tools, and presentations from 
its 2011 safety symposium can be obtained at its web site at www.IHST.org and its 
Facebook page at http://www.facebook.com/pages/International-Helicopter-Safety-
Team-IHST/150529738351608



This Crash Highlights 
The Dangers of 
Nighttime Disorientation 

Boldmethod 

We're all taught during training to be aware of nighttime disorientation. 
Unless you fly frequently at night in dimly lit areas, it's hard to truly 
grasp how disorienting total darkness can be.

In many countries, pilots are required to hold an instrument rating to fly 
at night. But private pilots in the United States have the privilege of 
flying any time, any day, as long as visual conditions exist.



Challenging Nighttime Conditions
On February 12th, 2016, at about 18:50 Central Standard Time, a Piper 
PA28 Warrior (N2209W) crashed during an approach to the Destin 
Executive Airport, Florida (KDTS). At this time of year in Florida, sunset 
took place roughly 1 and a half hours before the crash. The pilot flying 
was a non-instrument rated private pilot with one passenger on board.

A witness, who was also approaching the airport in a private aircraft, 
reported that conditions were "extremely bumpy" below 300 feet. The 
weather reported at DTS at the time of the accident included clear skies 
and wind from 240 degrees at 7 knots gusting to 15 knots.

Tailwind On Base
As the pilot of the Piper Warrior approached DTS, he had difficulty 
managing the gusty crosswind on his base-to-final turn for Runway 32. 
On the first attempt, he overshot the final approach course and 
announced on the CTAF frequency that he was going around. "Radar 



track data depicted the airplane crossing the approach end of the 
runway and then turning upwind on the far side of the runway. The 
airplane continued in a left circuit around the airport, and its altitude 
varied between 500 and 700 ft above ground level" (NTSB).

Leaving The Traffic Pattern
Once the traffic pattern was complete, the pilot initiated a left base turn 
to try again. The airplane stopped its turn early and flew through the 
final approach course a second time as it tracked parallel to the coast. 
This time, instead of completing another left pattern around the airport, 
the airplane turned right, away from the lighted airport and out over 



open, dark water with no visible horizon. It's presumed that the pilot 
anticipated overshooting final yet again, and decided to try a different 
strategy.

"The last radar targets showed the airplane over the water in a 
descending right turn toward the airport, with the last target at 175 
ft above the water, and 128 knots groundspeed" (NTSB).

How Illusions Played A Role



As a non-instrument rated pilot, the NTSB determined probable cause to 
be: "the pilot's decision to turn the airplane away from the lighted 
airport at low altitude, over water, with no visible horizon, in dark night 
conditions, which resulted in spatial disorientation and a loss of airplane 
control." According to the witness flying into DTS, the pilot's last radio 
call announced he would be "circling somewhere."

When flying into an airport that has very few ground features around it, 
you'll get the illusion that you're higher than you actually are. That's 
because the airport looks like an island of bright lights, with nothing but 
darkness around it. Pilots tend to fly lower approaches into these kinds 
of airports, hence the name "black hole effect". The darkness sucks you 
in, and if you aren't careful, can cause you to crash short of the runway.

The aircraft impacted the water at a high speed, suggesting that the pilot 
had no last-second visual queues that they were too low. Most likely, 
during that right hand turn back towards the airport, the pilot looked 
away from the altimeter to focus on finding the runway for their 
approach. Over open water with no lights, except those on the shoreline 



and by the airport, it's easy to see how easy it would've been to become 
disoriented.

NTSB 

To prevent a nighttime accident like this, don't try a non-standard 
maneuver that you're unfamiliar with. Instead, adjust and try again.

Staying near the runway helps you maintain basic orientation of your 
location, and maintaining a strong instrument scan helps you keep your 
bearings.

Had the pilot done both, this accident would likely have never 
happened.



This Illusion Can Easily 
Lead To A Crash

 By Swayne Martin

Spatial disorientation is the lead killer of pilots. More than mechanical 
failures, fires, and medical emergencies. If you fly at night or in 
instrument conditions, it's especially important to know about the 
somatogravic illusion. It's caused crashes of naval aviators and airline 
pilots alike, so regardless of what you fly, this illusion is critical to 
understand.

matthewpiatt  

When It Happens



Somatogravic illusions occur during rapid acceleration and deceleration 
flight movements. Specifically, this illusion usually happens when 
there's limited exterior visibility and a pilot reacts to body senses over 
actual flight path and instrument readings. As you accelerate, your body 
senses a pitch up motion, so your natural reaction will be to pitch down. 
The reverse is true for deceleration, where deceleration is felt as a pitch 
down motion and your reaction is to pull back on the yoke to pitch up.

While the illusion can happen during deceleration, the most common 
example of this illusion is from the rapid acceleration during a go-
around while flying through reduced visibility like instrument 
meteorological conditions (IMC) or night time conditions. Imagine you're 
flying an instrument approach to a runway and as you hit your 
minimum decision altitude the runway is nowhere in sight. As you add 
power to go around, you rapidly transition from a slow approach to an 
accelerating climb-out. You look down in the cockpit to change power, 
flaps, and landing gear settings. In the back of your mind, you sense 
that you're pitching up to a dangerous angle of attack, so you correct 



by pitching down, all without actually looking at your attitude indicator. 
And seconds later, your airplane impacts the ground.

GolfCharlie232 

Because you were going around at a low altitude, you only had a few 
seconds to remember to check your attitude indicator and realize your 
mistake before the imminent crash. So how could your body trick you 
into making such a grave mistake so easily? It all comes down to how the 
inner-ear works.

Inner-Ear Sensations
Sensory information about motion, equilibrium, and spatial orientation 
are provided by the vestibular system and its associated parts in and 
around the ears.



Inside the utricle of the inner ear, there are little hairs that, as our 
bodies move, sense motion by bending forward and backward. As you'll 
notice in the diagram below, the tilting motions of these hairs during 
acceleration and deceleration are the same as when you tilt your head 
forward or backward. That's why when you accelerate and decelerate in 
the plane, your vestibular system essentially tricks your brain into 
thinking you've entered a false flight attitude.



It Affects Naval Aviators And Piper Warrior 
Pilots Alike

Before we get started, take a look at the video below.

https://youtu.be/HBYzzkiEVVs

Did you notice that the pilot was catapulted off the carrier with his 
hands off of the flight controls? 



Only after the plane was in-flight did his hand switch from a hand-hold 
to the control stick between his legs. One reason for this hands-off 
takeoff is so that the pilot doesn't react to the acceleration somatogravic 
illusion. Pilots naturally feel the fighter entering a high angle of 
attack while accelerating on the catapult from 0 to over 160 knots in 
less than 3 seconds. Before takeoff, the airplane is trimmed slightly 
nose-up so that it flies naturally off the carrier deck. Over time, the navy 
has lost many airplanes to pilots reacting to somatogravic illusions by 
diving the airplane directly into the ocean after taking off (especially 
during nighttime catapult launches). A hands-off takeoff is one way to 
solve the problem.

Wikimedia 



It's Caused Airline Crashes Too
Illusions like this have caused a number of fatal crashes. One, in 
particular, that of Gulf Air Flight 72, is an example of a somatogravic 
illusion affecting something as large as a commercial airliner.

Wikimedia 

The A320 with 143 passengers and crew on board approached to landing 
in Bahrain at higher speeds than normal and carried out an unusual low 
altitude orbit in an attempt to correct the approach. The orbit was 
unsuccessful and a go around was attempted. While carrying out a 
turning climb, the aircraft entered a descent at 15 degrees nose down. 
The aircrew did not respond to repeated ground proximity warning 
systems (GPWS) warnings. Approximately one minute after starting the 
go-around, the aircraft disappeared from radar screens. There were no 
survivors.



The accident investigation concluded that the primary cause of the crash 
was "spatial disorientation related pilot error."

Wikimedia 

The Solution
To best counter the effects of somatogravic illusions, remember to check 
your instrumentation before reacting to a perceived flight attitude, 
especially when in times of reduced visibility. What your body tells you 
to do isn't always accurate. If you choose to react to sensations in the 
cockpit without taking in all flight information first, you may end up in a 
pretty bad spot.
Swayne Martin



Twenty-Five Case Studies Worth Your While
Jun 25, 2019 Business & Commercial Aviation 


O  EMAIL
 SHARE





COMMENTS 1 
 

(1) Air Canada Flight 797, June 2, 1983, cabin fire, NTSB AAR-86/02.

(2) Air Cargo Carriers Flight 1260, May 5, 2017, complacency, NTSB DCA17FA109.

(3) Air France Flight 296, June 26, 1988, complacency, Bureau d’Enquetes et d’Analyses 
(BEA) published April 1990.

(4) Air France Flight 447, June 1, 1990, loss of control, BEA published July 2012.

(5) Alaska Airlines Flight 261, Jan. 31, 2000, improper maintenance practices, NTSB 
AAR-02/01.
(6) American Airlines Flight 965, Dec. 20, 1995, CFIT, Flight Safety Foundation’s Flight 
Safety Digest, May-June 1998.
(7) Bombardier BD-700 C-GXPR, Nov. 11, 2007, eye-wheel-height, Transportation 
Safety Board of Canada (TSBC) A08A0134.

(8) Bombardier Challenger 600 N370V, Feb. 2, 2005, weight and balance, NTSB 
AAR-06/04.

(9) Challenger 604 C-FTBZ, Oct. 10, 2000, complacency, NTSB AAB-04/01.

(10) Challenger 604 N90AG, Jan. 4, 2002, icing, UK AAR 5/2004.

(11) Colgan Air Flight 3407, Feb. 12, 2009, improper stall recovery, NTSB AAR-10/01.

(12) Comair Flight 5191, Aug. 27, 2006, situational awareness, NTSB AAR-07/05.

(13) Eastern Air Lines Flight 401, Dec. 29, 1972, crew resource management, NTSB 
AAR-73-14.

(14) Gulfstream GIII N303GA, March 29, 2001, CFIT, NTSB AAB-02/03.

(15) Gulfstream GIV N121JM, May 31, 2014, intentional noncompliance, NTSB 
AAR-15/03.

(16) Gulfstream GV N777TY, Feb. 14, 2002, NTSB MIA02LA060.



(17) Learjet N47BA, Oct. 25, 1999, hypoxia, NTSB AAB-001/01.
(18) Pilatus PC-12 N128CM, March 22, 2009, complacency, NTSB AAR-11/05.

(19) Pinnacle Airlines Flight 3701, Oct. 14, 2004, intentional noncompliance, NTSB 
AAR-07/01.

(20) Qantas Flight 72, Oct. 7, 2008, crew coordination, Australian Transport Safety 
Bureau AO-2008-070.
(21) Sabreliner N442RM and Cessna N1285U, Aug. 16, 2015, midair collision, NTSB 
WPR15MA243A/B.
(22) Southwest Airlines Flight 1248, Dec. 8, 2005, situational awareness, NTSB 
AAR-07/06.

(23) Southwest Airlines Flight 1455, March 5, 2000, situational awareness, NTSB.

(24) Swiss Air Flight 111, Sept. 2, 1998, cabin fire, TSBC A98H0003AAB-02/04.
(25) United Airlines Flight 173, Dec. 28, 1978, crew resource management, NTSB AAR 
79-7.

Australian Transport Safety Bureau reports are available at https://www.atsb.gov.au/

BEA reports are available at https://www.bea.aero/index.php?id=17&no_cache=1

Flight Safety Digest is available at 
https://flightsafety.org/aerosafety-world/publications/flight-safety-dig...

NTSB accident reports are available at http://www.ntsb.gov under the “Investigations” 
tab.

TSBC reports are available at http://www.bst-tsb.gc.ca/eng/aviation/index.html under 
the “Investigations” tab.

U.K. accident reports are available at https://www.gov.uk/aaib-reports



The number of rotor blades, rotor rpm and rotor diameter have little 
effect on formation of the vortex ring state, but aircraft with higher disk 
loading and increased blade twist are more susceptible to it. Photo 
courtesy of the U.S. Marine Corps
On Aug. 23, 2013, a Eurocopter AS332 with 18 persons on board was on the 
final stage of an instrument approach to Sumburgh Airport in the 
Shetland Islands.
As the aircraft neared the minimum descent altitude of 300 ft agl, nose-up 
pitch was 12 deg and airspeed was 43 kt. At about 240 ft, pitch had reached 
20 deg nose-up, airspeed was 32 kt and the descent rate was 1,000 fpm and 
increasing.
As the Super Puma descended through 100 ft, the airspeed had dropped 
below the flight data recorder’s lower limit of 30 kt, the engine torque had 
been increased to 115 percent and the rate of descent was about 1,800 
fpm.
The aircraft hit the water 1.5 nm short of Runway 09, killing four 
passengers and seriously injuring three others and a pilot.
More than 10 years earlier, on March 4, 2003, a Robinson Helicopter R44 
was the subject of a TV commercial being filmed in Jakarta, Indonesia. 
While the aircraft was making a steep approach with a 12- to 15-kt 



tailwind to a hotel’s rooftop helipad, it developed a very high descent 
rate, which the pilot appeared never to arrest. The helicopter struck the 
helipad, bounced into the air, then rolled off the edge of the building and 
fell 15 stories into a third-story swimming pool. The two passengers on 
board were killed, as was the pilot.
Although the U.K. Air Accident Investigation Branch is still investigating 
the 2013 crash, both accidents appear to be classic examples of a pilot’s 
failure to recover from the vortex ring state, sometimes called “settling 
with power.” (See the sidebar.)
Traditionally pilots have been taught to lower the nose (forward cyclic), 
reduce power and, essentially, “fly out” of the condition. But there is a 
much better way, which I have dubbed the “Vuichard Recovery” after 
Claude Vuichard, a senior flight inspector/examiner for the Swiss Federal 
Office of Civil Aviation.
The vortex ring state is only one of three distinct working conditions for a 
helicopter’s rotor.
In the common condition, airflow is directed downward through the rotor 
and the rotor disc moves in the direction of rotor thrust, as in a vertical 
climb. This is called the propeller working state, or sometimes the normal 
working state. Hovering is the static thrust condition in this state.
If the hovering helicopter descends at greater than 300 fpm, it enters the 
vortex ring state. Here, the rotor still directs the air downward, but some 
air below it is forced out radially and up outside the rotor disc. Some of 
this upward-flowing air is drawn in and back down through the rotor. 
This forms the large circulating pattern called the vortex ring state. 
(Smaller vortices are formed inboard on each blade near the rotor hub 
but are of little consequence.)



In the propeller working state, air moves down through the rotor. At a 
descent rate greater than 300 fpm, the vortex ring state begins; some 
down flow moves radially out under the rotor disc and is drawn up and 
into the rotor. In the windmill brake state, all air moves up through the 
rotor. Illustration by Tim Tucker
The vortex ring state also can be recognized when airspeed is less than 
effective translational lift and random yawing and pitching produces a 
wallowing effect and buffeting or shuddering of the aircraft. Classic 
examples include out-of-ground-effect hovering and steep approaches 
downwind.
The vortex acts perpendicular to the main rotor. If the pilot applies 
forward cyclic to recover, the tailwind blows the vortex in the same 
direction the aircraft is moving and delays recovery.
The third distinct rotor working condition—the windmill brake state—is 
encountered if the descent is allowed to continue to greater than 2,000 
fpm. In this state, the flow of air is pushed entirely upward through the 
rotor. Rotor thrust is achieved by actually slowing this upward flow. The 
force generated by the rotor is equivalent to that produced by a 
parachute of the same diameter.
Interestingly, the boundary between the vortex ring state and the 
windmill brake state is the ideal autorotation condition.
George de Bothezat first recognized the vortex ring state in 1922 with his 
“flying octopus,” a machine with four massive, six-bladed rotors (very 
similar to many drone designs we see today). Since then, numerous flight 
tests, wind tunnel experiments and mathematical modeling efforts have 
refined our understanding of the vortex ring state. It is understood that 
the number of rotor blades, rotor rpm and rotor diameter have little 
effect on the vortex ring formation, but helicopters with higher disk 
loading and increased blade twist are more susceptible to it.
Now as for the “Vuichard Recovery,” I was introduced to the technique 
while teaching a Robinson Pilot Safety Course in Neuchatel, Switzerland 
in June 2011. The previously mentioned Vuichard was one of the 
attendees. During the flight portion of the course, in a Robinson 
Helicopter R44, I went over the standard vortex ring state recovery 
technique that had been taught to pilots here in the U.S. for more than 60 
years. Vuichard is a helicopter pilot of more than 35 years with more than 
16,000 flight hours. This supposed student then asked me if he could 
demonstrate a recovery technique that he had developed over the years 
as a pilot conducting long-line operations in the Swiss Alps.



I’m normally fairly reluctant to heed such requests from a trainee who 
wants to “show me” one of his or her own techniques. This is especially 
true outside the U.S., where I’m not familiar with local standards and 
practices. But in this case, I hesitantly agreed.
Rather than forward cyclic and reduce collective (as I have been teaching 
and evaluating for years), he actually increased the collective to climb 
power, added the appropriate left pedal to keep the nose straight and 
applied right cyclic. The combination of tail rotor thrust and right bank 
moved the aircraft to the right and almost immediately out of the vortex 
ring. I was amazed. After a little practice, I was making recoveries from a 
fully developed vortex ring state with only 20 to 30 ft of altitude loss.
For the past two years, we have been teaching the Vuichard Recovery with 
great success in the safety courses at Robinson’s Torrance, Calif. plant 
and abroad. Additionally, I have included it in the maneuver guides for 
R22, R44 and R66. Pilots quickly see the recovery is accomplished more 
efficiently with much less altitude loss than the traditional method.

In the Vuichard recovery, the pilot increases collective to takeoff power, 
adds appropriate pedal and applies right cyclic for a 10- to 20-deg bank. 
The recovery is complete when the rotor reaches the upward flow of the 
vortex. Illustration by Tim Tucker
One common student error in the Vuichard technique is not coordinating 
enough left pedal with the increase in collective, allowing the nose to yaw 



to the right. Remember, it is the tail rotor thrust that helps move the 
helicopter to the right to enable the recovery, so the left pedal is essential. 
When teaching the recovery, I find it a little easier for pilots to break the 
procedure down into two steps. First, apply the right cyclic to establish a 
10- to 20-deg bank angle, then increase the collective to climb power 
coordinated with the left pedal. Once the two-step process is mastered, it 
is quite easy to then progress to smooth, simultaneous control inputs.
As with the traditional method, I recommend practicing the Vuichard 
Recovery so that it can be completed above 1,000 feet agl. For 
demonstration purposes, I frequently allow a high descent rate to build 
prior to initiating the recovery to clearly show how efficient this new 
technique really is. However, in the real world, early recognition and 
initiation of the recovery is key to minimal altitude loss. Once proficiency 
with the technique is achieved, pilots should practice recovering from the 
vortex ring state as soon as the condition is recognized.
It is interesting to compare the two techniques at the point of exit from 
the vortex ring. Traditionally, when the aircraft is clear of the vortex, the 
helicopter is in a dive caused by the nose low attitude, power is reduced 
and the descent rate is high. For the entire time the pilot is correcting to a 
climb attitude and climb power, the aircraft is losing altitude. With the 
Vuichard Recovery, at the point the aircraft is clear of the vortex, climb 
power and attitude are already present so altitude loss is minimized.
I’m convinced the Vuichard Recovery is a tremendous improvement and 
can greatly improve the safety of operations close to the vortex ring 
boundaries. Instruction should begin at the student pilot level to build an 
instinctive, intuitive reaction and continue throughout one’s training.
It is important for the FAA to include a specific discussion of the method 
in the Rotorcraft Flying Handbook and the Helicopter’s Instructor’s 
Handbook so that pilots and instructors could quickly exit from this 
potentially fatal condition.
Need To Know: Vortex ring state is one of three distinct working 
conditions for a helicopter’s rotor.The Vuichard Recovery uses tail rotor 
and bank to move the aircraft laterally out of the vortex ring.

“Settling With Power”
In the U.S., there seems to be a great deal of confusion on whether the 
vortex ring state should be properly or improperly referred to as “settling 
with power.” The controversy stems from a condition completely 



different from the vortex ring state, in which engine power required 
exceeds engine power available.
Over the years, various aviation organizations have used conflicting 
terminology in discussing these very different conditions.
In the 1950s, the U.S. Navy referred to the vortex ring state as “power 
settling” and used the term “settling with power” for the power-available-
vs.-power-required situation. Not wanting to let the Navy set the 
standard, the U.S. Army reversed the terminology in the 1960s. Army 
pilots in Vietnam used the term “settling with power” to refer to the 
vortex ring state and “power settling” when they were trying to get out of 
a tight landing zone with too many troops onboard.
The FAA uses “settling with power” in its discussion of vortex ring state in 
both the Rotorcraft Flying Handbook and the Practical Test Standards 
(probably because there are more former Army pilots in the FAA than 
former Navy pilots).
Outside the U.S., the picture is much clearer; for the most part, the term 
used is “vortex ring state.”
I say, let’s call it what it is—the “vortex ring state,” not some vague term 
that has different meanings to different pilots.