A Reliance On Misunderstood Systems With Tragic 
Consequences
Nov 19, 2019 Richard N. Aarons | Business & Commercial Aviation 

There comes a time when every person simply needs help, but asking for a hand can be 
difficult for some. Over the years, we’ve reviewed many accidents that befell business 
pilots who set themselves up for disaster by failing to take the simple step of inviting or 
hiring a “companion pilot” to lend a hand in the cockpit. This happened to an 
experienced older Cessna 500 pilot returning home to Atlanta from business meetings 
in Ohio. There are lessons here for all who fly alone.

Citation N8DX collided with terrain in a residential neighborhood near Marietta, 
Georgia, on March 24, 2017, at 1924 EDT killing the lone occupant — a 78-year-old 
private pilot returning from Cincinnati. The airplane was destroyed by the impact and 
post-crash fire. The flight had been operated on an IFR plan from Lunken Field (KLUK) 
and was headed for home at Fulton County Airport-Brown Field (KFTY).

Several witnesses observed the airplane before the accident. One witness — a 
professional pilot — stated he observed the airplane flying level on a southerly heading 
about 1,000 ft. below the 5,000-ft. ceiling. He reported seeing nothing unusual about the 
business jet until it made “a complete 360-deg. roll” to the left before entering a steep 
90-deg. bank to the left. He described the turn as similar to a “military high-key turn.” 
The airplane then rolled inverted and entered a sudden vertical nose-down dive. “The 
plane entered a slow counterclockwise spiral . . . as it started its dive” that continued 
until the airplane disappeared behind a building.

Another witness stated that she observed the airplane make a “barrel roll” with the nose 
of the airplane “slightly elevated.” She then observed a second roll and stated that the 
airplane slowed before its nose began to point down and the airplane spiraled downward 
counterclockwise.

NTSB investigators were able to recover the CVR and, along with ATC recordings, 
assembled this sequence:

At 1851:36, when the airplane was level at 23,000 ft., an Atlanta Center controller 
advised the pilot of an amendment to his original flight plan. Ten seconds later, the 
controller provided new routing information. The controller repeated the new routing at 
1852:50 and 1855:17, and the pilot correctly read back the information at 1855:25.

The airplane was equipped with a Garmin GTN 750 GPS that provided navigation, radio 
tuning and other capabilities. Aural clicks and the sound of knobs turning were heard on 
the CVR consistent with the pilot attempting to enter the new routing into the Garmin 
unit.



At 1858:57, the controller instructed the pilot to descend to 22,000 ft., and the pilot 
acknowledged this instruction. At 1859:04, the pilot told the controller, “I’m having a 
little trouble with my, ah, GPS. Did you give me direct [unintelligible] on that arrival?” 
The controller then asked the pilot to repeat his request, and the pilot said, “I’m having 
difficulty with my GPS. It’s not picking up this arrival and I was wondering if you can 
give me, uh, direct routing then instead of going to the arrival.” At 1859:46, the 
controller cleared the airplane direct to KFTY and, at 1900:10, instructed the pilot to 
descend the airplane to 11,000 ft.; the pilot acknowledged this information. About 3 min. 
later the CVR recorded the pilot saying, “I have no idea what’s going on here.”

At 1907:42, the controller instructed the pilot to descend the airplane to 6,000 ft., and 
the pilot acknowledged this instruction. At 1910:26, the CVR recorded a sound similar to 
the autopilot disconnecting.

At 1911:02, the pilot told the controller that the airplane was descending through 8,000 
ft. but was experiencing a “steering problem” and that he could not “steer the aircraft 
very well.” The pilot then mentioned that the airplane was “in the clouds.” At 1914:29, 
the controller instructed the pilot to descend the airplane to 4,100 ft., the minimum 
vectoring altitude. The airplane continued to descend, during which time it entered 
visual meteorological conditions.

At 1915:44, the controller told the pilot that the airplane had descended to an altitude of 
3,600 ft., which was 500 ft. below the minimum vectoring altitude, and instructed the 
pilot to maintain an altitude of 4,100 ft. At 1915:52, the pilot said, “Yeah, I understand. 
I’m going back up but I have no . . . I have very little steering on here and I have 
mountains [around me]. Atlanta doesn’t have mountains.” The controller then issued a 
low-altitude warning and advised the pilot again to climb the airplane to 4,100 ft. The 
pilot responded that he had his “autopilot back . . . so it gives me stability.”

At 1917:21, the controller instructed the pilot to change to another Atlanta Center 
frequency; afterward, the pilot reported that the airplane was at 4,100 ft. At 1917:54, the 
controller confirmed that the airplane was at 4,100 ft. and instructed the pilot to contact 
Atlanta approach control on a frequency of 121.0 MHz. The pilot reported, at 1918:21 and 
1918:26, that “I can’t get to one two one point zero” and that, “I’m having a problem with 
my ah Garmin.”

At 1918:33, the pilot asked the controller to “take me in;” the controller agreed. About 1 
min. later, the pilot told the controller that he was “just barely able” to keep the airplane 
straight and its wings level. The pilot also indicated that he was unsure if he would be 
able to make a right turn into the airport. At 1921:17, the controller told the pilot that the 



airport was 2 to 3 mi. on a heading of 177 deg., and the pilot responded that he thought 
that he had a heading of 177 deg. but did not have the airport in sight. At 1922:09, the 
controller asked the pilot if he wanted to declare an emergency, and the pilot said, “I’m 
not sure and I think I oughta declare an emergency just in case.” The pilot then asked the 
controller to have the KFTY control tower “turn up” the runway’s landing lights, and the 
controller acknowledged this request.

At 1923:09, the pilot asked the controller, “what runway am I running into . . . is the 
runway going sideways?” The controller responded that Runway 8 was the active 
runway. At 1923:44, the pilot said, “well, I’ve got my landing gear down but I don’t 
know.” This statement was the last communication from the pilot to the Atlanta Center 
controller.

At 1923:55, the CVR recorded the pilot straining. At 1924:00, the pilot is heard on the 
CVR saying, “. . . it’s going down, it’s going down” followed by the sound of the autopilot 
disconnect tone. At 1924:07, the TAWS announced, “sink rate, sink rate” followed by 
“pull up, pull up.” The CVR recording ended at 1924:19.

Data recovered from the TAWS unit, which is part of the onboard EGPWS, recorded the 
two warnings heard on the CVR. The first warning, a Mode 1 sink rate warning, occurred 
when the airplane was at an altitude of 4,000 ft. and on a heading of 160 deg. The 
airplane’s descent rate increased from approximately 0 fpm to approximately 8,500 fpm. 
About 3 sec. later, as the descent rate increased, a Mode 1 pull up warning was triggered 
at an altitude of 2,900 ft. The data ended approximately 7 sec. later with a recorded 
descent rate of almost 12,000 fpm.

The weather conditions reported at Cobb County International Airport-McCollum Field 
(KRYY), located about 3 mi. west of the accident site, 23 min. after the accident were: 
wind from 160 deg. at 8 kt.; visibility, 10 sm; overcast ceiling at 5,500 ft.; temperature, 
21C; and dew point, 9C.

The airplane had impacted the front yard of a home in a residential neighborhood about 
15 mi. north of Brown Field. The airplane came to rest in an upright position, and all 
major components were accounted for at the scene. The wreckage was indicative of the 
airplane impacting the ground in an approximate nose-level/wings-level attitude with 
little to no forward momentum. A ground scar just forward of the left wing indicated that 
the airplane bounced back about 3 ft. after it hit the ground. The wires and trees that 
were near the impact point showed no indication that they had been struck.

A post-impact fire consumed most of the cockpit, fuselage, left wing and the inboard 
portion of the right wing. The Garmin GTN 750 unit sustained severe heat and fire 



damage and could not be examined. The major components of the autopilot system, 
including the vertical gyros, directional gyros, autopilot servos, flight director computers 
and the autopilot computer, were identified and examined. They sustained post-crash 
fire and impact damage; however, no evidence of an autopilot failure was found.

The empennage separated from the airplane at the aft pressure bulkhead. The horizontal 
and vertical stabilizers remained attached to each other but separated from the fuselage 
and were found across the street from the main wreckage site. The left elevator and a 
portion of the right elevator separated from the horizontal stabilizer, and the rudder 
separated from the vertical stabilizer.

Flight control continuity was established from each primary flight control system to the 
cockpit. The cable runs were continuous except in areas with structure breaks or severe 
fire damage. The flaps were in the intermediate flap position, and the flap handle was in 
the second (takeoff and approach) position. The speed brake on the left wing was 
consumed by fire, and the speed brake on the right wing was in the down and faired 
position. The elevator trim actuator measured 2.1 in., which correlated to a 10-deg. tab-
up position; the rudder trim actuator measured 1.7 in., which correlated to a 5-deg. tab 
trailing-edge right position; and the left aileron trim tab actuator measured 1.6 in., which 
correlated to a tab-down position between 0 and 5 deg. The elevator trim indicator in the 
cockpit was between neutral and nose down.

The airplane’s fuel tanks (one in each wing) were breached from impact. Two fuel cross-
feed valves were found in the wreckage in the open position.

The nose landing gear was found folded aft and underneath the fuselage. The left and 
right landing gear were folded underneath their respective wings. The damage was 
consistent with the landing gear being extended at the time of the accident.

The left engine had separated from the aft fuselage and came to rest on the right engine. 
In the cockpit, the left throttle was found out of the power quadrant pedestal, and the 
right engine throttle was at idle. Both engines sustained heat and impact damage and 
exhibited damage consistent with the engines operating at the time of impact.

No preimpact anomalies were noted that would have precluded normal airplane or 
engine operation.

An autopsy of the pilot was performed by the Cobb County Medical Examiner’s Office, 
Marietta, Georgia. The cause of death was blunt force injuries. Toxicological testing 
performed at the FAA Forensics Sciences Laboratory identified ethanol and propanol in 



the pilot’s blood and ethanol in the pilot’s heart. These findings were consistent with 
postmortem alcohol production. No medications or other substances were detected.

The Pilot

The investigation turned to the businessman pilot. The CVR and ATC transcripts 
indicated that he seemed to be having trouble using the airplane’s avionics and autopilot 
systems. He held multiengine land, single-engine land and single-engine sea and 
instrument ratings. He had purchased the airplane in May 2001 and earned a Cessna 
500 type rating in 2002.

The pilot’s last FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on Sept. 27, 2016, with the 
limitation that he possess glasses for near/intermediate vision. At that time, he did not 
report his total flight time; his previous medical application (dated Sept. 18, 2013) 
indicated a total flight experience of 6,000 hr. and 50 flight hr. in the previous six 
months. The pilot’s logbooks were not available for review, so investigators could not 
determine his overall currency and total flight experience in the accident airplane.

The Safety Board said that the 1976 Cessna 500 was originally certified to be operated 
with a pilot and copilot. To qualify for single-pilot operations, a pilot must complete an 
FAA-approved single-pilot authorization training course annually.

The previous owner of the accident airplane had been issued a single-pilot conformity 
certificate by Sierra Industries Ltd., of Uvalde, Texas, which had performed earlier 
modifications to the airplane. However, no record indicated that the accident pilot 
received training under Sierra Industries’ exemption.

Investigators contacted several other training facilities that offer single-pilot exemption 
training for the Cessna 500 to see if they had provided such training to the pilot, but 
none of those facilities had any record showing that the pilot had been trained for and 
granted single-pilot authority.

A friend of the pilot who was a flight instructor and airplane mechanic and had flown 
with the pilot several times reported he repeatedly told the pilot that he needed to fly 
with a copilot. The accident-pilot responded that he preferred to fly alone. The accident-
pilot also told his friend that he did not need a single-pilot exemption because the 
airplane had been given a single-pilot exemption with the Sierra Industries modification.

The friend told investigators he had conducted post-maintenance test flights on the 
accident airplane and instructed the pilot on operating the Garmin GTN 750, which had 
been installed in the airplane about 3.5 years before the accident. The Garmin GTN 750 



was a more advanced upgrade from the KLN 90 GPS that the pilot had previously been 
using “for years.” The friend said that the pilot was “very confused” with the Garmin 
GTN 750 unit’s operation and would struggle “pulling up pages” and “correlating all the 
data.” If ATC amended a preprogrammed flight plan while en route, the pilot would get 
confused and not know how to amend the flight plan.

The friend also said the pilot was “very dependent on the autopilot” and would activate it 
immediately after takeoff and then deactivate it on short final approach to land. The pilot 
“never” trimmed the airplane before turning on the autopilot, which resulted in the 
airplane “fighting” the autopilot. As a result, the pilot was “constantly complaining” that 
the airplane was “uncontrollable.” The friend further stated that the pilot “always 
assumed” that the autopilot would automatically trim the airplane. In addition, the 
friend said that he flew to Savannah once to “fix” the airplane because the pilot insisted 
that it was uncontrollable. When the friend arrived and flew the airplane, he quickly 
realized that the airplane was not trimmed properly and that there was nothing wrong 
with the autopilot.

Avionics

The airplane had undergone an avionics retrofit on Aug. 28, 2013. The STC replaced and 
upgraded the flight panel instruments to a Garmin GTN 750 display that supported 
navigation/mapping, radio tuning, weather display and terrain/traffic awareness. The 
unit’s navigation capabilities allowed waypoints to be entered that could be used to build 
and store flight plans for future use. In addition to the touchscreen features, the unit had 
concentric knobs for data input and radio tuning. Communication and navigation radio 
information was shown on the top portion of the display. For radio tuning, the unit had 
electronic touchscreen “tabs” that provided recent, nearby and saved radio frequencies. 
The radio frequency could also be adjusted using the large and small knobs on the lower 
right corner of the display. When information was entered using the Garmin GTN 750 
touchscreen, an aural “click” sound was annunciated.

The upgrade integrated the Garmin GTN 750 display with a Sperry (now Honeywell) 
SPZ-500C autopilot/flight director instrument system. When engaged, the autopilot, 
with the use of the integrated flight director, coupled to the selected modes and flew the 
airplane automatically while the pilot monitored the autopilot performance on flight 
instruments. The autopilot/flight director instrument system provided automatic flight 
control in the pitch, roll and yaw axes with manual, automatic and semiautomatic flight 
maneuvering options available to the pilot.



According to Honeywell, the autopilot would automatically disconnect in flight if there 
were a loss of the vertical or directional gyros, a loss of valid 28-volt power to the 
autopilot or gyros, or a failure of the autopilot torque-limiter. Honeywell also stated that 
a pilot could disconnect the autopilot in flight using one of the following seven actions:

 Press the AP TRIM DISC button.

 Press the vertical gyro FAST ERECT button.

 Press the compass LH-RH switch.

 Press the AP TEST button.

 Select AP Go-Around mode.

 Pull the autopilot AC or DC circuit breaker.

 Use manual electric elevator trim.

The airplane was also equipped with a Bendix/King (now Honeywell) KGP560 GA 
EGPWS.

Aircraft maintenance was being managed by CESCOM, which is a division of CAMP 
Systems, the exclusive factory-endorsed maintenance program for Cessna aircraft. This 
is a continuous airworthiness maintenance program, which is a combined program of 
maintenance and inspections. The airplane’s maintenance logbooks were not located.

The last Phase 5 inspection was done in 2016, and the post-maintenance flight test found 
no items related to the circumstances of the accident. The mechanic stated that he had 
never seen the airplane’s maintenance logbooks and that he would prepare maintenance 
entries in the CESCOM system. The mechanic said that he last spoke with the pilot about 
two weeks before the accident. He reported that, at that time, the pilot told him that “the 
airplane was flying better than ever.” The mechanic indicated that the pilot had not 
mentioned any maintenance issues regarding the autopilot, gyro instruments, the 
Garmin GTN 750 or the flight controls. The mechanic further indicated that the only 
time the pilot had mentioned the Garmin GTN 750 was when he had asked him to help 
find a pilot in the Atlanta area who could help him become more comfortable using the 
unit.

Findings

The NTSB determined the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: “The pilot’s failure to 
maintain adequate airspeed while manually flying the airplane, which resulted in the 
airplane exceeding its critical angle of attack and experiencing an aerodynamic stall. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot’s inability [to] control the airplane without the 
aid of the autopilot.”



In its analysis of this accident, the safety board took note of the comments from the 
pilot’s friend who, referring to the GTN 750, said, “that the pilot generally was confused 
about how the unit operated and struggled with pulling up pages and correlating data” 
and did not trim the airplane or understand the autopilot system.

“This information suggests that the pilot historically had difficulty flying the airplane 
without the aid of the autopilot,” said the safety board. “When coupled with his 
performance flying the airplane during the accident flight without the aid of the 
autopilot, it further suggests that the pilot was consistently unable to manually fly the 
airplane.

“Additionally, given the pilot’s previous experience with the GPS installed on the 
airplane, it is likely that during the accident flight the pilot became confused about how 
to operate the GPS and ultimately was unable to properly control the airplane without 
the autopilot engaged. Based on witness information, it is likely that during the final 
moments of the flight the pilot lost control of the airplane and it entered an aerodynamic 
stall. The pilot was then unable to regain control of the airplane as it spun 4,000 ft. to 
the ground.”



Accident on 12/24/2009 12:00:00 AM in Gulf of Mexico,

Tail Number: N798P

Damage: Substantial

Aircraft Type: SIKORSKY S-76C++

Serial Number: 760685

Airport: N/A

Visibility: 7 statute miles

Wind Velocity: 30 knots

Wind Gusts: knots

Sky Condition: BKN at 2900 feet

Total Injuries: 0

Total Fatal Injuries: 0

NTSB No.: CEN10FA079

NTSB Summary

HISTORY OF FLIGHT On December 24, 2009, approximately 1231 central 
standard time, N798P, a Sikorsky S-76C++ multi-engine helicopter, sustained 
substantial damage when it rolled over shortly after it attempted to land at 
Vioska Knoll 956-A (VK956-also known as Ram Powell), an offshore tension-leg 
platform located in the Gulf of Mexico. The helicopter remained on the platform. 
The airline transport pilot rated captain and commercial rated second-in-
command, along with the five passengers, were not injured. The helicopter was 
registered to and operated by PHI, Incorporated, Lafayette, Louisiana. A visual 
flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed for the flight that originated at the 
operator's base in Boothville, Louisiana, and was destined for VK956. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight conducted under 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 135. The purpose of the flight was to drop off the five 
passengers. There were no planned passengers for the return flight. The 
Second-in-Command (SIC) stated that when they arrived at the platform, they 
made a 360 degree high reconnaissance turn around the platform to make sure 
the deck was clear. The winds were "holding steady" from 174 degrees at 30 
knots. Initially, the SIC was the pilot-flying, but due to the direction of the wind 
relative to the approach and the visibility of the approach from the right seat, he 
turned the flying duties over to the PIC in the left seat. After a positive transfer 
of the controls, the PIC flew the visual approach directly into the wind. The SIC 



reported that the landing was normal and the helicopter was in the center of the 
aiming circle. However, the position of the tail rotor was blocking the exit 
stairwell. He said, "Aircraft was hovered approximately 1-foot aft of aiming circle 
[main gear one foot aft of circle]. Aircraft landing made, all gear on deck." The 
Pilot-in-Command (PIC) then began to reposition (ground taxi) the helicopter to 
the right so the tail would be clear of the stairwell. The SIC stated that he was 
looking out of his window to the right and told the PIC when the tail was clear of 
the stairwell (about a 20 degree turn). He said, "At that moment, I felt the aircraft 
rock towards the right. I looked forward again and realized the aircraft had 
pitched to the right and was continuing to roll rapidly. The initial pitch down-right 
was abrupt as if the right main gear had compressed. There had been no 
adverse indications prior to rolling." The PIC, who was seated in the left seat, 
stated that at the time they arrived at the platform, the wind was out of the 
southeast at 30 knots. After landing on the platform, the tail of the helicopter 
was blocking the stairwell, so he ground-taxied the helicopter to the right about 
20-30 degrees. The second-in-command (SIC), who was in the right seat and 
looking out of the right front window, told the PIC when the tail was clear. The 
PIC then moved the helicopter about 5 more degrees to the right when he felt 
the helicopter "squat down." He responded by moving the cyclic to the left, but 
the helicopter rolled quickly to the right and on to its side. The PIC said he did 
not make an attempt to pick the helicopter up into a hover. A review of PHI's 
critical wind azimuths for ground operations of medium/heavy aircraft on heli-
decks and elevated airports revealed that operations with a 0 to 30 degree 
crosswind of 50 knots or less was permitted. Operations in crosswinds between 
30 and 60 degrees in 40 knots or less were restricted and ground operations 
with a crosswind greater than 60 degrees with winds greater than 30 knots were 
prohibited. PILOT INFORMATION The PIC, age 53, held an air transport pilot 
(ATP) rating for air airplane single-engine land and rotorcraft-helicopter. His last 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) First class medical was issued on August 
1, 2009. The pilot reported a total of 14,459 flight hours; of which, 2,826 hours 
were in the same make/model as the accident helicopter. The SIC, age 57, held 
a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land and rotorcraft-
helicopter with an instrument rating for both airplanes and helicopters. His last 
FAA Second class medical was issued on June 1, 2009. He reported a total of 
18,103 flight hours; of which, 332 hours were in the same make/model as the 
accident helicopter. METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS The Ram Powell 
platform was equipped with an aviation weather observation system (AWOS); 
however, at the time of the accident, the wind sensor was out of service and 
had been inoperative for several months. The reported weather at 1215 was 
visibility 7 miles, scattered clouds at 1,200 and 1,600 feet, broken clouds at 
2,900 feet, temperature 22 degrees Celsius, dewpoint 19 Celsius, a barometric 
pressure setting of 29.76 inches of Mercury. A weather forecast issued by PHI 
at 1000 on the morning of the accident reported a strong cold front pushing east 
across their entire service region bringing thunderstorms and gusty winds. The 
winds were forecasted to be from the east between 15 and 25 knots, with gusts 



of 25-35 knots and possibly 40 knots along the line of storms. As a result of this 
forecast, PHI issued a weather warning regarding the passage of the cold front. 
The warning reported a line of thunderstorms along the edge of the front that 
were moving east across the Gulf of Mexico at 35-50 knots. There was also a 
tornado watch in effect until 1300 over the eastern half of Louisiana that 
extended approximately 25 miles beyond the coastline. FLIGHT RECORDERS 
The helicopter was equipped with a Penney & Giles dual cockpit voice recorder 
(CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR), in addition to a Honeywell Aerospace 
enhanced ground proximity warning system (EGPWS). Cockpit Voice Recorder 
A CVR group was formed on January 26, 2010, and the last five minutes of the 
recording were transcribed. It began with the PIC calling the platform to tell 
them that they were 5 minutes out. When the helicopter was approximately 2.5 
miles from the platform, the automated passenger briefing was heard. It was 
also at this time that the SIC transferred controls to the PIC, and he began the 
approach-to-landing with a 360 degree high reconnaissance turn around the 
platform. At 1228:06, the SIC announced that the emergency floats were armed 
and the Before-Landing checklist was completed. Shortly after, the PIC 
announced the "decision point." The EGPWS was heard giving the 100-foot and 
10- foot-high call-outs, and the SIC confirmed when the helicopter was over the 
deck of the platform. At 1230:51, the PIC stated that he was maneuvering the 
tail to the left and the nose to the right, so the helicopter was not blocking the 
exit stairwell. The SIC then told the PIC when the tail was clear. At 1231:10, the 
sound of the helicopter was heard as it rolled over on the deck, followed by 
numerous sounds of the passengers exiting the helicopter. Flight Data Recorder 
An FDR Group was not formed, but data was downloaded and provided to PHI, 
Sikorsky, and the FAA. Due to limitations of the FDR data, an accurate 
animation of the flight could not be created. EGPWS Examination of the 
EGPWS was conducted at the facility of Honeywell Aerospace, Redmond, 
Washington, on February 3, 2010, under the supervision of the Safety Board. 
The EGPWS was received undamaged and was disassembled. The printed 
circuit boards were also found intact and undamaged. The EGPWS was 
reassembled and placed on a test bench. Once powered was applied to the test 
bench, the data retained within the EGPWS was successfully downloaded from 
the flash memory chips. Using company software, the downloaded data was 
converted into a readable format. Review of the downloaded data revealed that 
a takeoff from a PHI facility was recorded in flight leg 2744 at an EGPWS 
operating time of 2988:11:22. A landing was logged for flight leg 2744 at an 
EGPWS operating time of 2988:51:05. Three separate bank angle warnings 
were recorded at an EGPWS operating time of 2988:51:31, 2988:51:33, and 
2988:52:22 within flight leg 2744. A second takeoff was recorded at an EGPWS 
operating time of 2988:52:23 within flight leg 2745. A landing for flight leg 2745 
was recorded at an EGPWS operating time of 2988:52:23. Three separate bank 
angle warnings were recorded within flight leg 2745 at EGPWS operating times 
of 2988:52:24, 2988:52:32, and 2988:52:40. These bank angle warnings 
coincided with the time the helicopter touched down on the platform and then 



subsequently rolled. A review of the EGPWS data also revealed that at the time 
the PIC began to move the tail away from the exit stairwell, the collective was 
not in the full down position, the nose of the helicopter was pitched up, and 
main rotor RPM (Nr) was 110 percent (the normal operating main rotor RPM of 
the S-76C++ is 107 percent). The pilot also turned the helicopter approximately 
70 degrees prior to it rolling over. These findings were consistent with data 
downloaded from the FDR. PLATFORM INFORMATION The Ram Powell 
platform, also known as Vioska Knoll (VK956), is a tension leg platform with an 
attached Nabors P-17 platform rig. The heli-deck is 52-feet-wide and 92-feet-
long,and approximately 170-feet above mean sea level. The main landing area 
is 52-feet by 52-feet, with the remaining space utilized for parking. This platform 
easily accommodated the S-76C++ helicopter, which has a main rotor diameter 
of 44 feet. WRECKAGE INFORMATION The helicopter was moved to PHI's 
main facility in Lafayette, Louisiana, and was examined by representatives of 
Sikorsky and PHI under the supervision of the FAA. The airframe remained 
relatively intact, but was damaged along the right side of the fuselage. The 
windshields were intact, but the right side pilot's second chin window was 
heavily scraped from contact with the deck of the platform. The right cabin door 
was damaged, and the upper center and forward lower corner of the pop-out 
window were displaced outward from the weather-stripping channel. The rain 
gutter above the right cabin door was damaged. The top of the right forward 
opera window was partially dislodged from the weather-stripping channel. The 
right main landing gear door was cracked at the outboard edge of the non-skid 
surface; slightly damaged and abraded at the forward outboard corner. The tail 
cone was slightly buckled on the left side. The horizontal stabilizer was 
substantially damaged and had shifted in its mount approximately four inches to 
the left. All three landing gear were in the down and locked position. The 
helicopter was placed on jacks and the landing gear was functionally tested. All 
three gears operated normally, despite the damage to the right main landing 
gear door. The nose landing gear doors could not be tested due the position of 
the jack. The tail cone and vertical pylon remained intact. Continuity for the tail 
drive shafts, intermediate and the tail gearbox were verified. The tail gear box 
fairing and forward section of the tail gear box outer housing exhibited some 
impact damage. The main rotor blades (MRB) were not recovered, other than 
an approximately 3 foot section of spar. Two blades fractured at the spindle and 
two blades fractured at the blade cuff. The tail rotor blades (TRB) were not 
damaged, except for a cuff counterweight on the blue-blade that had fractured 
and separated. The engines were examined externally only. Both engines had 
fractured at least two mounting bolts from their semi-circular forward engine 
mounts. Remnants of the broken bolts were observed on the deck of each 
engine's bay. Impact damage was consistent with a rollover while operating at 
full operating rotor speed and both engines producing power. The throttle 
quadrant was intact. Both engine speed selectors were OFF (fully aft). Both fuel 
selectors were in OFF. Both T-handles were in the AFT position. The crew 
reported placing the controls in these positions after the event. Examination of 



the flight control system revealed no damage to the flight controls. Hydraulic 
ground power was applied to the aircraft, and the controls were exercised. 
Mechanical continuity and smooth operation was observed from the cockpit to 
the swash-plate. Three pitch change rods were fractured, and damage to the 
main rotor head prevented testing beyond the swash-plate, or measurement of 
blade angles. A slight interference was noted at a cotter pin on the nut retaining 
the #2 Roll SAS actuator to the roll ratio crank in the mixing unit. The cotter pin 
had rotated upwards and the free end was rubbing against the 76400-03211-
041 walking beam. The scoring on the walking beam was light and appeared to 
be new. The interference was easily overcome, both with and without hydraulic 
power applied. Rigging pins were installed in the neutral rig position, and all 
lined up properly, indicating the basic flight control relationships had not 
changed. A full rig was not possible, due to the main rotor head and blade 
damage. The aircraft was equipped with a Honeywell SPZ-7600 Digital 
Automatic Flight Control System (DAFCS). This system was a fully coupled, 
four axis (pitch, roll, yaw and collective) flight control system combining autopilot 
and flight director functions. The system also incorporated several additional 
features to reduce pilot workload: auto trim, heading hold, automatic turn 
coordination, and auto level. The autopilot provided two basic modes of 
operation: Stability Augmentation System (SAS) and Attitude Retention (ATT). 
The SAS mode provided short-term rate damping during hands-on flying while 
the ATT mode was used for hands-on or coupling to the flight director. The flight 
director provided steering commands which could have been manually flown by 
the pilot or coupled to the autopilots for fully automatic flight path control. The 
system consisted of two FZ-706 flight control computers, a PC-700 autopilot 
controller, two MS-700 flight director mode selectors, two Penney & Giles air 
data computers, and an AL-300 command display. It was integrated to a variety 
of avionics equipment such as NAV receivers (short range and long range), 
gyros/AHRS, radar altimeters and cockpit indicators including Electronic Flight 
Instrument System (EFIS) to provide pilot workload relief. Aircraft control inputs 
are achieved through the use of series actuators in pitch, roll and yaw. There 
were three series actuators per system, each with a linear stroke of ±8 mm 
which is equivalent to ±5 percent of total control authority per actuator. Series 
actuator positions were displayed on an AFCS indicator panel located in the 
pedestal. After applying power to the aircraft, it was noted that both SAS roll 
channels were biased to the left direction, indicating the SAS had attempted to 
correct the right roll during the event. Auto trim was achieved through parallel 
rotary actuators in pitch and roll with 100 percent authority [However, trim 
actuators are rate limited to less than 10% per second]. These actuators also 
provided magnetic brake and artificial feel functions. A similar rotary actuator 
also provided collective control and trim. An electro-hydraulic pedal damper/trim 
actuator provided yaw trim. Autopilot malfunctions are annunciated on a DAFCS 
caution panel located on the instrument panel. Either pilot can override the 
AFCS functions. The cyclic, collective, and yaw controls were examined for 
evidence of malfunctions or pre-impact failures. 



Mechanical continuity was established for all DAFCS trim and SAS servos. No 
anomalies were noted. The instrument panel was intact. Only the standby 
instruments provided any visual indications, since most of the instruments were 
glass multifunction display units. The standby airspeed indicator showed 0 
knots. The altimeter was set to 29.72 inches of Mercury in the Kollsman 
window. The standby gyro showed an approximate 40 degree right roll and an 
approximate 8 degree pitch down. The G/S, NAV, and OFF flags were in view. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION Due to the severe weather 
moving across the Gulf of Mexico, the PIC and SIC were stranded on the 
platform and mandatory drug testing was delayed for several days. Test results 
were negative for both pilots. SURVIVAL ASPECTS This impact was survivable 
and no injuries were reported. Egress for the five cabin occupants was through 
the left cabin door's pop-out window and the copilot's (left hand) door, which 
was opened normally (not jettisoned). ADDITIONAL INFORMATION According 
to the FAA Rotorcraft Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-21), page 11-7 and 11-8, 
Dynamic Rollover, "A helicopter is susceptible to a lateral rolling tendency, 
called dynamic rollover, when lifting off the surface. For dynamic rollover to 
occur some factor has to first cause the helicopter to roll or pivot around a skid, 
or landing gear wheel, until its critical rollover angle is reached. Then, beyond 
this point, main rotor thrust continues the roll and recovery is impossible. If the 
critical rollover angle is exceeded, the helicopter rolls on its side regardless of 
the cyclic corrections made.' "Dynamic rollover begins when the helicopter 
starts to pivot around its skid or wheel. This can occur for a variety of reasons, 
including the failure to remove a tie down or skid securing device, or if the skid 
or wheel contacts a fixed object while hovering sideward, or if the gear is stuck 
in the ice, soft asphalt, or mud. Dynamic rollover may also occur if you do not 
use the proper landing or take off technique or while performing slope 
operations. Whatever the cause, if the gear or skid becomes a pivot point, 
dynamic rollover is possible if you do not use the proper corrective techniques.' 
"Once started, dynamic rollover cannot be stopped by application of opposite 
cyclic control alone. For example, the right skid contacts an object and becomes 
the pivot point while the helicopter starts rolling to the right. Even with full cyclic 
applied, the main rotor thrust vector and its moment follows the aircraft as it 
continues rolling to the right. Quickly applying down collective is the most 
effective way to stop dynamic rollover from developing." Dynamic rollover can 
occur in both skid and wheel equipped helicopters, and all types of rotor 
systems. The following are most critical for helicopters with counter-clockwise 
rotation: right side skid/wheel down, since translating tendency adds to the 
rollover force, right lateral center of gravity, crosswinds from the left, and left 
yaw inputs. A review of PHI's training program relative to dynamic rollover 
focused on slope operations, stuck/skids/wheels, and tie-downs. It did not 
include specific ground taxi techniques, hazards or aerodynamics specific to 
wheeled helicopters.



Aircraft

The pilot made an approach to the off-shore platform landing pad directly into a 
30-knot headwind. Upon landing, the tail rotor was blocking the emergency exit, 
so the pilot maneuvered the wheeled helicopter approximately 70 degrees to 
the right while the copilot made sure the tail rotor was clear of the exit. As the 
pilot was completing the turn, the helicopter began to roll rapidly to the right and 
onto its right side. The main rotor blades made contact with the platform and the 
helicopter was substantially damaged. Data downloaded from the flight data 
recorder and enhanced ground proximity warning system revealed the pilot did 
not fully land the helicopter prior to the ground taxi and still had a high power 
setting, a high nose attitude, and the collective was not in the full down position 
as it was being repositioned. As a result, the helicopter entered a dynamic 
rollover.

Cause

The pilot's failure to fully land the helicopter prior to entering a turn in strong, 
crosswind conditions, which resulted in a dynamic rollover.



National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report

 
 

Accident 
Location: New York, NY Number: ERA19FA191

Date & Time: 06/10/2019, 1340 EDT Registration: N200BK

Aircraft: Agusta A109 Injuries: 1 Fatal

Flight Conducted 
Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Executive/Corporate

 
On June 10, 2019, about 1340 eastern daylight time, an Agusta A109E helicopter, 
N200BK, was destroyed when it impacted the roof of a building in New York, New 
York. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. Day instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the corporate flight, which was 
conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 
91. The flight departed from the East 34th street heliport (6N5), New York, New 
York, about 1330 and was destined for Linden Airport (LDJ), Linden, New Jersey.

On the morning of the accident, the pilot and a pilot-rated passenger departed the 
Bel-Aire heliport (NY46), Amenia, New York, about 1030. They stopped briefly at 
Hudson Valley Regional Airport (POU), Poughkeepsie, New York, for fuel, then flew 
to 6N5 and arrived about 1130. According to the pilot-rated passenger, the flight was 
uneventful.

According to personnel at Atlantic Aviation, the fixed-base-operator at 6N5, the 
pilot-rated passenger was at the controls as the helicopter landed. He departed the 
heliport by car, while the accident pilot remained at 6N5. The accident pilot waited in 
the lounge for about 2 hours. While there, he was continuously checking weather 
conditions using his tablet computer. Prior to departing, he mentioned to the staff 
that he saw a "twenty-minute window to make it out."

According to preliminary tracking data obtained from the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), the helicopter departed 6N5 and initially few south over the 
East River, before changing course northward. About 5-7 minutes after departure, 
the pilot contacted Atlantic Aviation and made a request to return to the heliport. He 
was advised to land on pad No. 4. The pilot then radioed that he "did not know where 
he was." The helicopter flew erratically over the East River, changed course and 
altitude several times before making a 270° turn, which approached 6N5 from the 
west. About 500 ft west of 6N5, at an altitude of 600-700 ft mean sea level (msl), the 
helicopter reversed course, and flew erratically over Manhattan, before impacting a 
roof of the 54-story building at 787 7th Avenue. The last recorded position of the 



helicopter was about 0.1 nautical mile southeast of the building at an altitude of 
about 1,570 ft msl. The overall height of the building above the street was about 790 
ft msl, with the roof section where the helicopter came to rest (below the exterior 
walls and catwalks surrounding the perimeter of the roof), at an altitude of about 765 
ft msl.

A witness recorded video of a portion of the flight as the helicopter was flying in and 
out of clouds. The helicopter descended rapidly from the clouds in a nose down pitch 
attitude, appeared to initially transition to a level pitch attitude before climbing into 
the overcast cloud ceiling and out of view.

Examination of the wreckage on the rooftop revealed that all major components of 
the helicopter were present at the accident site and were confined to an area 
approximately 100 ft long and 20 ft wide, oriented on a heading of about 300° 
magnetic. Small pieces of debris were recovered from the 50th floor level and street 
level. The helicopter was severely fragmented and partially consumed by a post-
impact fire. All four main rotor blades were fragmented. Remnants of two main rotor 
blades remained attached to the rotor hub, the other two blades were separated from 
the hub. All exhibited leading edge damage. The main rotor gearbox was impact 
damaged, partially fragmented, and could not be turned by hand. The tail rotor 
blades, hub, and gearbox remained largely intact. One tail rotor blade exhibited a 
leading-edge gouge, the other blade tip was fracture separated and exhibited thermal 
damage. The tail rotor driveshaft was fractured in several locations; an 8 ft section 
remained attached to the tail rotor gearbox. The tail rotor shaft and blades rotated 
freely when turned by hand. While most of the flight control components were 
identified, flight control continuity could not be determined due to impact damage 
and extreme fragmentation of the airframe. All three landing gear actuators were in 
the down position.

The left engine was broken into two sections at the reduction gearbox. The 
compressor impeller rotated freely by hand, several blades exhibited leading edge 
damage and several blade tips were bent in the direction opposite of rotation. The 
power turbine shaft was fractured, consistent with overload and exhibited twisting 
features and rotational scoring. The fuel management module was damaged, 
separated from the engine control gearbox, and its control was oriented in the 
"flight" position.

The right engine was mostly intact and exhibited thermal damage. The compressor 
impeller would not rotate; its blades exhibited leading edge damage and were not 
bent. Debris was found ingested downstream of the compressor discharge area, 
consistent with engine operation. The driveshaft between the right engine and the 
main gearbox was fracture separated in a twisted pattern. The fuel management 
module was damaged, partially separated from the engine control gearbox, and its 
control was oriented in the "flight" position.

The throttle quadrant was found loose and separated from its mount. The control 
cable ends were not found. Although both levers were found in the "MAX" position, 
their position at the time of impact could not be confirmed.

The twin engine, 7-seat helicopter was manufactured in 2000. It was equipped with 
two 549-horsepower, Pratt & Whitney Canada PW206C engines. The most recent 



documented inspection was completed on May 21, 2019, which was a 50 hour/30-
day inspection. At that time the helicopter had accrued a total of 3,939 flight hours. 
Both engines had accrued about 570 hours since overhaul.

According to FAA airman records, the pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with a 
helicopter rating, which was issued on September 24, 2004. He also held a flight 
instructor certificate with helicopter rating, which was issued on June 20, 2018. He 
did not have an instrument rating. His most recent FAA second-class medical 
certificate was issued on May 15, 2019, at which time he reported 2,805 hours of total 
flight experience.

At 1351, the weather conditions at a reporting station located in Central Park about 1 
mile northeast of the accident site, at an elevation of 156 ft msl, included an overcast 
ceiling at 500 ft above ground level, visibility 1.25 statute miles in rain and mist, 
temperature 18° C, dew point 7° C, wind from 070° at 8 knots, altimeter setting 
30.05 inches of mercury. According to 14 CFR Part 91.155, basic visual flight rules 
weather minimums for helicopters operating from the surface to 1,200 ft msl were 
1/2-statute mile visibility, and remain clear of clouds.

The helicopter was retained for further examination.

 
 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Agusta Registration: N200BK

Model/Series: A109 E Aircraft Category: Helicopter

Amateur Built: No    

Operator: N200bk Inc Operating None
Certificate(s) Held:

 
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Instrument Condition of Light: Day
Site: Conditions

Observation Facility, NYC, 156 ft msl Observation Time: 1351 EDT
Elevation:

Distance from Accident 1 Nautical Miles Temperature/Dew Point: 18°C / 17°C
Site:

Lowest Cloud Condition:   Wind Speed/Gusts, 8 knots / , 70°
Direction: 

Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 500 ft agl Visibility 1.25 Miles

Altimeter Setting: 30.05 inches Hg Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

Departure Point: New York, NY (6N5) Destination: Linden, NJ (LDJ)

 



Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal Aircraft Damage: Destroyed

Passenger N/A Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Injuries:

Ground Injuries: N/A Aircraft None
Explosion:

Total Injuries: 1 Fatal Latitude, 40.761667, -73.981944
Longitude:

 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Douglass P Brazy

Additional Participating David Gerlach; FAA/AVP-100; Washington, DC
Persons: Christopher Lemieux; Leonardo Helicopters; Philidelphia, PA

Merryn Spielman; Pratt & Whitney of Canada; Longueuil, QC

Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.

 
 



A Short Flight to Disaster: Agusta A109 Mountain CFIT in Marginal Weather 
(N109W)
On 19 November 2016 Agusta A109A II N109W was destroyed in a Controlled Flight Into 

Terrain (CFIT) accident at Monte Rho, near Varese, Italy at c 2950ft AMSL.  One of the three 

occupants was killed and the other two seriously injured.  Italy’s Agenzia Nazionale per la 

Sicurezza del Volo (ANSV) released its safety investigation report, in Italian only, on 21 

December 2020.  At the time of the accident, the weather in the area were characterized by 

ANSV as “poor visibility and cloud-covered peaks”.

Wreckage of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: Italian National Alpine and Speleological Rescue Corps [Corpo 
Nazionale Soccorso Alpino e Speleologico - CNSAS])



Monte Rho and Accident Site of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: ANSV)

The Accident Flight
The US registered aircraft was registered to a trustee company in Delaware, US, however 

the ANSV describe it as being operated non-commercially by Execavia Ltd (registered 

in Valletta, Malta), although the ‘user’ of the helicopter was BG Air SA based in Lugano, 

Switzerland.

The pilot was a 57-year-old Italian with a PPL(H) issued by ENAC and CPL(H) issued 

by FAA, and 4400 hours of flight time.  The pilot and a female passenger (seated in the 

front left seat) arrived in Lugano from Caiolo, Italy at c14:00 Local Time.  A male passenger 

boarded and the aircraft departed at 14:12 Local Time, heading south, having filed 

a VFR flight plan.  Lugano TWR confirmed that the N109W was the only known traffic 

present in the area and once at Visual Reporting Point “S” they were instructed to change to 

the frequency of the Milan FIC.

ANSV comment that at that time “the weather conditions did not seem critical” but while 

flying over Lake Lugano the pilot noted a relatively low cloud ceiling.



In particular, towards the southern edge of the lake, at the limit of the Lugano CTR, towards the 

VRP “S”, there was low haze, which made it difficult to see the terrain.

Chart of Lugano CTR showing VRP “S” (Credit: ANSV)

Consequently, in order not to be forced to fly at a very low altitude, he had decided to “aim for a 

hill, crossing which I would have had the whole Po Valley  in front of me”.   Since there were 

clouds on the sides of the aforementioned hill [Moute Rho], he decided to aim for the top of the 

same.



Flightpath of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: ANSV)



Flightpath of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: ANSV)

However, the helicopter’s rate of climb as insufficient and the helicopter contacted trees on 

the mountain, first with the tail and then the main rotor.

The pilot…did not feel a big impact, but a series of many small impacts up to the final impact 

with the ground.

The surviving passenger…immediately after taking off…started reading a newspaper; after a few  

minutes, he heard a bang, realizing the helicopter had crashed.

The fuselage came to rest on its left-hand side less than 5 minutes after take off.






Wreckage of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: ANSV)

No Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) signal was detected (investigators found the ELT 

turned off but could not determine if that occurred upon rescue or before the 

flight).  Rescuers were informed of the accident by a mobile phone call from the pilot. 

The adverse weather and approaching darkness hampered the rescue operation 

and rescuers did not arrive on-site until 18:30 Local Time.

Rescuers at the Agusta A109A II N109W Accident Site (Credit: Italian National Alpine and Speleological Rescue 
Corps [Corpo Nazionale Soccorso Alpino e Speleologico - CNSAS])

ANSV Analysis
Investigators found an AV-MAP EKP V unit in the helicopter.  This is a non-certified GPS 

mapping tool “usable only as a support for VFR navigation, not replacing the official 

documentation” or “on-board instrumentation”.  The helicopter was unfortunately not 

equipped with a Terrain Avoidance and Warning System (TAWS) but the radalt low height 

warning was set at 200 ft.

The ANSV comment that radar data showed:



…an almost constant climb rate and horizontal speed. Taking into account the low intensity of 

the wind, it seems unlikely that the helicopter found itself in a leeward condition [such as 

a mountain wave], such as to limit its climbing performance…

[I]t would seem plausible that the pilot, due to the poor visibility existing in the area overflown, 

underestimated the actual distance from the ground and did not realize that the separation 

from the ground was rapidly reducing, due to the gradually increasing slope of the  terrain, thus 

ending up hitting the  tops of some trees.

Moreover, the course of the mountain ridge, initially parallel to the direction of flight necessary 

to reach the Po Valley and subsequently perpendicular….could have misled the pilot, making 

him believe  that the route ahead was free, and then present itself as an unexpected obstacle.

The pilot’s decision to continue the flight in marginal conditions of visibility, documented by the 

evidence acquired during the investigation, appears to be determined by an inadequate risk 

assessment, associated with the rapid deterioration of the meteorological situation coupled with  

the mountainous terrain along the route.

[T]he evidence acquired leads us to believe that the planning of the flight  from Lugano to Caiolo 

was decidedly inadequate in terms of assessing the meteorological conditions, which can be 

deduced from the examination of multiple sources.



Wreckage of Agusta A109A II N109W (Credit: Italian National Alpine and Speleological Rescue Corps [Corpo 
Nazionale Soccorso Alpino e Speleologico - CNSAS])

ANSV Conclusions
The following factors contributed significantly to this CFIT accident:

 Marginal weather conditions in the mountainous terrain where the accident occurred, 
which did not allow the safe continuation of the flight;

 Non-compliance with VFR flight rules and safety altitudes.

The following factors may have contributed:
 Operational pressure (deriving from the need to complete the transfer flight to Caiolo), 

which did not allow the pilot to consider an alternative plan, consisting, for example, of a  
return to the airport of departure;

 Excessive confidence of the pilot in his own ability to manage the flight in marginal or 
inferior meteorological conditions with respect to the minimum VFR conditions, in the 
light of his significant flight experience and knowledge of the area of operations;

 False security resulting from having a cartographic or portable GPS system on board.



Air Ambulance Helicopter Spatial Disorientation in Night IMC (North 
Memorial Healthcare Leonardo A109S N11NM, Minnesota)
On 28 June 2019, at about 0040 Local Time Leonardo Helicopters AW109S N11NM, an air 

ambulance operated by North Memorial Healthcare, was destroyed at Brainerd Lakes 

Regional Airport (BRD), Minnesota. The pilot and flight nurse died at the scene.  The flight 

paramedic was seriously injured.

Wreckage of North Memorial Health Leonardo A109S N11NM (Credit: NTSB)

The helicopter had been approaching the airport in dark night instrument meteorological 

conditions (IMC) after delivering a patient to the North Memorial Medical Centre and was 

just commencing a missed approach.  This was the operator’s second night A109S accident 

in less than three years.  The previous one, non-fatal, involving N91NM on 17 September 

2016 was discussed in this Aerossurance article: HEMS A109S Night Loss of Control Inflight, 

issued on 29 September 2018.  That also involved a missed approach and NTSB determined 

in the first accident that “the pilot’s excessive cyclic input…resulted in a loss of control and 

spiralling descent into terrain”.
The Safety Investigation



The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued in November 2020) that N11NM was…

…equipped with a 2-axis autopilot  for lateral (roll) and longitudinal (pitch) control. The autopilot  

provided for limited yaw dampening, but no yaw control. Minimum airspeed to comply with IFR 

handling quality requirements for the helicopter [Vmini] was 55 knots.

The pilot had 3376 hours total, 533 on type and 2294 as Pilot In Command.

The pilot’s most recent Part 135 competency/proficiency check occurred on March 12, 

2019.   During the 90 days before the accident, the pilot logged 27 landings at night, 16 

instrument approaches, 1 flight hour of actual instrument time, and 57 hours of simulated 

instrument  time. The pilot’s total actual instrument time flown was 41 hours.

BRD was located in a rural area with few ground lights, and there was no moon illumination at 

the time of the accident. Airport personnel stated that several lakes near BRD would often 

generate patchy fog and visibility could vary significantly at different locations on the airport.

Another pilot working for the operator told the NTSB:

I’ve experienced some weird things at Brainerd… I’ve seen it in both directions, where it’s worse 

than it says it is, and I’ve seen it where it’s way better than it says it is.

History of the Accident Flight
The flight was returning to BRD after delivering a patient to North Memorial Heliport 

(MY77), Robbinsdale, Minnesota. An onboard Appareo Vision 1000 device recorded flight data, 

cockpit imagery, and audio of the flight. The helicopter departed MY77 at 2348, and the pilot 

received an instrument flight rules  [IFR] clearance from air traffic control (ATC) to climb to 6,000 

ft mean sea level (msl) and fly direct to BRD.

At 2356, while holding an iPad, the pilot stated on intercom to the paramedic and/or flight nurse  

that visibility at BRD was “1 mile, looks good.” The pilot requested the instrument landing system  



runway 23 (ILS RWY 23) approach and informed the controller that he had obtained the current 

weather at BRD.

At 0028, the pilot selected the BRD automated surface observing system (ASOS) frequency. The 

ASOS transmission included a ceiling of 200 ft above ground level (agl) and 1/4-mile visibility 

with fog. The controller cleared the helicopter for the ILS RWY 23 approach. Shortly thereafter, 

the ASOS transmitted weather included 1/2-mile visibility with haze, and the pilot stated 

“awesome, 1/2 we’re  legal” on the intercom. The pilot subsequently activated the runway lights.

At 0034:35, the helicopter began a descent on the ILS glideslope with the autopilot coupled. 

About 5 seconds later, the pilot appeared to turn on the helicopter’s landing light and/or search 

light.

At 0036:30, the helicopter passed the final approach fix (5.3 miles from Runway 23) at 93 

knots. At 0036:37, the ASOS-transmitted weather included 1/4-mile visibility with haze and a sky 

condition of 200 ft vertical visibility.

 



After arriving at the ILS decision height, the pilot selected the altitude hold mode on the flight 

director and about 1 second later, decoupled the autopilot (pitch and roll steering modes). The 

radar altimeter read 130 ft agl.

Over the next 14 seconds, with a power setting below 30% torque, the helicopter’s 

pitch  increased from -3° (nose-down) to +20° (nose-up) and the radar altimeter increased to 230  

ft agl. As airspeed decreased below 50 knots, the pilot selected vertical speed, and heading 

modes on the flight director. The helicopter’s power increased rapidly through 40% torque and 

the airspeed decreased through 25 knots. Based on a GPS groundspeed of 40 knots, the 

airborne tailwind was about 15 knots.



At 0039:38, the pilot announced a go-around. The helicopter’s power increased past 80% torque,  

and the airspeed was 0 knots. The flight instruments indicated that the helicopter had entered a 

right rotational yaw and the radar altimeter read 300 ft agl. The helicopter’s right yaw 

continued to increase; the power setting rose above 110% torque and the airspeed remained 

near 0 knots.

The last recorded information, at 0039:57, indicated that the helicopter was about 100 ft agl. 

The power setting was below 30% torque and the pilot had selected the “ALT” (altitude hold) 

button on the flight director.



[T]he flight paramedic (seated in the left forward seat) recalled that the runway  lights and 

surface were visible below a thin fog layer during the approach. As the helicopter   

approached the runway, he noticed clouds to the side and recalled the pilot stating that the 

weather conditions were  foggy and that a go-around was needed. The helicopter subsequently 

spun to the right and impacted the ground.

Wreckage of North Memorial Health Leonardo A109S N11NM (Credit: NTSB)



The helicopter impacted a grassy area south of runway 23 and came to rest upright and nearly 

intact on a heading of 074°. The helicopter was upright and nearly intact, with no movement 

from the initial impact point.   The main fuselage and tail boom exhibited crushing consistent 

with a high-velocity vertical descent and impact.

https://youtu.be/XesiQIpcwQw

Wreckage of North Memorial Health Leonardo A109S N11NM (Credit: NTSB)

Survivability
The operator’s communication center first attempted radio contact with the helicopter crew 

about 15 minutes after the accident…



After impact [the survivor] was trapped. His right arm had gotten stuck between the cyclic and 

the seat and he was slumped sideways and leaning against the pilot. He believed he had broken 

a few ribs and a broken arm. He attempted to use his foot to press the push to talk on the floor, 

but he felt pain when he moved his foot. He was able to get his portable radio out of his pocket 

and radio for help…about 22 minutes after  the accident.

Of note is that even for an on-airport accident:

The low-visibility weather conditions contributed to the delayed arrival of first responders.   

Emergency response personnel located the helicopter about 41 minutes after the accident.

The cause of both deaths was due to multiple traumatic injuries.  The extent in the vertical 

crush damage can be seen in this comparison between an exemplar helicopter and 

N11NM, where 41.5 inches had shrunk to 29 inches in these two FAA images



 

No estimate of the impact g is presented by the NTSB.

The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) reviewed the helicopter’s seats, restraints, 

and helmet specifications and the effects of the impact with terrain at a high vertical velocity. No  

anomalies were noted.

Recorded Data Analysis 
The helicopter had been retro-fitted with the Appareo Vision 1000 device 1740 flying hours 

prior to the accident.  This is…

…a small self-contained image, audio and data recorder…mounted in the overhead of an 

aircraft’s cockpit[which] records a cockpit image at a rate of four times per second.



Vision 1000 Image of the Cockpit of N11NM (Credit: via NTSB)

In addition…the device is also capable of recording two tracks of audio that are synchronized 

with the image data. The unit also contains a GPS receiver that receives GPS satellite-based 

aircraft time, position, altitude, and speed. [T]he Appareo unit also has a self-contained real-time  

inertial measuring unit that provides 3-axis accelerations as well as aircraft pitch, roll and yaw 

data.

The Vision 1000 device was recovered with no sign of obvious damage.



Vision 1000 from A109S N11NM (Credit: via NTSB)

However, the NTSB lab struggled to download the data on the unit’s   SD card.  Appareo 

subsequently informed the NTSB that an early standard of SD cards used had failed after c 

1800 hours of data recording (and c 20% less flying hours).

The STC  [Supplemental Type Certificate] for the Appareo Vision 1000…Instructions for Continued  

Airworthiness (ICA)…included an initial system inspection as well as an annual system 

inspection…   The initial system inspection contained procedures to check the functionality of the 

Vision 1000 and to download the memory chip to verify audio, video, and position data is 

accurate.   The annual inspection included a visual inspection of  the wiring and connections for 

damage and security as well as the initial system inspection.

Appareo had not formally issued a service bulletin or any guidance to regarding SD cards 

expecting that routine Flight Data Monitoring (FDM) and the ultimate backstop of the 

annual inspection would prompt card changes if required.

According to the Director of Maintenance (DOM) for the operator, the original  intention was to 

have annual inspections that verified the functionality of the SD card and the mechanics were 

supposed to upload the information to Appareo software so the successful capture of flights 

could be verified. The operator then stated that mechanics and pilots did not have access to the 



Appareo software for reviewing the data, and were then instructed to perform a “visual 

inspection” and have “base pilots rotate the SD cards to [their] aviation safety officer for review 

and monitoring.” The DOM went on to explain that this particular process had no oversight and 

the inspections of the SD cards and subsequent verification of recorded flight data “quickly fell 

apart.”

It’s not clear if the limited availability of the Appareo software was a deliberate plan for 

data protection purposes.  It does appear from the statement above that routine FDM was 

not being done, but it is clear that the operator’s maintenance programme was not 

following the ICA for the V1000 unit.

Fortunately the V1000 also records data to an internal memory, sealed inside a thick 

aluminium case, and wrapped in a fire-blanket.  This would not meet the stringent crash 

protection requirements for Flight Data Recorders (FDRs) but does provide a degree of 

crash resistance.

Data was also available from the Sandel  ST3400H   HeliTAWS  Terrain Awareness and 

Warning System (TAWS) and the Outerlink CP-3i SATCOM module.
FAA Guidance
The NTSB comment that:

FAA guidance for helicopter instrument approaches allows a reduction of the Category A 

visibility by 1/2, but in no case less than 1/4 statute mile or 1,200 ft runway visual range (RVR). 

The approach can be initiated at any speed up to the highest approach category authorized; 

however, the speed on the final approach segment must be reduced to the Category A speed of 

less than 90 knots before the missed approach point in order to apply the visibility reduction.

The FAA describes some hazards when the ground or horizon are obscured.  The NTSB 

note to that



The vestibular sense (motion sensing by the inner ear) in particular can and will confuse the 

pilot. Because of inertia, the sensory areas of the inner ear cannot detect slight changes in 

airplane attitude, nor can they accurately sense attitude changes that occur at a uniform rate 

over a period of time. On the other hand, false sensations are often generated, leading the pilot 

to believe the attitude of the airplane has changed when, in fact, it has not. These false 

sensations result in the pilot experiencing spatial disorientation.

The Operator
At the time the operator advertised that:

Our fly-by-instrument certified pilots can take to the air when weather has grounded other 

pilots.



This boast, wisely,   no longer features on their website. 

The NTSB report that:

The operator’s flight training and currency programs were all conducted inflight, as the only 

A109 simulator was based in Italy.

Following a September 2016 accident that involved a loss of control during a missed approach 

in night IMC conditions, the operator started construction of a flight training device  (FTD) for 

instrument procedures using an actual A109S cockpit. The FTD was not yet certified or in use at 

the time of the accident.

NTSB Analysis
The dark night conditions at the rural airport resulted in little to no visual references during the 

pilot’s transition to landing and the attempted missed approach. It is likely that the pilot became  

spatially disoriented, which led to the excessive pitch attitude, slow airspeed, his failure to 

recognize and arrest the right yaw, and the subsequent loss of control.

The NTSB do not comment on the previous accident.
NTSB Probable Cause
The pilot’s spatial disorientation during an instrument approach in dark night instrument 

meteorological conditions, which resulted in a loss of control and subsequent impact with 

terrain.

Safety Actions
Following the accident, the operator:

 Increased the minimum weather conditions required for instrument approaches to 
be a cloud ceiling of 400 ft agl and 1 mile visibility.

 Made communication centre training and process improvements “including 
timely identification of an aircraft potentially in distress”.

 Inspected all Vision 1000 units installed in their fleet, ensured firmware was 
updated, and verified the units were operational.

 Installed the Appareo Transfer Utility on their maintenance laptops.



 Obtained access to an Appareo interface which allows monitoring of each SD card 
by aircraft and serial number, showing date of last upload and the health of each 
upload

 “Informed” maintenance staff that the Vision 1000 memory cards were to be 
downloaded at a 50-hour/30-day interval “when possible”.

Safety Resources
Aerossurance’s Andy Evans helped prepare this short educational SKYclip video for the 

Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) on Helicopter Somatogravic Illusions:



NTSB on LA A109S Rooftop Hospital Helipad Landing Accident (N109EX 
of Helinet Aviation Services / Prime Healthcare at USC Kerk)
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) have published 

their  preliminary   report on Leonardo Helicopters AW109S N109EX of  Helinet Aviation 

Services which crashed onto the University of Southern California (USC) Keck Medical 

Center (USC Keck) rooftop helipad in Los Angeles, California on 6 November 2020.

The helicopter was making a Part 135 helicopter air ambulance flight, with a donor heart 

for a transplant operation aboard. The pilot suffered minor injuries and the two passengers 

were uninjured.  The Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD) retrieved the organ from the 

wreckage and the hospital says “the heart was successfully transplanted following the 

crash, and the transplant recipient is recovering well”.



Wreckage of Helinet Aviation Services / Prime Healthcare Leonardo Helicopters A109S on Rooftop Helipad of Los 
Angeles Co/USC Kerk Medical Center Heliport (35CA), Los Angeles, CA (Credit: NTSB)

The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their preliminary 

report that:

The pilot reported that he established the helicopter in a steep approach, to land on the rooftop 

helipad of a multi-story medical building [approaching in a northerly direction over Hazard 

Park according to videos of the accident].

The pilot had offset his heading to the left to gain greater visibility to the  landing zone. He 

observed the absence of any wind indication from the windsock and no movement on nearby 

trees. When the helicopter had decelerated to about 45 knots, he increased the engine and 

rotor RPM to 102%.

About 40 feet above the helipad, the pilot noticed a slight yaw to the right that continued despite  

full left pedal application. He thought to fly away from the helipad when the helicopter 

aligned  in the direction he just approached from. As the helicopter rotated to about 90° from his  

approach heading, it suddenly and very violently made a dramatic increase in right yaw.



https://youtu.be/xDdpmY7nniM

Realizing the helicopter was going to be uncontrollable, the pilot “dumped the collective” and 

tried to stay over the helipad. He stated that after the helicopter struck the helipad, it rolled left 

and continued spinning on its side, and eventually came to a stop.

The pilot shut down the engines and all three occupants exited unassisted.

https://youtu.be/C_Pbyb1-gNU

The NTSB say that:

A review of a witness video, (See figure 1), taken from an adjacent building, revealed the 

helicopter approached the rooftop helipad while slowly rotating clockwise about the vertical 

axis.

The helicopter stopped descending and rotated 360°. The helicopter then descended while 

rotating an additional 180° and rolled to the left before impacting the helipad. The main rotor 

blades contacted the helipad, followed by the left main landing gear and the fuselage. The 

helicopter descended out of view of the camera.

https://youtu.be/zeWIlTZZZro

The helicopter came to rest on its left side, on the helipad.



The four composite blades of the main rotor system fragmented and separated, spreading 

debris throughout the rooftop and down to the ground. The tail rotor and 90° gearbox 

separated and were found on the rooftop. The left main landing gear separated and remained 

near the attachment points of the fuselage.

https://youtu.be/6q_lNILAfbY



The NTSB investigation continues.

We will update this article when the NTSB releases more information.



An Approach So Awful, The Tower Controllers Ducked 
Out Of Fear
Mar 25, 2019 Richard N. Aarons | Business & Commercial Aviation 

This article appears in the April 2019 issue of Business & Commercial Aviation with the title “Distracted, 
Disoriented and Wrongly Determined.”

Four crewmembers and 47 of the 67 passengers on board a US-Bangla Airlines 
Bombardier Q400 died on March 12, 2018, when their scheduled flight crashed and 
burned at Tribhuvan International Airport (VNKT), Kathmandu, Nepal, while 
maneuvering for a VFR landing.

The Nepalese government convened an investigation commission (NAIC). Its findings 
are unusual and worthy of consideration:

The probable cause of the crash, said the commission, was “disorientation and a 
complete loss of situational awareness” on the part of the pilot. Contributing to this was 
his attempt to recover from a misaligned approach path by maneuvering “in a very 
dangerous and unsafe attitude.”

The landing “was completed in a sheer desperation” after the pilot sighted the runway at 
very close proximity and low altitude. He made no attempt to go around, even though a 
go-around was possible until “the last instant before touchdown on the runway.”



In short, psychological factors pushed the pilot to put the airplane on the ground regardless of how it got 

there, while steep experience and authority gradients prevented the copilot from intervening. What follows 

is largely from the Commission’s report.

US-Bangla Airlines Flight BS211 was a scheduled segment from Hazrat Shahjalal 
International Airport (VGHS), Dhaka, Bangladesh, to Tribhuvan International. The 
aircraft would overfly Bangladesh and Indian airspace en route to Nepal.

Ten minutes before the 0651 UTC takeoff, Dhaka Ground Control contacted the aircraft 
requesting its Bangladesh Air Defense Clearance (ADC) number — a recently imposed 
mandatory filing for all international outbound flights. The captain had not been briefed 
by his company about the requirement for an ADC number, so radio discussions ensued 
between the pilot, company ops and ground control.

Investigators later stated that the pilot’s vocal pitch and language during these exchanges 
indicated “he was agitated and experiencing high levels of stress.”

During the climb-out, the captain overheard a radio communication between company 
operations and another US-Bangla aircraft regarding the fuel onboard that flight. The 
Commission stated the captain engaged in unnecessary radio conversation with the 
operations staff without verifying whether the fuel message was meant for him.

According to the investigation, “The pilot’s vocal pitch and language used indicated that 
he was very much emotionally disturbed and experiencing high level of stress.”



The 52-year-old male pilot in command held an ATP with ratings in the Dash-8-400 and 
the ATR 72. He had accumulated 5,518 hr. total flying time with 2,824 hr. in type and 
667 hr. in the previous year. He had 15 hr. of rest before the accident flight. He served as 
a company instructor and check airman. He started his career in the military flying MiG 
fighters. In civilian life he flew commercial cargo operations and ultimately ended up 
with the passenger airline.
The 25-year-old copilot held a commercial license with experience in the Cessna 150 and 
a type rating in the Dash-8. She had accumulated a total of 390 hr., 240 hr. in type and 
131 hr. in the previous 90 days. Her rest period was “within limitations.”

Throughout the flight, said the commission, the captain engaged in a lengthy one-way 
conversation with the first officer “and made multiple unnecessary statements and 
comments against another colleague in the company who had questioned his reputation 
as an instructor.”

At 0832, the tower cleared US-Bangla BS211 to land on either Runway 2 or 20, but the aircraft again made an 
orbit to the right.

The commission reviewed the CVR transcript and concluded, “The captain seemed very 
much emotionally disturbed and stressed, because this conversation regarding the 
colleague was repeated several times during the flight. At times the captain even seemed 
to have an emotional breakdown . . . . This stress might have led him to smoke in the 
cockpit during the flight and this clearly was against the company SOPs. This state of 
mind with high degree of stress and emotions might have led him to all the procedural 
lapses that followed . . . .



“The captain was trying to perform his role as pilot flying and instructor coaching the 
first officer on various aspects of flying and operations environment in VNKT. These 
factors might have escalated his flight duty workload even further.”

The first officer was performing her flight duties on this route for the first time. The 
captain was familiar with the sector but had been in Ethiopia for training over the 
previous 24 days.

A full analysis of the approach is presented later, but here are the highlights:

At 0746:27, the crew began to prepare for its arrival into the VNKT area. While 
monitoring ATIS and performing other flight duties, said investigators, the pilots were 
busy “discussing their personal issues and worries.”

At 0748:59, the first officer reported MONDA at FL 240 to Kolkata Control and was 
instructed to report establishing contact with Kathmandu Control. Between contacts, the 
captain was showing the first officer how to set up the FMS, FGS and other avionics. He 
did this “with great passion, calmness and professional efficiency,” said the Commission. 
The captain then asked the first officer if she was comfortable with all he had explained, 
and she replied, “Yes, very comfortable, sir.”

The commission said it believes “that the captain was constantly trying to prove his 
professionalism and reputation as a competent trainer in front of a junior trainee during 
this flight.”

At 0752:04, the aircraft made initial contact with Kathmandu Control. At 0807:49, the 
first officer requested descent clearance, and Kathmandu cleared the aircraft to FL 160 
with an estimated approach time of 0826, which she acknowledged.

At 0810, the flight was handed off to Kathmandu Approach, and a minute later the 
approach controller instructed the aircraft to descend to 13,500 ft. and hold over GURAS 
(17 nm southwest). The crew inserted the GURAS hold in the FMS.

The reported weather at the time was VFR — 6,000 meters visibility; wind, 210 deg. at 6 
kt.; few clouds at 1,500 ft.; scattered clouds at 3,000 ft.; temperature 22C; and dew point 
10C. Elevation of Tribhuvan Airport is 4,390 ft. Its single runway — 2/20 — is 10,007 ft. 
long. MDA on the approach is 5,120 ft. (807 ft. AGL).

ATC instructed the aircraft to reduce speed and descend to 12,500 ft. Three minutes 
later, Approach instructed the aircraft to descend to 11,500 ft., and cleared it for the VOR 
RWY 2 approach, maintaining minimum approach speed.

Neither pilot remembered to cancel the HOLD previously entered into the FMS because 
they were still engaged in unnecessary conversation. Upon reaching GURAS, the aircraft 
turned left to enter the holding pattern. 



The captain noticed the excursion and made an immediate correction. (ATC was alerting 
the crew to the situation at the same time.) The captain selected the HDG mode and 
dialed in a heading of 027 deg. —  a 5-deg. intercept angle for the desired 202-deg. 
inbound radial to VNKT. The local wind was out of the west at 28 kt. The aircraft 
continued the approach in heading mode and crossed the 202-deg. radial at 7 DME. The 
aircraft then continued on the 027-deg. heading, thus deviating to the right (east) of the 
final approach course.

Although VMC prevailed, the crew never saw the airport as they passed it, ending up 2- 
to 3-nm northeast of the complex.  At 0827, Kathmandu Tower alerted the crew that the 
landing clearance was for Runway 2, but the aircraft seemed to be circling to Runway 20.

A minute later, the tower controller asked the crew of their intentions, to which the 
captain replied the flight would be  landing on Runway 2.

The aircraft then made an orbit to the right. So, the controller instructed the crew to join 
downwind for Runway 2 and report when sighting a Buddha Air aircraft that was on final 
for the runway.

However, instead of joining the downwind leg for Runway 2, the US-Bangla Q400 
continued its right turn to a westerly heading northwest of Runway 20. The controller 
instructed the aircraft to remain clear of Runway 20 and continue to hold at its present 
position because a Buddha Air aircraft was landing at Runway 2 (from the opposite side) 
at that time.

At 0832, the tower cleared US-Bangla BS211 to land on either Runway 2 or 20, but the 
aircraft again made an orbit to the right.

While continuing with the turn, the captain reported that he had the runway in sight and 
requested clearance to land. The tower controller cleared the aircraft to land. The aircraft 
continued to turn and approached very close to the threshold of Runway 20 on a 
westerly heading and unaligned with the runway.

At 0833:27, the tower controller became alarmed by the situation and canceled the 
landing clearance by saying, “Takeoff clearance canceled.” (He obviously misspoke.)

Within the next 15-20 sec., the aircraft pulled up in a westerly direction and turned left 
with a very high bank angle and overflew the western area of the domestic apron, 
continued on a southeasterly heading past the control tower and continued at a very low 
height over the domestic southern apron area and finally attempted to align with 
Runway 20 to land. (While the aircraft was heading toward the control tower, the 
controllers ducked out of fear that it would hit the tower building.)



“When the aircraft further turned toward the taxiway aiming for the runway through a 
right reversal turn, the tower controller made a halfhearted transmission by saying, 
‘BS211, I say again . . . ,’” said the commission.

At 0834, the aircraft touched down 1,700 meters from the threshold in a 15-deg. bank at 
a 25-deg. angle to the centerline. It then veered southeast off the runway through the 
inner perimeter fence along a rough downslope and finally stopped about 442 meters 
southeast of the touchdown point. The aircraft broke up into number of sections along 
the rough downslope before coming to a stop.

Some 2,800 kg (6,200 lb.) of fuel was on board at touchdown; fire broke out within 6 
sec. The commission concluded that most of the occupants would have survived the 
impact, but the immediate and rapidly spreading post-crash fire likely precluded the 
possibility of escape for most of those who died. The airport fire brigade vehicle 
movement was initiated within 16 sec. of impact.

Commission Analysis

Investigators looked to the CVR transcript to understand the final moments of the flight. 
The captain was flying throughout the approach and also communicating, thus 
increasing his workload.

At 0758:24, the captain told the first officer how to locate charts for the VNKT arrival. 
The commission believes that the captain did not have the proper charts in view at this 
time and that fact “could be interpreted as an indication that he was not adequately 
prepared for flight operation at that time.” Hence, the captain made a very short briefing 
on the arrival into VNKT while referring to the first officer’s charts.

The Commission concluded that most of the occupants would have survived the impact, but the immediate and 
rapidly spreading post-crash fire likely precluded the possibility of escape. 



“The captain never carried out a complete briefing on VNKT RWY 02 approach, which 
requires a very high degree of flight deck preparation, orders and understanding of the 
very challenging operations environment. This might indicate his complacency as he had 
performed this approach several times before and did not realize that the first officer was 
operating this flight for the first time.”

At 0759:05, the crew used the first officer’s charts to review the ROMEO STAR and 
several waypoints with altitude restrictions and the track to follow toward GURAS, the 
IAF. The crew failed to review the more important and complex approach chart in detail 
and conducted only a “very brief discussion” mentioning the procedure altitude of 8,900 
ft. at 9 DME and the obstacle clearance altitude for that particular segment of approach.

The captain directed the first officer to clip the approach charts on her side console, so 
he had no means of referring to the chart again while performing the approach as the 
pilot flying. Critical items such as minimum sector altitudes, final approach inbound 
course, type of approach, surrounding terrain with highest obstacle sectors, descent rate 
requirements, aircraft configuration schedule, speed control, stabilization criteria, 
missed approach point and procedure, minimum descent altitude and runway lighting 
etc. were never
reviewed.

“In summary,” said the commission, “the flight crew failed to conduct a complete 
approach briefing. The briefing they did conduct was unstructured and inconsistent. The 
first officer also made several statements that indicated she had an incorrect 
understanding of the procedures to follow during approach. Her confusion over the 
missed approach procedure was never resolved by the captain, asserting that he would 
brief the remaining items later.

“The commission concludes that as a result of the flight crew’s failure to complete the 
approach briefing as per the company SOPs, the captain and the first officer did not have 
a shared understanding of how the approach was to be managed and conducted. Both 
pilots failed to recognize their lack of compliance to prescribed procedures and threat 
identification techniques.”

Final Moments

The first officer reported GURAS at 11,500 ft. to ATC at 0821:06. The flight was cleared 
to continue. “This particular moment becomes the triggering factor for distraction and 
temporary confusion between the crew when the aircraft suddenly started entering the 
hold over GURAS as programmed in their FMS,” said investigators.



The pilots were surprised because they had not removed the HOLD instruction. The 
captain hurriedly selected the HDG mode to 027 deg. to intercept the final approach 
inbound track, thus overriding the autopilot FMS LNAV guidance. This action on the 
FGCP caused the loss of FMS Auto Flight Final Approach lateral navigation guidance 
capability.

The ADC registered strong westerly winds from 270 deg. to 280 deg. at an average of 28 
kt., pushing the aircraft flight path toward the east.

The flight was now high on the vertical descent profile. (The captain was distracted, and 
the aircraft had gone to pitch hold mode reversion due to heading selection in HSI.)

The captain commanded descent inputs in the FGCP pitch wheel to approximately 1,300 
fpm to initiate descent.

Per the airline’s SOPs for stabilized approach criteria, the airplane should have been in 
full landing configuration at this time with the landing checklist completed.

The captain requested initial flaps 5 at 15 DME after crossing the IAF. At 0822:5, the 
captain asked for flaps 15 and the landing checklist while crossing 13 DME. During the 
landing checklist challenge and response sequence, the captain confirmed the landing 
gears were down by stating “gears down three greens” without checking to confirm their 
position. Actually, the gears were not down and locked. This was overlooked by the first 
officer as well.

At 0823:41, the first officer reported to ATC that the flight was on a 10-mi. final; the CVR 
recorded the landing gear unsafe tone sounding continuously and ignored by both pilots.

At 0823:45, the flight was handed off to VNKT Tower and initial contact with the tower 
was established at 0824:39. The flight was cleared to continue the approach, and the 
gear unsafe tone continued to sound in the cockpit.

At 8 DME, the captain erroneously set the minimums at 4,688 ft. instead of 4,950 ft. as 
published. (The radio altimeter was set to 629 ft. to receive the “100 ft. above” auto-
callouts above the correct minimums.)

The captain requested the landing checklist again and the first officer affirmed that it 
had already been completed even though the landing gear unsafe tone was still active. 
During the final descent, the first officer called out the altitude constraints for the 
segments and kept prompting the captain that they were 500 ft. to 600 ft. high on
profile.



“With the noisy flight deck — the landing gear unsafe tone was active — and in an 
already rushed situation where the crew was dealing with correcting a significant vertical 
flight path deviation, the pilots seemed so preoccupied that the interception of the final 
approach course of 022 deg. by the aircraft in HDG mode at 7 DME went undetected by 
both pilots and hence the flight path deviation started toward the east of final course. No 
attempt was made to rearm or reengage the FMS LNAV mode or select the VOR mode,” 
said the Commission.

The CVR revealed that the captain was having difficulty in understanding what the first 
officer was saying due to the high noise levels inside the flight deck. Exhibiting his 
confirmation bias, the captain again requested the landing checklist for the third time, 
where the first officer again confirmed that it had already been completed regardless of 
the landing gear unsafe tone still stridently audible.

At 0825:25, the aircraft arrived at the MAP in VMC with a descent rate near 1,700 fpm 
and the aircraft well east of the final approach course. The EGPWS announced “Sink 
Rate” and “Too Low Gears” callouts. The tower reported winds from 220 deg. at 7 kt. 
with a tailwind component of 6 kt. and cleared the flight to land on Runway 2.

No attempt was made by the flight crew to carry out a standard missed approach 
procedure, regardless of the fact that they had not identified the airport environment, 
nor had they met the stabilization criteria for IFR operations. (The pilots had good 
visibility of the ground environment, but had not located the airport.)

At this point, the first officer realized the landing gear was not down and initiated its 
extension under the instruction of the captain. The captain requested the landing 
checklist for the fourth time. Further conversation between the pilots “led to an 
ambiguous expectation of when they would acquire visual contact with the runway 
environment.” By this time, the aircraft had already flown past the eastern side of the 
runway and was northeast of the airport. 

The captain continued to assume that the landing runway was ahead of them, though it 
was now behind them. Autopilot was disengaged at 1.1 nm east of the VOR.

At 0827:30, a VNKT tower trainee controller contacted BS211 seeking the crew’s 
intentions. Noting that the airplane had passed Runway 2, the controller issued a 
clearance to land on Runway 20. The captain replied that he thought he was continuing 
for Runway 2.

At this moment the tower trainee controller was replaced by the tower duty controller. 
Based on the airplane’s visual flight position northeast of the airport, he cleared the 
flight to land on Runway 20 believing that was the pilot’s intention. Shortly thereafter, 
the duty controller was replaced by the tower supervisor.



While the crew struggled to find the runway, the flight continued northeast. The CVR 
recorded continuous EGPWS warnings with various flight parameters exceeded. At 
around 6 DME northeast of the VOR the captain started maneuvering the aircraft on a 
right-hand circle while sighting the rising terrain ahead of them. During the maneuver, 
the aircraft descended to as low as 175 ft. AGL with bank angles of up to 35 to 40 deg., 
triggering various EGPWS alerts and warnings.

“Desperate to find the landing runway and still unaware of their position, compounded 
by threatening high terrain all around and multiple EGPWS warnings,” said 
investigators, “there was a complete loss of situational awareness on the part of the flight 
crew at this stage.”

At 0829:02, VNKT tower asked the crew about their intention and tried to reconfirm the 
aircraft was still VFR. The captain affirmed and radioed his intention to land on Runway 
2. Based on the aircraft’s current position, the controller cleared the flight to join the 
right-hand downwind for Runway 2.

At this time, the tower also was handling another aircraft —  Buddha 282 —  which was 
on a 2-mi. final for Runway 2 and had been cleared to land. This traffic information was 
passed on to BS211, cautioning the pilots again that there was landing traffic on short 
final for Runway 2 sequenced before them. The disoriented Dash-8 captain 
acknowledged the report.

Rather than join the downwind as assigned, BS211 flew toward Runway 20.  The tower 
controller warned BS211 not to proceed toward Runway 20 because of possible conflict 
with Buddha 282. Flight BS211 was cleared to perform an orbit at its current position. 
However, BS211 had already flown past the threshold of Runway 20 — 3.2 DME north of 
the VOR — on a heading of 280 deg. at 6,000 ft. The Q400 continued to climb to 6,500 
ft. when the captain again started maneuvering the aircraft on a steep right-hand circle. 
He was constantly talking to the first officer and, at this time, admitted to her that he had 
made a mistake.

During this circle, bank angles reached up to 45 deg. with descent rates over 2,000 fpm 
triggering the EGPWS warnings again.

While the Dash-8 was maneuvering, the CVR recorded another local pilot from the 
ground raising concern to ATC that the Dash-8 pilots seemed to have been disoriented 
and lost and also informed ATC that the surrounding visibility toward nearby hillsides 
was marginal. The airport visibility at this time was still 6,000 meters. Until this 
moment the CVR recorded no statements from either Q400 pilot that they had located 
the runway although they were maneuvering in the vicinity of the Runway 20 threshold.

At 0831:52, the tower issued a landing clearance to the flight for either runway. The 
Buddha Air flight had landed and was clear of the runway.



The captain replied that he would like to land on Runway 20 now although neither pilot 
had the runway in sight. The aircraft now exited the orbit and flew to the southwest on a 
heading of 160 deg. at an altitude of 5,400 ft.

“Both pilots were anxiously trying to locate the runway,” said investigators. “The CVR 
revealed the pilots made several statements which reflected that they had now 
completely lost their orientation of the runway, but this was not communicated to ATC.”

At 0832:34, the flight was just northeast and abeam of the threshold of Runway 20 on a 
southeasterly heading. The tower controller advised the crew “to turn right” in an 
attempt to assist the pilots find Runway 20.

At 0832:43, the first officer sighted the threshold of Runway 20 at their three o’clock 
position. The airplane was at 5,500 ft., some 4.1 DME from the VOR and approximately 
1.8 nm from the threshold of Runway 20.

“Though it appeared unmanageable to land the aircraft on Runway 20 from that  current 
position, attitude and altitude, for some undetermined reason, the captain initiated 
desperate maneuvers in an attempt to put the aircraft on ground and requested landing 
clearance again affirming that he had the runway in sight now,” said the Commission. 
“The flight directors were set to standby at this point and the captain reconfirmed the 
landing checklist was done again for the sixth time now. Still to his confusion he 
requested the first officer to give him the heading bug of 022 deg. and set the same on 
her side, though the practical setting would have been 202 deg. for Runway 20.

“The FDR data shows that the aircraft overflew the threshold of RWY 20 at 450 ft. AGL 
on a westerly heading of 255 deg. and left bank angles of 40 deg. at an IAS of 150 kt. 
Distressed and panicked by the captain’s engagements, the first officer made no callouts 
for go-around or to discontinue the maneuver.

“At 0833:27, spotting the aircraft carrying out reckless and irresponsible maneuvers at 
very close proximity of the ground within the airport periphery and alarmed by the 
situation, the tower controller hastily canceled the landing clearance by saying ‘Takeoff 
clearance canceled.’ At that critical moment ATC was confused sighting the unusual and 
abnormal maneuver of the aircraft and could not be assertive. The captain still requested 
a clearance in a calm and content tone. But the aircraft was flying on improper attitude.”

The EGPWS warnings “Bank Angle” and “Sink Rate” sounded continuously in the 
cockpit while the aircraft overflew the airport’s domestic apron, and cleared the hangar 
side and domestic passenger terminal by barely 45 ft.

Tower controllers viewed all the airplane’s “unusual maneuvers . . . and out of fear, 
ducked down below their table level.”



The airplane missed the tower and overflew the parking area  before making a right 
reversal turn to align more or less with the runway.  The Dash-8 impacted on its right 
main landing gear 1,700 meters past the Runway 20 threshold on the left side of the 
centerline. The aircraft hit the runway at an IAS of 127 kt. and a heading of 190 deg., and 
immediately departed the runway surface “in an uncontrollable manner, further 
impacting the inner periphery fence, descending downslope and finally bursting into 
flames.”

Psychological Aspects

Management and most fellow pilots opined that the captain was a very friendly, soft-
spoken and gentle person. He was levelheaded, they said, and would behave nicely with 
his colleagues and junior staff. He was well-spoken and would not use foul language in 
conversations. His attitude and behavior toward company, authority, colleagues and 
juniors was good and he was liked by most of them. He was also a very good teacher and 
instructor. Most of the students were satisfied with his teaching techniques. The captain 
never consumed alcohol, was happily married and had a teenage son.

The commission said it seemed the captain was obsessively worried over a female 
colleague’s criticism of his competency. Most of the conversation in the cockpit during 
the accident flight was directed toward and aimed at the woman who apparently was 
telling others that the captain was not a good instructor and he could not teach properly.

“This talk seemed to hurt the captain very deeply as he really took pride in his teaching 
skills,” said the commission. “He was telling the first officer about how this particular 
talk had hurt him a lot, so much so that though he loved the company and liked the 
environment around, he would give notice for resignation from the company because
of the alleged behavior of the female colleague.

“The effect of stress was evident with the fact that he was irritable, tensed, moody and 
aggressive at various times,” said the commission.  He also seemed to be fatigued and 
tired due to lack of sleep the previous night as well as due to the stress he was harboring. 
“The captain’s impulsive and inappropriate behavior, or concentration, incomplete task 
management — as not completing the before-landing checklist, mentioning all three 
green for landing gear down in spite of not actually all three being green, repeatedly 
asking for before-landing checklist in an obsessive manner — was all  due to the 
excessive stress he was harboring.

“The captain seemed very insecure about his future as he had planned to resign from this 
company. He said he did not have any job and did not know what he was going to do for 
living in the future. The future financial insecurity may have augmented his stress.”



The captain was engaged in unnecessary conversation that was beyond the norms and 
violating the company SOPs, concluded the commission.  This distraction, as well as 
stress, may have led to an unstabilized approach, poor speed control, failure to correctly 
configure the aircraft and failure to assure the checklists were completed.

“He had many opportunities to correct the maneuvers, if he had followed the SOPs 
during the descent and approach phases,” said the commission. “It seems that the 
captain was trying to prove to the first officer that he was indeed a good pilot, good 
teacher and competent in flying skills, and would be able to safely land the aircraft in any 
adverse situation.

“The captain’s decision to land the aircraft at any cost after sighting the runway at a very 
close proximity, way off the final approach course, at very low altitude, and the decision 
for not initiating a go-around even after realizing that flight was not stabilized, is very 
poor decision making on the part of the PIC.”



Fatal Fatigue: US Night Air Ambulance Helicopter Loss of Control – In-flight 
Accident (Air Methods AS350B2 N127LN, Wisconsin)
On 26 April 2018 Air Methods Corporation (AMC) Airbus Helicopter AS350B2 air 

ambulance helicopter N127LN was destroyed in a Loss of Control – In-flight (LOC-I) accident 

near  Hazelhurst , Wisconsin. The pilot and two medical personnel aboard were fatally 

injured. The helicopter, operating as ‘Ascension Spirit Air‘, was on a night repositioning 

flight after two prior inter-hospital patient transfer flights with a refuelling stop.  The US 

National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has issued a simple probable cause:

The pilot’s loss of helicopter control as a result of fatigue during cruise flight at night.



Wreckage of Air Methods (AMC) Airbus Helicopters AS350B2 Air Ambulance N127LN near Hazelhurst, WI (Credit: 
NTSB)

The Final Flights and the Pilot’s Immediate History
The NTSB explain in their safety investigation report (issued 23 September 2020) 

that…

The accident flight was the [34 year old] pilot’s first flight after a week-long family vacation in 

Florida. …the pilot had a sleep opportunity of more than 9 hours during each of the 6 nights 

before the accident.   The trip [home the day before]…involved [a flight, a 4 hour drive and] a 

change in time zones.

AMC pilots work 12-hour shifts, with a 7 days on and 7 days off, then 7 nights on and 7 

nights off pattern.  In this case the pilot was resuming the roster with a night shift.

The pilot’s wife reported no issues with the pilot falling asleep or staying asleep.   The pilot’s wife 

thought that he went to sleep between about 2100 and 2130.   The time that the pilot awoke on 

the day of the accident was not known.   The pilot’s wife stated that, before going on duty, he 

would normally rest and sleep during the day…

The pilot’s wife had also been an AMC pilot for 10 years and was then a pilot at the same 

base.  She was resuming the roster with a day shift and the implication was she had left 

home before her husband awoke.  Contemporary press reports suggest the family had two 

young daughters.  It is explained that the pilot:

…took the kids to daycare so that he could rest for his night shift. He went to the grocery store in 

the morning and then went home to rest. At about 4:00PM he took his daughter to a doctor’s 

appointment.

She saw her husband when he arrived at work for the night shift and thought that he had 

arrived about 45 minutes early for his shift.



He arrived early because he was already in town for the doctor’s appointment and his wife 

had turned down the flight to Madison, Wisconsin (see below) for duty time reasons.

They did the shift change together, and she noted nothing unusual about her husband. Cellular 

telephone records indicated his activity from 0725 to 2057 with three extended breaks in activity 

(greater than 60 minutes) from 0923 to 1118, 1431 to 1556, and 1741 to 2040.

Of these three periods the first could overlap with the grocery shopping and the third does 

overlap with flying (see below).  Beyond one witness statement and analysis of phone 

records the NTSB human factors analysis does not reconstruct the pilot’s daytime activities 

further.

The NTSB explain the helicopter and crew had…

…transported a patient from the Howard Young Medical Center Heliport  (60WI), Woodruff, 

Wisconsin, to the Merrill Municipal Airport  (RRL), Merrill, Wisconsin, departing about 1759 and 

arriving about 1819.

The helicopter then departed from RRL about 1832 with another patient aboard and landed at 

the UW Hospital and Clinics Heliport (WS27), Madison, Wisconsin, about 1937. The patient was 

offloaded, and the helicopter departed WS27 about 2028 for refueling at Dane County Regional 

Airport  (MSN), Madison, Wisconsin, arriving about 2037.

The total flight time for the first three flights was 94 minutes and occurred over a period of 

about 2 ½ hours.   About 2104, the pilot radioed the operator to report that the helicopter was 

ready to depart MSN for 60WI.

According to information from the helicopter’s on-board Appareo Vision 1000 recorder (which 

records image, audio, and parametric data), the pilot conducted a preflight of the helicopter 

with the engine operating, and no anomalies were detected.



Vision 1000 (Credit: Appareo)

Noticeably:

Yawning and sighs were heard. The pilot requested clearance to 60WI and departed about 2107.  

About 1 minute later, the pilot asked if the medical crew was “alright back there,” and one of the 

medical crewmembers responded “yup.” One of the medical crewmembers then stated, “question  

is are you alright up there?” The pilot responded, “uhhh think so. Good enough to get us home at  

least.”

About 2200, a medical crewmember stated, “I could go to sleep,” and the pilot responded, “yeah 

that’d be nice huh.”

This was followed by a couple of radio calls then:

After about 2215, the medical crewmembers started non-aviation-related conversations [mostly 

about hunting], and the pilot was last heard during the conversations about 2229.

Between about 2215 and 2242, the pilot made movements including raising his left arm near his  

helmet (which was mounted with night vision goggles), flexing his legs, adjusting his seating 

position, and changing cyclic position.

About 2243, the helicopter was operating in level flight at an airspeed of 126 knots and an 

altitude of at 2,280 ft mean sea level (msl).



The artificial horizon indicator then showed the initiation of a right bank. The pilot’s right 

forearm started moving along with the cyclic to the right, and the artificial horizon indicated a 

bank between 10° and 15°. The roll rate to the right appeared to increase rapidly, and the pilot’s  

body, right forearm, and right hand (which was holding the base of the cyclic grip) appeared to 

move along with the increased roll rate.



A medical crewmember stated “what are we doin’?” twice. The pilot’s head moved to the right 

and could no longer be seen in the image, and the right bank increased to more than 90°.

A medical crewmember stated, in a strained voice, “Ohhh [expletive].” The crewmember then 

shouted “what?” and the pilot’s name. The other medical crewmember also shouted the pilot’s 

name.

The pilot’s head returned to the image and moved to the left. His right hand still gripped the 

cyclic. The artificial horizon showed an inverted indication, and the torque gauge indicated a 

value beyond the red line. The emergency locator transmitter light illuminated while the pilot’s 

head and upper body moved to the left. Sounds similar to a rotor high rpm horn and a grunt 

were recorded, along with a medical crewmember shouting the pilot’s name. The recording 

contained no response from the pilot when the crewmembers shouted his name.

The artificial horizon indicated a right roll of more than 270° with a pitch-down attitude, the 

altimeter indicated 1,900 ft msl, and the airspeed indicator showed 98 knots. The last two 

frames showed that the pilot’s head and upper body had moved to the right and that the 



airspeed indicator displayed 70 knots, the artificial horizon indicated a 90° left bank with a 

pitch-down attitude, and the altimeter indicated 1,825 ft msl.

The helicopter wreckage was found 3.5 hours later.



Wreckage of Air Methods (AMC) Airbus Helicopters AS350B2 Air Ambulance N127LN near Hazelhurst, WI (Credit: 
NTSB)

No adverse medical history or toxicology findings were recorded in the brief medical 

factual report.
Air Methods Procedures, Safety Management, Reporting of Fatigue and 
Pre-Flight Risk Assessment
The NTSB Human Factors Factual Report contains a description of the Air 

Methods’ voluntary Safety Management System (SMS), fatigue related procedures 

and fatigue safety promotion material.  The company Operations Manual stated that:

Pilots will report for duty with the appropriate rest and be capable of performing their assigned 

flight crewmember duties. At any time a flight crewmember becomes medically or physically 

unfit for duty they shall vocally notify the appropriate aviation manager, self-ground and 

comply with the requirements of CFR 61.53.

61.53 is strictly the requirement for “prohibition on operations during medical deficiency” 

rather than a specific fatigue regulation.



However, there is no mention in the NTSB Human Factors Factual Report of whether Air 

Methods, a company with over 450 aircraft and flying 150,000 hours per annum, 

had ever recorded any fatigue related reports in their SMS.  In an appended interview the 

pilot’s wife stated that in her experience flying for AMC:

Pilots could call a “time out” if they were exhausted. Their current base was a slower base and 

they did less time outs than when at their previous base. There were no repercussions if a pilot 

called in fatigued. She could not remember if her husband had ever called a “time out” but she 

was sure at some point over a 10-year career that he had. Pilots were never pressured to take a 

flight when they were tired or fatigued, or if there was marginal or questionable weather.

Neither she nor her husband had concerns about working the night shift; it was only 7 nights a 

month. She thought a pilot would call a time out before they felt tired in flight. Her husband 

never mentioned falling asleep or difficulty staying awake when flying. There was no guidance 

from Air Methods about what to do if a pilot became tired during a flight.

The local AMC manager (a former H145 pilot) commented in interview that:

What shift a pilot worked was not necessarily related to vacations. A pilot might have to work 

harder to transition back to a night shift after being on vacation. There was no specific guidance  

as to how to handle off duty time outside the requirement that a pilot could not be scheduled for  

duty when they were off duty. It was the pilot’s responsibility to show up rested for their shift.

There were no repercussions if a pilot was fatigued. The pilot would be told to go home and get 

rest and let the company know when they could return. He had never called in fatigued 

personally but he was aware of a few instances where a pilot had done that. They were so few 

and far between he could not recall a story about a pilot calling in fatigued.

If a pilot was fatigued during a flight, he would call the aviation manager, let them know where 

he was, that the flight was finished, and he felt tired. The company would make arrangements to  



stay the night and get another pilot to relocate the aircraft. He never had a conversation with a 

pilot about fatigue midshift, only if there was a delay that would extend the pilot’s duty day.

There was no real guidance from the company about fatigue but there was a bed in the office if 

a pilot felt tired or the pilot should step up and say something and stop that flight from coming 

forward.

Asked if a pilot feeling fatigued in flight or nodding off would be considered a reportable event, 

he thought it could be [our emphasis added].

Remarkably, at the time of the interview (September 2019 – 17 months after the accident) 

he stated:

The company had not put out any information since the accident related to fitness for duty. 

Pilots at the company had heard that the investigation had moved towards human factors, but 

nothing was being discussed because it was speculation.

In contrast and unremarked by NTSB, during one of that evening’s flights the medical 

personnel stated:

19:03:52.2 MC2: what annoys the # [redacted] outta me about that is ya have the fricken’ right to  

give yourself a rest period. You can say ‘I’m not takin’ anything for X amount of hours – don’t call  

me.’

19:04:05.7 MC1: everybody’s afraid to pull the trigger on that.

19:04:23.0 MC1: the funniest thing I find – in all the training we do – especially with Air Methods 

– it’s – ya don’t feel fit to fly – ya don’t fly. so if ya call yourself off from flying – after calling in 

four times here – they start penalizing you by writing you up. Five is a written – six is a possible 

suspension – seven’s definitely a suspension – eight you’re terminated within a rolling twelve 

month period.

19:04:11.5 MC2: got ya



19:04:12.0 MC1: and a doctor’s note does not even count. you gotta apply for family medical 

leave and get it cleared that way to have it taken off – that’s the only way – otherwise that’s how 

it sits.

19:04:21.0 MC2: that’s stupid.

19:04:21.7   MC1: so tell me if I don’t feel good enough to fly – how I’m supposed to keep me safe 

and everybody else safe when you’re gunna penalize me for it.

The pilot made no comment during this conversation.

In accordance with 14 CFR 135.617 Air Methods has a Pre-Flight Risk Analysis (PFRA) 

Program.  Its intent was stated as “to assist in reducing incidents and accidents” and “to 

assist pilots in identifying, assessing, managing risks and ensuring they are mitigated, 

accepted or declined”. Their iPad PFRA Tool was “designed to provide the Pilot and the OCC 

with a robust method of assessing the risk for each flight.”

Information (risks) inputted to the PFRA by the pilot related to (1) pilot and crewmember, such as  

pilot experience as single pilot, at current base/program, and using night vision goggles; (2) 

aircraft, such as MELs and aircraft weight within 200 lbs of max HOGE; and (3) flight request, 

such as if crew had flown more than 3 flights during the shift, weather and turbulence, flight 

taking place between 0100 and 0500, planned completion time of flight will take more than 4 

hours and planned completion time of flight past 12th hour of duty day. Each risk was weighted 

and factored into the overall score…

The local AMC manager commented that:

He did not think there was anything in the preflight risk assessment that consider a flight for a 

pilot that was coming on shift after being on vacation but there was consideration given if a 

pilot had been on shift for several days in a row; he thought that would move them up to the 

next level. There was consideration given if a pilot had been off duty for 60 days or more.



PFRAs are sent to the company Operational Control Centre (OCC) in Englewood, 

Colorado for verification, a check of relevant weather data and approval/rejection before 

the flight commences.

https://youtu.be/jOXzTe1EX4Y

The OCC may request a call with the pilot prior to their decision.

The PFRA for the accident flight had a total score of 6 (low risk) and received an “Approved-OCC” 

response at 1727 on April 26, 2018.

The NTSB do not comment on either the effectiveness or indeed the potential unintended 

consequences of a tool that gives a low risk score to a flight that suffered a fatal accident.  

Nor do they comment that the approval was prior to the first of multiple sectors to conduct 

two tasks and was given 5.25 hours before the accident occurred.  Similar issues were 

observed in this case study: HEMS A109S Night Loss of Control Inflight
Our Observations
Fatigue is often difficult to determine in fatal accidents.  In this case the pilot was adjusting 

to a night shift after a week of leave.  The evidence suggests the pilot most likely had 

adequate rest the night before, did have opportunity at least to rest during the daytime 

and had undertaken some relatively standard taskings prior to the accident.  Here the 

presence of a recording system provided some evidence from recorded crew statements 

and this, and the absence of any medical data that might have otherwise indicated a pilot 

incapacitation, appears to have been sufficient for the NTSB probable cause determination.

It is however disappointing that none of the established scientific tools for assessing 

fatigue risk were not used during the investigation.  For example the UK Air Accidents 

Investigation Branch (AAIB) in their report into an Airbus A319 that lost both engine fan 



cowlings used a Health and Safety Executive (HSE) 2006 fatigue and risk index tool to model 

the likely fatigue of the maintenance personnel involved.

While the pair of interviews recorded presented suggests that pilots could and did turn 

down flights when they felt fatigued without any adverse consequences and that fatigue 

was actually rare, it does not appear that NTSB examined actual safety reports to verify 

what data the operator’s SMS had gathered on fatigue concerns.

It is startling that 17 months after the accident there was reportedly no specific extra 

emphasis on fitness for duty within the operator.  Nor are any safety actions reported by 

NTSB or recommendations made.  After a non-fatal fixed wing night air ambulance 

accident (Fatigue Featured in Anchorage Alaska Air Ambulance Accident) the pilot sensibly 

discussed the idea of a pre-flight personal wellness check.

 Not for the first time   a pre-flight risk assessment score card proved useless in even 

highlighting an accident flight as being an elevated risk.  These scoring systems are 

typically uncalibrated and their effectiveness is rarely monitored, while giving the illusion of 

managing risk.

One might also wonder if hospitals are unnecessarily requesting patient transfers after 

dark.



Wreckage of Air Methods (AMC) Airbus Helicopters AS350B2 Air Ambulance N127LN near Hazelhurst, WI (Credit: 
NTSB)



US Air Ambulance Near Miss with Zip Wire and High ROD Impact at High 
Density Altitude (Trans Aero MedEvac HEMS Airbus AS350B2 N894NA)
On 29 September 2018 Airbus Helicopters AS350B2 air ambulance N894NA of Trans 

Aero (dba Trans Aero MedEvac) was damaged in a landing accident, caught spectacularly 

on video, at the Ski Apache ski resort in southern New Mexico, on the slopes of Sierra 

Blanca mountains.  The pilot and two medical personnel on board were uninjured.

Stills from Video of Trans Aero Air Ambulance Airbus AS350B2 N894NA Accident at Ski Apache, near Ruidoso, 
New Mexico (Credit: Video Pete Hildebrand)

The Accident Flight
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued in January 2021) that the aircraft was inbound to collect a patient at a landing 

site at 9,793 ft AMSL.

NTSB statements from the pilot and medical personnel onboard indicate they originally 

anticipated collecting the patent from  Sierra Blanca Regiona l   Airport (SRR), Ruidoso, New 

Mexico (a lower but still significant 6,814 ft AMSL).  One of the medical personnel on 

board recount that:

Enroute, while going over the mountain, there was a quick discussion between the crew 

regarding the density altitude of the landing zone due to the high altitude. Also, the crew was 



trying to contact the Ski Apache ground personnel but they were not able to attain to reach them  

until there were in the area of the landing zone.

The pilot (aged 53, with 16,818 flying hours experience, 3526 on type)…

…decided to conduct an eastbound reconnaissance over the  landing site to scan for obstacles. 

He saw two cables in front and below the helicopter ‘s flightpath and  initiated a go-around.

It was only during this reconnaissance that they had made radio contract with the 

ground.  These cables were in fact the ‘Palmer‘ zip wires at the resort.

Ski Apache Landing Site (Credit: Site Procedures via NTSB)

It is not clear if the zip wires were in use, although the resort’s procedures are to halt their 

use when a helicopter was called.  A UAE SAR AW139 did crash on 29 Dec 2018 after a zip 

wire strike.



Ski Apache Palmer Zip Wire Video 2016 (Credit:
Kellen Vaughan)

Oddly, part of the drill for preparing the landing site was to place thin orange tape on the 

ground under the zip wires in the hope this would be seen by the inbound pilot.

Exemplar Orange Ribbon Ski Apache Landing Site (Credit: Site Procedures via NTSB)

The NTSB don’t elaborate further on the near miss or the landing site but go on to say the 

pilot….



…added power to clear the cables, and once the tail cleared the cables, he  lowered the collective 

due to a slight drop in the main rotor speed. As he continued the go-around, he  initiated a 180º 

left turn to attempt an approach to the landing site.

The pilot stated wind was “5 knots and variable inside the valley. My approach was now 

slightly faster than normal”.

He was asked why he decided to turn the helicopter versus completing the go-around, he stated 

that he looked towards the east at their current heading and saw a tree that would not be ideal 

for an emergency landing site if they lost engine power. He could not further explain why he 

decided to turn the helicopter and in hind sight, he would have continued the go-around.

During the westward approach and while the helicopter was about 20 ft above ground level, he 

raised the collective to reduce the descent rate, and the main rotor speed subsequently decayed.  

He felt that, due to the “faster than normal” descent rate, he would not be able to cushion the 

landing.

Before touchdown, a medical crewmember spotted an elevated steel barrier cable below the 

helicopter, and the pilot made a 90º left turn to avoid a tail rotor strike.

The helicopter subsequently touched down hard, bounced, rotated about 180º 

counterclockwise over the barrier cable, slid down a  [c 25 ft] embankment, and came to rest 

upright.



Video of Trans Aero Air Ambulance Airbus AS350B2 N894NA Accident at Ski Apache, near Ruidoso, New Mexico 
(Credit: Pete Hildebrand)

The operator estimated the weight at the time was 4,871 lbs (2,209 kg) and reported the 

damage as…

Landing gear spread, dents on tail boom, lower vertical stabilizer bent, ground impact damage 

to one main rotor blade near tip. …there were no preaccident mechanical failures or 

malfunctions with the helicopter that would have precluded normal operation.






Trans Aero Air Ambulance Airbus AS350B2 N894NA Lower Vertical Stabiliser Damage (Credit: FAA via NTSB)

Trans Aero Air Ambulance Airbus AS350B2 N894NA Fuselage Damage (Credit: FAA via NTSB)

The helicopter was recovered by road.
NTSB Safety Investigation
The pilot reported that, during his preflight preparation, he did not calculate the hover-in-

ground-effect value, the hover out-of-ground-effect value, or the density altitude for the 

designated landing site.



However, it appears that at that time the crew were expecting to collect the patient 

from Sierra Blanca Regional Airport, so any pre-flight performance calculations would have 

needed to be repeated.  He did calculate the fuel needed for the sector there and then to El 

Paso, Texas, and confirmed that with the estimated patient weight that the aircraft would 

remain within gross weight.

He added that the accident flight was his second flight in a high-altitude, mountainous 

environment and that most of his flight hours were accumulated at sea level [note: mostly 

offshore flying].

Procedures had been in place for air ambulance operations at Ski Apache since February 

2016. The FAA reported that the pilot…

…was not aware nor briefed of the procedures for landing in the designated helicopter landing 

zone  [nor] aware of the zipline wire obstacles near the landing zone.

At the time of the accident, the density altitude for the landing site was calculated by the 

FAA as over 12,000 ft.

The more experience of the medical personnel on board commented to NTSB that:

He felt crew resource management [CRM] skills and procedures were lacking, prior to and during  

the accident flight. He believed that there should be a more formal safety brief prior to takeoff 

that covered flight plans, aircraft performance, potential hazards and the pre-landing process. 

He felt that the operation’s aviation safety is self-directed and lacking when it comes to base and  

company culture assimilation.

NTSB Probable Cause
The pilot’s failure to maintain the proper descent rate during landing.

Contributing to the accident were  the pilot’s failure to conduct preflight performance 

calculations, which resulted in his operating the helicopter in high-density altitude conditions, 

and his lack of experience in high-altitude, mountainous flying.



Its noticeable the NTSB have focused purely on aircraft performance and ignored the wider 

planning and landing site issues.  In contrast to another recent helicopter accident we 

examined (Grand Canyon Air Tour Tragic Tailwind Landing Accident), as this was non-fatal, 

the depth of investigation and thus the overt safety learning in the actual NTSB final report 

is limited.
Safety Actions
Trans Aero believes that the aircraft was at to high of weight for operations at that altitude. We 

have changed our policy and will not operate AS35082 in a medical configuration above 6,000′ 

MSL. We have also required pilots to check and note the IGE and OGE performance of the 

aircraft prior to departure.

Safety Resources
The European Safety Promotion Network – Rotorcraft (ESPN-R) / EHEST Leaflet 

 HE7 :     Techniques for   Helicopter Operations in Hilly and Mountainous Terrain 

https://www.easa.europa.eu/community/sites/default/files/2020-06/
Rotorcraft%20Cable%20Collisions%20Animation-web.mp4



Fire-Fighting AS350 Hydraulics Accident: Dormant Miswiring (Helibravo 
Airbus AS350B3 D-HAUO)
On 31 May 2020, Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 D-HAUO, operated in Portugal by Helibravo – 

 Aviaç ã o (leased from Meravo), crashed shortly after uplifting water during a fire-fighting training 

flight.  One of the two occupants received minor injuries and the other was unharmed.  

Investigators uncovered a latent maintenance error that had inexplicably remained undetected 

for 16 years, despite numerous opportunities to detect it.

Impact Sequence: Helibravo Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 D-HAUO During Fire-Fighting Training (Credit: GPIAAF)

The Accident Flight

The Portuguese accident investigation agency, GPIAAF, say in their safety 

investigation report (issued on 23 December 2020) that the training session 

was the day before the local fire season commenced.  The aircraft had recently 

arrived from Germany (where base maintenance was conducted).  Dual 

controls were temporarily fitted for the instructor seated in the left-hand seat.



The removable flight controls allows full aircraft control on its three axis and 

the engine control as well, however it is not equipped with additional control 

systems for bucket opening or releasing, hydraulic system cut-off or other 

specific mission functions, designed only to be controlled by the pilot sitting 

on the right.

The standardization training was to include several water collections and 

releases in a mountain training area that the instructor had used twice before 

that day.  This was the first flight together of these two pilots.  They only had 

headsets “as the intercom system of their helmets was not compatible with the 

aircraft” (for reasons that are not elaborated).

The instructor pilot and the pilot had, respectively, a total of 2992 and 2984 

hours of flight experience, of which 1451 and 1701 were performed on the type.

After 4 successful drops the instructor “decided to take over the aircraft’s 

controls and demonstrate to the pilot the water scooping and take-off 

procedure”.

With the Bambi Bucket filled with water, while starting the transition flight 

(from hover), the helicopter initiated a leftward rotation and the instructor pilot 

tried unsuccessfully to counteract immediately applying RH pedal to maintain 

the heading. The instructor pilot mentioned that he needed to apply unusual 

force in the controls and there was no appropriate response from the 

helicopter.

After having made a circular descent of approximately 360º, the bucket was 

dragged through the vegetation, forcing the helicopter into a deeper nose 

down attitude and crashed.



Flight of Helibravo Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 D-HAUO During Fire-Fighting Training (Credit: GPIAAF)

The underslung bucket was not jettisoned by the right-hand pilot before 

impact.

The helicopter was destroyed by the ground impact that occurred with a 

significant nose down attitude and on its left side, breaking the front skid 

cross support, deforming the lower cabin area and cockpit top, injuring the 

instructor pilot in the head.  The main rotor blades were destroyed when 

touching the ground with high energy…

The helicopter came to rest on its side and both crew egressed successfully.

AS350 Flying Controls / Hydraulics Background

The flight control [is] assisted by a hydraulic system using an engine-driven 

pump using a flexible drive belt from the engine-to-main rotor gearbox power 

drive shaft………



……and three main and one tail rotor hydraulic servo actuators with 

associated electrically operated warning and emergency systems.  Hydraulic 

accumulators are fitted on each of the three main rotor servo actuators.

There is a load compensator accumulator on the tail rotor hydraulic actuator.

Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 Hydraulic System 

Post-Modification SB 29.00.07 (Credit: GPIAAF)

The hydraulic system is controlled by the “HYD” cut-off switch, mounted on the 

collective stick of the right-hand seat, and by the HYD TEST switch, mounted on the 

centre console. The left-hand seat flight controls used by the flight instructor are 

removable and…not equipped with a “HYD” cut-off switch.

Eurocopter [as Airbus Helicopters was then known] issued the SB 29.00.07 (dated 

April 08th 2004) that improved the functionality of the “HYD” cut-off switch. 



The SB was mandated by the French Aviation Authority (DGAC) in June 2004 with 

AD F-2004-089. The intent of the SB/AD action was to “… eliminate the possibility of a 

load imbalance of the flight controls due to residual pressure in the system after 

cutting off the hydraulic assistance.” This was achieved by modifying the existing 

electrical circuit to permit the simultaneous opening of the four electro-valves for the 

three main rotor servos and the regulating unit.

The system is designed in such a way that when the “HYD” cut-off switch on the 

collective pitch grip is set to on, the main servo-controls solenoid and the regulator 

solenoid are energized allowing the hydraulic pressure immediately drops in the 

hydraulic circuit. The solenoid valve of the load compensator is not energized, the 

hydraulic pressure remains inside the load compensator system. The “HYDR” red 

light is set to on with the pressure drop and the servo-controls operate in 

“mechanical”.

Additionally, the un-guarded “HYD TEST” pushbutton on the control pedestal cuts off 

the hydraulic pressure by energizing the solenoid valve on the regulation unit. The 

solenoid valve of the load compensator in the tail rotor is also energized and 

discharges the hydraulic pressure of the load compensator system.

GPIAAF Safety Investigation

The investigators checked the pressure in the servo-controls accumulators, 

expecting a nominal 15 bar and found:

• Right accumulator: 14 bar  //  • Forward accumulator: 4 bar

• Left accumulator: 0 bar     //   • Yaw load compensator (tail rotor): 5 bar



Significantly:

During the extensive system testing, it was found that the operation of 

the…...“HYD” cut-off switch activation, resulted in the yaw load compensator 

solenoid valve energization [too], which was not expected by design (loss of 

the complete hydraulic assistance on the yaw control).

No anomaly was found with the “HYD” cut-off switch itself.

The related wiring configuration was checked and a discrepancy was detected 

on “23DELTA-1” connector misconfigured on wires DH2F and DH50E 

connected to “10D” connector resulting the rear servo valve being energized 

in both conditions, with HYD TEST pressed and “HYD” cut-off switch 

activation.  The wire misconfiguration was traced and found to be related with 

the diode’s installation as per SB AS350 29.00.07.

Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 Hydraulic System SB 29.00.07 Wiring (Credit: GPIAAF)

The non-compliance in the SB 29.00.07 application with “23DELTA-1” 

connector found in pre-mod configuration with the wires DH2F and DH50E still 

connected to “10D” connector, explains why the “HYD” cut-off didn’t behave 

as expected.



This is despite:

The SB 29.00.07 requires functional tests to be performed after its application 

to verify proper system operation.

Additionally, the maintenance program of the AS350B3 requests that every 2 

years or 600FH a test to the load compensator operation (AMM 67-34-00,5-1) 

and integrity of the system (AMM 67-34-00,6-1) is performed. These 

maintenance tasks are designed to check and detect possible issues with the 

operation of the “HYD” cut-off switch.

GPIAFF examined the aircraft’s technical records, finding that:

…SB 29.00.07 was accomplished by the owner’s maintenance service 

provider, and responsible for the aircraft’s airworthiness on 06-DEC-2004. 

Since then, the helicopter underwent several maintenance activities that 

should have detected the 16 years old misconfiguration modification. 

 The latest records exhibited the following:

• 600 h/24 M inspection dated 22.02.2019

• 600 h/24 M inspection dated 01.06.2017

• 600 h/24 M inspection dated 06.05.2015

The S-inspection (150h) was recorded just before the aircraft was ferried to 

Portugal, dated on 15-APR-2020 with tail servo accumulator pressure 

adjustment in accordance AMM 29-00-00, 3-5, F.1., i. (2). Likewise, the 600 h/24 

M inspection dated on 22-FEB-2019 included the main servos accumulator 

pressure adjustment according AMM 29-00-00, 3-7, F.1., j. (1). No pressure 

values were recorded in the documentation.



GPIAAF explain that:

The last phase of the emergency procedure or training requires the “HYD” cut-

off switch activation to depressurize the three servo-control accumulators to 

avoid any asymmetrical loads in flight. With the wiring misconfiguration on the 

accidented aircraft, the “HYD” switch activation will also depressurize the yaw 

load compensator, an important item to control the tail rotor during the 

running landing.

Airbus Helicopters performed the calculation of the load to be applied on the 

pedal to maintain the stationary/hover in case of the complete loss of the tail 

rotor hydraulic assistance. The data used for the calculations were: assumed 

mass: 2400 kg, OAT: 22°C, altitude: 850 m, no wind and out of ground effect.

In these conditions the pedal position should be 75% (0% is full left pedal and 

100% is full right pedal) without the assistance of the tail rotor servo-control 

and the yaw load compensator, the pilot “effort” load to be applied on the right 

pedal to maintain the heading in stationary is about 58 daN.  Note: With the 

yaw load compensator working properly and charged with only 5 bar of 

nitrogen (recorded pressure), the load was estimated at 7 daN. The near 60 kgf 

represent eight times the value that the pilot would expect.

Airbus Helicopters detail the system limitations in the Rotorcraft Flight Manual 

(RFM)and developed a procedure for flight training of a hydraulic pressure 

failure (RFM Supplement 7):



Hydraulics off training in hover or low speed condition is considered unsafe 

and is not permitted in the manufacturer’s instructions, ref. SIN 2630-S-29, SIN 

3246-S-29 and TI 000000188A.

EASA has previously issued SIB No.: 2018-13: Airbus Helicopters with Single 

Hydraulic Power System – Hydraulic Emergency Procedure and Hydraulic 

Failure Training.

GPIAAF Conclusions

GPIAAF say that their investigation points to the inability of the pilots to 

effectively control the helicopter without hydraulic system assistance as a 

most probable cause for the loss of control in flight, with the following 

potential contributory factors:



 Inadvertent activation of the hydraulics “HYD” cut-off switch at very low 
speed,

 The incorrect aircraft wiring configuration related to the 
accomplishment and the lack of post application checks of SB 29.00.07 
that allowed to energize the tail rotor load compensator solenoid, losing 
all hydraulic assistance with the “HYD” switch activation,

 Incorrect aircraft preload of three in four hydraulic accumulators.  This 
condition, not detected on the prefight checks, may cause asymmetric 
flight controls operation when the hydraulic pressure was lost.


Safety Actions

The operator and owner of the helicopter both conducted fleet checks without 

further findings.

The operator, following the event internal assessment, developed a set of 

actions and improvement in its training procedures with emphasis on training 

mission’s communication and preparation, trying to strengthen its CRM, both 

in training and in single pilot operations.

GPIAFF note that:

Not directly related to the accident causes, it was found that the hydraulic test 

(HYD TEST) switch is vulnerable to inadvertent operation.

Airbus had previously issued:

Service Bulletin (SB 67.00.32) recommending installing the modification 

073304 introducing a protective guard device over the HYD TEST switch to 

prevent inadvertent operation. Without the cover, the risk of unintentional use 

is always present.



GPIAFF Lessons Learnt from this Accident

 Strict compliance with technical instructions, standards and good 
practices [in maintenance]

 Meticulous compliance of an aircraft acceptance process within the fleet 
reinforcement, carrying out a detailed technical inspection for non-
standard configurations detection, anomalies or unsafe conditions such 
as the low nitrogen pressure in the hydraulic accumulators.

 Pilots [should] wear protective helmets with a properly operational 
communication system.

 Comply with the standard training procedures…namely, but not limited 
to hydraulic failure training (FMS-7), whose deviations can actively 
contribute to the accident.



Short Sling Stings Speedy Squirrel: Tail Rotor Strike Fire-Fighting in Réunion 
(Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 F-OFML) with Video
On 24 January 2019 Airbus Helicopters AS350B3e (H125) Squirrel F-

OFML of Hélilagon suffered a tail rotor failure during fire-fighting with an underslung 

bucket at Grand-Brûlé, Sainte-Roseon on the Indian Ocean island of Réunion.

Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 Trailing its Tangled Bambi Bucket after an Impact with its Tail Rotor while 
HESLO Fire-Fighting at the Piton de la Fournaise Volcano, Réunion (Credit: YouTube Video Posted by BK117)

The French Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la Sécurité de l’Aviation Civile (the BEA) 

explain in their safety investigation report (issued only in French) that the pilot (who had 

10,129 hours of flying experience and 4,198 on type) had been flying for four days fighting 

fires on the eastern side of the Piton de la Fournaise volcano.  This was by both by direct 

water drop and replenishing temporary reservoirs set up by ground fire-fighters using 

pumps and hoses.

The helicopter had an underslung 820 litre Type 1821 Bambi Bucket on a short 5 m sling 

(so the bottom of the bucket was c 9.7 m below the helicopter in the hover) to do both 

tasks.



Having dropped water on the main front of the fire at 2,200 ft AMSL (location 2 the 

graphic below), the helicopter was returning to collect more water from a point about 2 nm 

away, on the lower slopes of the volcano at 385 ft AMSL (location 1 below).  Wind was 

north-easterly, gusting 30 knots.

Route of Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 while HESLO Fire-Fighting at the Piton de la Fournaise Volcano, 
Réunion (Credit: BEA)

During that leg while descending through at 930 ft AMSL at 13:48:17 (location 3), the pilot 

heard a high-frequency noise at the same time as feeling a slight jerk to the left.  The 

pilot then perceived a loss of effectiveness of the rudder pedals.  After a MAYDAY call, the 

pilot continued flying with the intention of finding a suitable area for an emergency 

landing.



Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 Trailing its Tangled Bambi Bucket after an Impact with its Tail Rotor while 
HESLO Fire-Fighting at the Piton de la Fournaise Volcano, Réunion (Credit: YouTube Video Posted by ‘BK117B2′)

This part of the flight was captured on the early part of this video:

https://youtu.be/qFhnX1d0958 

The pilot was not able to find a location suitable for a run on landing.  When airspeed was 

reduced, the helicopter started to rotate around its yaw axis and made two and a half turns 

before a hard landing at 13:52:45 (in location 4 at 315 ft AMSL) on a lava flow from 2002, 

near the coast road.

Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 Yawing Anti-Clockwise (Credit: YouTube Video Posted by ‘BK117B2′)



Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 Yawing Anti-Clockwise: <1s after the Previous Image (Credit: YouTube Video 
Posted by ‘BK1172′)

Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 After Landing (Credit: YouTube Video Posted by ‘BK1172′)

The helicopter was shutdown.  On egress the pilot discovered the cables of the fire-fighting 

bucket were entangled with the tail rotor and the tail rotor blades were broken at 3/4 

length.  The right skid was broken in several places and there was impact damage from the 

underslung load on the tailboom.  A local news report contained close-up images.

Closer examination revealed that the Tail Gear Box (TGB) casing had fractured around its 

circumference.  The BEA determined this was due to overload when the blades struck the 

underslung load.



Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 Recovered to a Hangar for Examination (Credit: BEA)

The BEA observe that flight and wind parameters derived from the two independent 

onboard recording systems (an Appareo Vision 1000 and a Helisafe system) “show that the 

helicopter was operating in a very turbulent air mass”.  This is likely due to be a 

combination of the wind and the Volcano topology, supplemented by heat from the fire.



Vision 1000 and Helisafe Data Recorded Onboard Hélilagon Airbus AS350B3e / H125 while operating near the 
Piton de la Fournaise Volcano, Réunion (Credit: BEA)

When the underslung load hit the tail rotor the helicopter was flying at an indicated speed 

of 97 kt, with a rate of descent of 1,230 ft/min in a “particularly turbulent environment”.

The BEA note that the manufacturer’s manual for the fire-fighting bucket can only be 

complied with if the bucket is connected directly to the cargo hook (with no sling) or by 

using a sling of at least 15 m. The manual also states airspeed with the bucket fitted should 

not exceed 80 kt and recommends that when approaching that airspeed, caution is 

exercised. Airbus has issued several documents to warn of the risks when operating with 

external loads including Service Letter No 1727-25-05 of 26 March 2006 and Safety 

Information Note (SIN) No 3170-S-00 of 3 October 2017.  Following this accident, SIN No 

3349-S-25, specific to the use of the fire-fighting buckets was published in June 2019 and 

emphasises the importance of adhering to the associated limitations.  Airbus’ safety 

database shows no similar incidents involving longer slings and such buckets.



The operator, which had conducted fire-fighting in Réunion for over 30 years and 

maintained two helicopters on permanent stand-by, had however always used 5 m slings.  

Their procedures stated that slings over 8 m were “not recommended” and the short slings 

were preferred due to what they stated were “greater precision and ease of use by the pilot 

in hovering flight.”   However, the BEA identified that another operator in Réunion used 15 

m slings, as evident in the video screenshot of another aircraft in the vicinity of the accident 

helicopter, and so did SAF, the operator’s parent company (who had acquired Hélilagon in 

2016), when firefighting in the French Alps.

The Accident Helicopter (foreground) and an AS350 of Another Company (background) with Longer Sling (Credit: 
YouTube Video Posted by ‘BK117B2′)

The operator switched to 15 m slings immediately after the accident. Additionally, the BEA 

comment that while the pilots recent duty and flight time was within legal limits…

Helicopter firefighting activity requires pilots to have high concentration, repetitive actions, 

precision work when loading and delivering water, flying close to the ground…[and]…the 

intensity of the firefighting work may have been a physiologically trying change of pace upon 

returning from a three-week holiday period.



BEA Conclusions
The underslung fire fighting-bucket damaged the tail rotor.  The collision was due to a 

combination of factors:
 Use of a sling shorter than recommended by the manufacturer. This increased the 

risk of a collision.
 Flight above the maximum airspeed for the bucket.
 Very turbulent air.
 A descending trajectory where the helicopter momentarily descended faster than 

the empty underslung, but trailing load.
Our Observations
This accident is a reminder that just because an organisation has done something one way 

for a generation, their written procedures may be neither safe nor compliant.  The operator 

deserves credit however for immediately changing the sling length used “next day”.

The aircraft was well instrumented with Vision 1000 and Helisafe, considering it is of a size 

where data recorders are not required by regulation.  It’s not stated by BEA whether the 

operator conducted any Flight Data Monitoring (FDM).  If they did, that would bring 

considerable safety benefit and provide a way to monitor airspeed during fire-fighting, 

turbulence and usage generally, providing positive feedback to crews.

After a loss of tail rotor drive, the airflow over the vertical stabiliser provides some 

directional stability hence the desire for a run on landing if such a problem is suspected.  

While not commented on by the BEA, the trailing bucket may have delayed the loss of yaw 

control until the point the aircraft was much slower, and helped minimise the impact.  UK 

CAA research on Helicopter Tail Rotor Failures (CAA Paper 2003/1) included a study of 

mitigations that included deployable devices, such as an inflatable fin and drag (or drogue) 

parachute.



UK CAA Research Published in 2003 Considered a Drag Chute as a Deployable Mitigation to Tail Rotor Failures 
(Credit: UK CAA)



Low Viz Helicopter CFIT Accident, 
Alaska

National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report

 
 

Accident 
Location: Skagway, AK Number: ANC16FA023

Date & Time: 05/06/2016, 1900 AKD Registration: N94TH

Aircraft: AIRBUS AS350 Aircraft Damage: Substantial

Defining Event: VFR encounter with IMC Injuries: 1 Fatal

Flight Conducted 
Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use

Analysis 

 
The non-instrument-rated commercial pilot was making a visual flight rules internal-
cargo company flight in the helicopter. He was returning to base in the helicopter after 
dropping off 1 employee and 12 dogs at a remote dog camp situated on a glacier 
surrounded by mountainous terrain. The pilot had previously completed 5 of the day's 7 
planned roundtrip flights from the base to the dog camp. According to the dog camp 
manager, the weather was deteriorating with snow and wind increasing when the pilot 
departed on the accident flight. The dog camp manager's observations and radar data 
indicated that the pilot attempted to depart via the normal route to the south but turned 
around. He likely encountered low visibility conditions and then attempted several 
departures by routes to the north of the dog camp. About 8 minutes after departure, the 
helicopter impacted snow-covered mountainous terrain about 2 miles northeast of the 
dog camp. 

Postaccident examination of the helicopter revealed no evidence of preimpact 
mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. Given the 
deteriorating weather conditions when the pilot departed, it is likely that the pilot 
continued visual flight into an area of instrument meteorological conditions, which 



resulted in the pilot experiencing a loss of visual reference and subsequent controlled 
flight into terrain.

During the impact sequence, the two cargo straps used to secure two wooden dog boxes 
to the rear cabin floor failed, and the dog boxes shifted forward, striking the back of the 
pilot's fiberglass seat. It could not be determined if the forward movement of the dog 
boxes during the accident sequence contributed to the injuries sustained by the pilot. 

Immediately before departing from the dog camp on the accident flight, the pilot told 
the dog camp manager that, due to the degrading weather conditions, he would not be 
coming back for the last scheduled trip of the day, and the dog camp manager told the 
pilot that he agreed with him. However, the pilot then told the dog camp manager, "but 
don't give up on me yet," a statement consistent with self-induced pressure to complete 
the day's series of flights. 

On one of the day's previous flights, the pilot reported to the base manager, who was 
exercising operational control at the time of the accident, that he had encountered icing 
conditions while in flight. The base manager told the pilot "to do what he thought was 
best." However, flight operations in icing conditions are prohibited by the helicopter's 
rotorcraft flight manual and the operator's operations manual, and the pilot's statement 
should have prompted the base manager to suspend the flights. If flight operations had 
been cancelled for the day when the pilot reported the icing conditions, the subsequent 
flights, including the accident flight, would not have occurred. The base manager's 
failure to appropriately exercise operational control and terminate the flights may have 
been due to the difference in experience between the base manager, who had been 
operating these flights for 8 years, and the pilot, who had been operating these flights 
for 25 years. 

 



Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident 
to be:
 
The pilot's decision to continue visual flight into an area of instrument meteorological 
conditions, which resulted in the pilot experiencing a loss of visual reference and 
subsequent controlled flight into terrain. Contributing to the accident were the pilot's 
self-induced pressure to complete the flight and the operator's failure to maintain 
operational control over the flight.

 
 

Findings
Aircraft Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)

Personnel issues Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Situational awareness - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Motivation/respond to pressure - Pilot (Factor)

Environmental issues Below VFR minima - Decision related to condition (Cause)

Organizational issues Oversight of operation - Operator (Factor)

Factual Information

History of Flight
Enroute VFR encounter with IMC (Defining event)

Loss of visual reference
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT)

 
On May 6, 2016, about 1900 Alaska daylight time, an Airbus (formerly Eurocopter) AS 
350 B2 helicopter, N94TH, collided with snow-covered mountainous terrain about 4 
miles southeast of Skagway, Alaska, after departing from a remote landing site on the 
Denver Glacier. The commercial pilot received fatal injuries, and the helicopter 
sustained substantial damage. The helicopter was registered to and operated by 
TEMSCO Helicopters, Inc., Ketchikan, Alaska, under the provisions of Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 as a visual flight rules (VFR) internal-cargo company 
flight. Instrument meteorological conditions were reported on the Denver Glacier at the 
time of the accident, and company flight following procedures were in effect. The flight 
originated from a heliport at the operator's headquarters in Skagway about 1840, landed 
at the remote site for several minutes, and departed for the return flight about 1852.



Alaska Icefield Expeditions, Inc., contracted with TEMSCO to provide helicopter 
support for the movement of personnel, dogs, and cargo. The purpose of the flight was 
to transport dog camp company personnel (mushers) and dogs (Alaskan Huskies) from 
the operator's headquarters in Skagway to a remote dog camp on the Denver Glacier in 
the Tongass National Forest, about 5 miles southeast of Skagway. TEMSCO and Alaska 
Icefield Expeditions conducted heli-mushing operations for the Alaska tourism industry 
using a helicopter glacier landing permit issued by the US Forest Service. 

The pilot was scheduled for seven continuous roundtrip flights (without shutting down 
the helicopter) to the dog camp on the day of the accident. All flights scheduled for the 
day of the accident fell under the operational control of the base manager, who was 
located at TEMSCO's headquarters in Skagway. The pilot was ready to begin flight 
operations at 0800, but low ceilings prevented flight operations. The pilot attended 
company orientation training at 0900, and, at 1300, he provided helicopter loading 
training for new TEMSCO employees. At 1530, the pilot completed the training and 
evaluated the weather for flight operations. The pilot determined that the wind 
conditions were unsuitable at the time but were forecasted to improve later in the 
afternoon. 

The dog camp manager, who was located at the dog camp on the Denver Glacier, was 
responsible for managing operations of the dog camp. He reported that, on the day of 
the accident, from about 0600 to 1200, the weather in the dog camp was cloudy, 
snowing, and foggy, and the visibility was "a few hundred yards." At 1200, the clouds 
broke, the snow stopped, and visibility was such that he could see through Paradise 
Valley across the Taiya Inlet. He reported that flight operations were cancelled because 
of the wind; the wind on the glacier was between 10 and 15 mph. About 1630, TEMSCO 
informed the dog camp manager, that flight operations would begin to deliver mushers 
and dogs to the camp. 

At 1645, the wind speed had dropped significantly at the base, and the pilot decided it 
was safe to launch. The pilot completed two roundtrips, each with 1 musher and 10 dogs 
on board the helicopter. The dog camp manager stated that it was snowing as these 
flights arrived. At 1738, the pilot called inbound from the Denver Glacier to the base, 
and the base manager asked the pilot about the weather conditions. The pilot reported 
to the base manger that there was turbulence around the toe of the glacier and that he 
was keeping his airspeed down for a smoother ride. Based on the pilot's report, the base 
manager decided to cancel a scheduled external load flight that he had planned to fly 
and load the cargo internally in another helicopter.

At 1747, the helicopter departed from the base for the third trip, again with 1 musher 
and 10 dogs onboard. En route to the glacier, the pilot reported to the base manager that 
he "experienced a little bit of inflight icing" at 3,000 ft mean sea level (msl). The base 
manager asked the pilot what kind of precipitation he was experiencing, and the pilot 
reported "wet snow." The base manager told the pilot "to do what he thought was best." 
The pilot responded that he would evaluate the icing conditions as he flew on the 
subsequent flights. The fourth and fifth roundtrips were completed uneventfully; the 



fourth carried 1 musher and 10 dogs, and the fifth carried 1 musher and 11 dogs. 

At 1840, the helicopter departed for the sixth trip with 1 musher and 12 dogs onboard. 
As the helicopter passed through Paradise Valley, the passenger reported that the valley 
itself was "wide open" with a rainbow present, but he and the pilot could see that the 
clouds were "moving in" as the helicopter approached the Denver Glacier. The 
passenger reported that the clouds were "thick," and he could not see up the glacier 
toward the dog camp. The passenger further reported that the western mountain wall 
near the glacier was visible at the time, so the pilot elected to follow the wall into the dog 
camp "very slowly." He stated that the helicopter was "very low" with regard to the bluff 
and was closer to the wall than he had ever been on previous flights up to the dog camp. 
The dog camp manager reported that just before the sixth flight arrived, the wind speed 
was up to 20 to 30 mph, and it was snowing. The clouds had moved in and covered the 
bluff; visibility was about a 1/4 mile looking toward Paradise Valley. The helicopter 
landed at the dog camp, and the musher and 12 dogs were unloaded. 

Before the pilot left, he signaled for the dog camp manager and told him that he was 
"not coming back in this weather." The dog camp manager verbally agreed. The dog 
camp manager told the pilot to be safe, and the pilot said to the dog camp manager, "but 
don't give up on me yet." The pilot then departed from the dog camp at 1852 and headed 
toward Paradise Valley. 

According to the dog camp manager, the helicopter traveled about 1/8 mile toward 
Paradise Valley, turned around, and then turned north. The dog camp manager reported 
that the visibility looking north from the dog camp appeared to be about 1/4 mile. He 
noticed that the snow rate had picked up "considerably," and the wind speed was still 
between 20 and 30 mph. 

A review of Harris OpsVue track data was conducted during the timeframe of 1815 to 
1915. The OpsVue data indicated the accident helicopter was making multiple 360° 
turns before turning to the north and east and continuing to make turns. As the 
helicopter was tracking toward the east, the altitude was trending up in a slow climb 
before descending near the accident site. 

About 1900, the TEMSCO base manager noted that he had not heard any 
communication on the radio for a few minutes, so he asked about the status of the 
accident helicopter and noticed on the flight tracking computer that the helicopter's 
position was northwest of the dog camp at an elevation of about 6,200 ft msl, about 
2,000 ft above the dog camp's elevation. He made several radio calls to the pilot, and no 
responses were received. After repeated radio calls with no response from the pilot, the 
base manager decided to launch in a helicopter with an observer on onboard. The 
company emergency response plan was activated. At 1914, the base manager departed to 
the last known coordinates of the missing helicopter. The base manager reported that he 
was unable to fly over the dog camp via Paradise Valley at 1924 due to low ceilings, 
blowing snow, and turbulence. 

At 1942, the base manager reported that he was maneuvering near the North Denver 



Icefall area, and he was unable to climb higher than 4,000 ft msl due to low ceilings, 
blowing snow, and "mechanical" turbulence. By 1948, the base manager reported 
"improving" ceilings and being able to maneuver around 5,000 ft msl. At 2009, the base 
manager and observer visually confirmed the wreckage of the accident helicopter lying 
on its left side with the tailboom separated in steep, mountainous terrain near a frozen 
glacial lake, about 2 miles northeast of the dog camp.

After the base manger confirmed the location of the wreckage, he asked if the dog camp 
personnel could travel to the wreckage site. The dog camp manager and several other 
workers rode two snow machines toward the wreckage; they noted the wind speed was 
between 30 and 40 mph and visibility was between zero and "a few hundred feet" in 
blowing snow. As they proceeded toward the wreckage, the wind speed increased to 
between 50 and 70 mph. The dog camp personnel were unable to proceed any farther 
due to the steep terrain and the possibility of avalanches. 

The base manager attempted multiple times to land at the accident site but was unable 
to land due to high wind and flat light conditions. About 2200, a US Coast Guard 
helicopter attempted to access the accident site but was unsuccessful due to the wind 
conditions. After dumping fuel, the Coast Guard helicopter was able to access the 
accident site, and an aviation survival technician (helicopter rescue swimmer) 
confirmed one fatality in the wreckage. 

 
 
 

Pilot Information
Certificate: Commercial Age: 66, Male

Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Right

Other Aircraft Helicopter Restraint Used: 4-point
Rating(s): 

Instrument None Second Pilot Present: No
Rating(s):

Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes

Medical Class 2 With Last FAA Medical Exam: 02/27/2016
Certification: Waivers/Limitations

Occupational Pilot: Yes Last Flight Review or 03/19/2016
Equivalent:

Flight Time: (Estimated) 7190 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5700 hours (Total, this make and model), 
6690 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours 
(Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

 

 
The pilot, age 66, held a commercial pilot certificate with a rotorcraft-helicopter rating 
and held private pilot privileges for airplane single-engine land. The pilot did not have 
and was not required to have a helicopter instrument rating. His most recent second-



class medical certificate was issued on February 27, 2016, with the limitation that he 
must wear corrective lenses.

According to the operator, the pilot's total aeronautical experience was about 7,190 
hours of which about 5,700 hours were in the accident helicopter make and model. In 
the 90 and 30 days before the accident, the pilot flew 5 and 3 flight hours, respectively. 
This was his 25th season with TEMSCO.

The operator's pilot training records showed no deficiencies and indicated that the pilot 
had completed all required training, including a competency check ride on March 19, 
2016.

The Skagway base manager, age 30, held a commercial pilot certificate with a rotorcraft-
helicopter and instrument helicopter rating. His total aeronautical experience was about 
3,445 hours, and this was his eighth season with TEMSCO. All of his eight seasons were 
in Skagway. 

 
 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: AIRBUS Registration: N94TH

Model/Series: AS350 B2 Aircraft Category: Helicopter

Year of Manufacture: 1991 Amateur Built: No

Airworthiness Normal Serial Number: 2548
Certificate:

Landing Gear Type: Emergency Float; High Seats: 6
Skid

Date/Type of Last 12/17/2015, Annual Certified Max Gross 4961 lbs
Inspection: Wt.:

Time Since Last   Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft
Inspection:

Airframe Total Time: 10190.5 Hours as of last Engine Manufacturer: Safran (formerly Turbomeca)
inspection

ELT: C126 installed, Engine Model/Series: Arriel 1D1
activated, did not aid in 
locating accident

Registered Owner: TEMSCO HELICOPTERS, Rated Power: 760 hp
INC.

Operator: TEMSCO HELICOPTERS, Operating Commercial Air Tour (136); 
INC. Certificate(s) Held: Rotorcraft External Load 

(133); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)

 



The 1991-model-year helicopter was equipped with a Safran (formerly Turbomeca) 
Arriel 1D1 turboshaft engine. According to the operator's records, at the time of the 
accident, the helicopter had accumulated 10,190.5 flight hours, and the engine had 
accumulated 4,281.6 hours. The most recent inspection of the airframe and engine was 
completed on December 17, 2015. An examination of the helicopter's maintenance 
records revealed no evidence of uncorrected mechanical discrepancies with the airframe 
and engine.

The helicopter was originally manufactured as an AS 350 B and was converted to an AS 
350 BA in 1992 and then to an AS 350 B2 in 2003. The helicopter was configured to be 
flown from the right front seat, which was a non-energy attenuating, fiberglass seat. The 
left front seat that was installed in the helicopter was a single-place, non-energy 
attenuating, fiberglass seat. 

The helicopter was not equipped with a radar altimeter, nor was it required to be at the 
time of the accident. The helicopter was equipped with a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Capstone Project avionics package. The skid system of the 
helicopter included snow/tundra boards mounted on the aft ends of both skid tubes 
along with an emergency floatation system on both skid tubes. 

TEMSCO configured the helicopter cabin to facilitate the transportation of internal 
cargo. The rear seat assembly was folded up against the cabin wall, and two wood, dog 
transportation boxes were placed behind the front seats. A tarp, blanket, and wood 
shoring were placed between the lower box and the cabin floor. The dog boxes were 
stacked vertically and secured using two cargo straps attached to a total of four seat belt 
attachment rings installed on the floor of the cabin. Both cargo straps were secured to 
the rear seat belt attachment points in front of the aft cabin wall, routed over the top of 
the stacked boxes, and secured to the pilot and front passenger seat belt attachment 
points. With the configuration of the two cargo straps, forward restraint was present; 
however, no lateral restraint was present. Neither dog box had a placarded weight value 
on the outside of it. 

The make and model of the cargo straps, as well as the maximum load rating of the 
straps, could not be determined. The two cargo straps had abrasions at various locations 
along with unknown stains throughout the length of the straps. 

The Airbus AS 350 B2 rotorcraft flight manual (RFM) discusses required placards in the 
limitations section and states that a loading instruction placard is to be mounted on the 
side face of the control pedestal. On the accident helicopter, the placard was found 
mounted on the rear of the control pedestal. This placard listed the "distributed loads 
maximum" for the rear cabin floor as 682 pounds. 

The combined weight of the two wood dog boxes was 190.5 pounds; the wood boards 
used for shoring on the cabin floor weighed 9.5 pounds; and the blanket, tarp, and two 
cargo straps weighed 5 pounds. The total weight of 205 pounds was not included on the 
cargo manifest documents for the day's flights or the helicopter's weight and balance 
record.



On each of the first four flights from Skagway to the dog camp, the total dog weight 
entered on the cargo manifest form was 500 pounds (10 dogs on board). On the fifth 
flight, the dog weight entered was 550 pounds (11 dogs on board). On the sixth flight, 
the dog weight entered was 600 pounds (12 dogs on board). For all six flights from 
Skagway to the dog camp, the weight of the dog boxes and related items (205 pounds) 
combined with the dog weight resulted in the structural limitation of 682 pounds being 
exceeded.

 
 
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Instrument Conditions Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, PAGY, 20 ft msl Distance from Accident 4 Nautical Miles
Elevation: Site:

Observation Time: 0253 UTC Direction from Accident 271°
Site:

Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 8000 ft agl Visibility 10 Miles

Lowest Ceiling: None Visibility (RVR):  

Wind Speed/Gusts: 19 knots / 28 knots Turbulence Type / None
Forecast/Actual:

Wind Direction: 210° Turbulence Severity / N/A
Forecast/Actual:

Altimeter Setting: 29.8 inches Hg Temperature/Dew Point: 12°C / 3°C

Precipitation and No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Obscuration:

Departure Point: SKAGWAY, AK Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR

Destination: SKAGWAY, AK Type of Clearance: None

Departure Time: 1840 AKD Type of Airspace: Class G

 
The closest official weather observation station to the accident site was located at the 
Skagway Airport, Skagway, about 4 miles northwest of the accident site. At 1853, the 
reported weather conditions were wind 210° at 19 knots gusting to 28 knots, visibility 10 
statute miles, few clouds at 8,000 ft, temperature 53°F, dew point 37°F, and altimeter 
setting 29.81 inches of mercury.

Refer to the Meteorology Group Chairman's Factual Report in the public docket for 
further weather information.

 
 



Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal Aircraft Damage: Substantial

Passenger N/A Aircraft Fire: None
Injuries:

Ground Injuries: N/A Aircraft None
Explosion:

Total Injuries: 1 Fatal Latitude, 59.450278, -135.205556 (est)
Longitude:

 
On May 8, 2016, the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), along with an additional NTSB 
investigator, an aviation safety inspector (ASI) from the FAA's Juneau Flight Standards 
District Office (FSDO), and a representative from TEMSCO traveled to the accident 
scene via helicopter.

All the major components of the helicopter were found at the main wreckage site. The 
accident site was in an area of steep, mountainous terrain covered with deep snow, at an 
elevation of about 4,200 ft mean sea level, near a frozen glacial lake. The impact point of 
the helicopter was on about a 090° heading (magnetic). Scattered downslope from the 
helicopter were small portions of wreckage debris, broken Plexiglass, and personal 
effects.

The helicopter fuselage was lying on its left side with the nose oriented to the south. The 
Artex ME406 emergency locator transmitter (ELT) antenna wire had separated during 
the accident sequence. 

The cockpit was severely damaged with extensive deformation. The canopy was 
segmented and separated with all canopy glass windscreens and overhead 
transparencies shattered or missing. 

The cockpit levers and switches appeared to be configured for normal flight except for 
the guarded HYD TEST (in position), BATT/EPU (off position), and HORN switch (out 
position) on the center console, which had sustained impact damage.

The aft cabin was bent and buckled inward along the upper roof area. Both cargo straps 
used to secure the dog boxes were found separated. The top dog box was lodged in the 
forward cockpit area against the rear of the pilot's seat. The pilot's seat sustained 
multiple fractures to the rear and base of the seat, and the seat was separated from the 
floor. 

The bottom of the fuselage exhibited severe deformation with a large section of the skin 
missing just below the fuel cell.

The left skid remained relatively intact and was buried in snow. The right skid tube 
separated from the two crosstubes.



The tailboom separated from the fuselage just aft of the fuselage. Both tail rotor blades 
exhibited damage consistent with multiple terrain strikes under power.

The yellow main rotor blade remained attached to the Starflex assembly and was lying 
downhill from the fuselage. The red and blue main rotor blades, including part of the 
Starflex assembly, were partially buried beneath the snow and underneath the fuselage. 
All main rotor blade portions visible above the snow exhibited damage consistent with 
sudden stoppage associated with multiple terrain strikes while under power.

The main rotor system, transmission, and engine areas displayed damage consistent 
with rolling over while under power after the initial impact with terrain. The left side of 
the main rotor system, transmission, and engine were lying against the snow-covered 
terrain. No evidence of preimpact mechanical anomalies with the airframe and engine 
were found during the onsite examination.

The wreckage was recovered from the accident site and transported to a secure hangar 
at the Juneau International Airport, Juneau, Alaska. On June 9, 2016, a wreckage 
examination and layout were done under the direction of the NTSB IIC. Also present 
were an ASI from the FAA Juneau FSDO, an air safety investigator from Airbus, an air 
safety investigator from Safran, and three representatives from TEMSCO. During the 
examination, no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airframe and 
engine were noted.

 
 

 
 
Flight Recorders

The helicopter was not equipped and was not required to be equipped with a cockpit 
voice recorder, flight data recorder, or image recorder. A Latitude Technologies S200-
001 flight tracker, a Garmin GDL 90 datalink transceiver, and an AKV ETM 1000 engine 
and rotor system monitoring device were recovered from the wreckage. These electronic 
devices were not designed for crash resistance or survivability.

The Latitude Technologies Corporation S200-001 flight tracker, which was used by 
TEMSCO for flight tracking purposes, was transported to the manufacturer's facility in 
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, for an examination of the unit and subsequent data 
download. According to the manufacturer, the unit had the original firmware installed 
from when the unit was released in February 2009 with no subsequent firmware 
updates. The manufacturer additionally reported that this build of firmware had a 
previously unknown "bug" resulting in the data being captured in the background log 
being identical to the data that were transmitted while the helicopter was in flight with 
no additional GPS data in between the transmitted logs being captured. At the time of 
the accident, the operator had the "ping rate" set to every 120 seconds.



The Garmin GDL 90 and the AK ETM 1000 devices were submitted to the NTSB Vehicle 
Recorder Laboratory in Washington, DC, for examination and download. No track or 
navigation data was stored on the Garmin GDL 90. Various engine and main rotor 
system parameters were recorded for the accident flight on the AK ETM 1000.

Refer to the Recorder Specialist's Factual Report in the public docket for further 
information regarding the Garmin GDL 90 and an AKV ETM 1000 devices.

 
Medical And Pathological Information 

The Alaska State Medical Examiner, Anchorage, Alaska, conducted an autopsy of the 
pilot. The cause of death for the pilot was attributed to multiple blunt force injuries.

The FAA's Bioaeronautical Research Sciences Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicology tests on specimens from the pilot that were negative for carbon 
monoxide, ethanol, and drugs. Cyanide tests were not performed. 

 
Survival Aspects 

The pilot was seated in the front right seat and was wearing a 4-point restraint system at 
the time of the accident. The pilot did not wear and was not required to wear a flight 
helmet. 

 
Tests And Research

The caution-warning light panel from the helicopter was submitted to the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory for examination. The panel was x-rayed to determine the filament 
status of the light bulbs within the panel. The examination determined that none of the 
filaments exhibited hot filament stretching.

 
Organizational And Management Information

TEMSCO Operations

The TEMSCO Operations Manual discusses icing conditions and states:

Helicopter flights during icing conditions are prohibited. TEMSCO shall not fly into 
known icing conditions. If icing conditions are encountered, the Pilot-in-Command 
will deviate from course to avoid and navigate around any encountered icing 
conditions.



The Airbus AS 350 B2 Rotorcraft Flight Manual lists "flight in freezing rain or icing 
conditions (visible moisture and temperatures likely to produce ice)" as a prohibited 
maneuver in the limitations section.

The TEMSCO Operations Manual discusses operational control and states:

Operational control with respect to a flight, means the exercise of authority over 
initiating, conducting, or terminating a flight. The Director of Operations and the pilot  
in command are jointly responsible for the initiation, continuation, diversion, and 
termination of a flight. The Director of Operations may delegate functions to other 
trained personnel, but retains responsibility for initiation, continuation, diversion, 
and termination. The final authority over conducting or terminating a flight rests with  
the pilot in command. The following persons have "operational control" with respect 
to flight in descending order: director of operations, chief pilot, pilot in command, 
second in command, director of maintenance, base managers, base lead pilot, and 
trained flight followers.  

The FAA's Order 8900.1, Flight Standards Information Management System, identifies 
one of several failure modes of operational control and states:

Loss of operational control within the air carrier – hands-off management results in 
inadequate controls over its own operations. Management of operations should never 
be inattentive, distracted, or careless. Hands-off management is not a legitimate 
excuse for failing to maintain operational control.  

FAA Operations Specification A008 Operational Control states that non-management 
personnel exercising operational control shall be specified in the general operations 
manual (names, titles, duties, responsibilities, and authorities). A review of the 
TEMSCO Operations Manual showed that, for the operational control chain of 
command, the base lead pilot positions were listed "as assigned" with no names listed, 
and the trained flight follower positions had no names listed.

A formal flight risk assessment was not conducted by the pilot for the accident flight, 
nor was it required by the operator at the time of the accident. The TEMSCO Safety 
Management Systems Manual states that flight risk assessments are to be conducted for 
emergency medical services and tour operations. 

The TEMSCO Operations Manual discusses company VFR weather minimums and 
states that, for the local operating area (within a 30-nautical-mile radius from the base 
of operations), a 500 ft ceiling or greater and 1 statue mile visibility or greater is 
required. The manual states that the lowest of the ceiling or visibility shall be the 
limiting factor for dispatch. 

A review of the TEMSCO Operations Manual found no operational procedures listed for 
flight operations in deteriorating VFR weather conditions (such as reduced visibility and 
ceilings), inadvertent instrument meteorological conditions (IIMC) avoidance 
procedures, or IIMC recovery procedures.



TEMSCO Internal Cargo Operations 

The TEMSCO Operations Manual discusses internal cargo carried in passenger 
compartments and states:

Will be secured by means approved by the FAA. Will be carried in accordance with 
each of the following: Will be properly secured by a safety belt or other tie down 
having enough strength to eliminate the possibility of shifting under normally 
anticipated flight and ground conditions. Will be packaged or covered to avoid 
possible injury to passengers. It will not impose any load on seats or on the floor 
structure that exceeds the load limitations for those requirements. It will not be located  
in a position that restricts the access to or use of any required emergency or regular 
exit, or the use of the aisle between the crew and the passenger compartment. It will 
not be carried directly above seated passengers.  

This document further discusses the limitations of carriage of cargo in the passenger 
compartments and states:

Each bay or bin will be able to withstand the load factor as applicable to passenger 
seats of the aircraft. The maximum weight of cargo that each bin or bay is approved to  
carry will not be exceeded. Each bay will be loaded to insure proper weight 
distribution when using cargo load schedule. The load will not impose any load on the 
floor or other structure of the aircraft that exceeds the limitations of that structure. 
The maximum concentrated load for each compartment will not be exceeded. The bin 
or netting for loose cargo will be attached to the seat tracks or to the floor structure of 
the aircraft and its attachment must withstand the load factors applicable to the 
passenger seats. The cargo will not restrict access to or use of any required exit or 
aisle in the passenger compartment. It will be the responsibility of the Pilot-In-
Command to check and ensure that all cargo and passenger doors are properly 
secured prior to any flight.  

The operator reported that before the accident, the company conducted internal cargo 
load training for contract, charter, and utility pilots at company headquarters in 
Ketchikan, which was hands-on training that was both mission-specific and aircraft-
specific with no training syllabus or published curriculum at the time. The training was 
not conducted with the tour pilots.

After the accident, the operator developed internal cargo loading guidelines for all 
company Airbus AS 350 pilots. This document covers cargo strap standards (what type 
to use), the various helicopter floor weight limitations, and the various limitations of the 
mooring rings. The document also highlights the importance of not exceeding any 
limitations of seat-belt-based mooring rings when a ring is used to restrain cargo and 
the seat is occupied.

Tour Operators Program of Safety

At the time of the accident, the operator was a member of the Tour Operators Program 
of Safety (TOPS). The most recent TOPS compliance audit on the operator before the 



accident took place from August 8 through August 10, 2015. All the audit areas 
(management, safety, flight operations, pilots, flight coordination, heliport, 
maintenance, maintenance personnel, and ground support personnel) along with base 
visits and flight observations were classified as "meets TOPS standards." 

 
Additional Information

Carriage of Internal Cargo in Airbus AS 350 Series Helicopters

The NTSB IIC submitted multiple inquiries during the investigation to the FAA Office of 
Accident Investigation and Prevention, Washington, DC, regarding the carriage of 
internal cargo in the Airbus AS 350 series. On March 28, 2017, the FAA responded, in 
part:

The FAA does not require original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to publish 
information regarding cargo loading. The certification assumption is that the 
helicopter will be used to carry people, unless indicated otherwise by the applicant. In 
the case of the AS350, Airbus did not indicate that anything other than passengers will  
be carried.  

In its March 28, 2017, response, the FAA also stated: 

Any "approved" cargo installation will be explained in the rotorcraft flight manual 
(RFM) limitation or supplement section – (what tie-downs are used, what straps are 
used, etc.); loading instructions (what areas in the cabin get loaded first, second, etc.); 
and procedures (walk around procedures will mention to verify cargo secured). 
Operators do not have certification approval to install cargo in the cabin unless it is 
mentioned in the RFM or [RFM supplement] RFMS (part of the [type certificate] TC or 
an STC) – installation instructions are provided in the flight manual. It is possible that  
there may be some operators that have been using existing tie-downs/seat rails to tie 
down cargo in the cabin, and incorrectly assuming that this is a "certified" installation  
when in fact it is not. … The RFM or RFM supplement will be clear as to what is 
approved regarding internal cargo (if it does not mention how and where to install 
cargo, then it's not certified).  

In a response on August 25, 2017, the FAA stated, "our position is the same as in the 
other queries from the NTSB regarding cabin cargo – operators should not be securing 
cargo in areas unless doing so has been FAA approved (basic design, design change, 
field approval, etc.)." In a letter dated August 29, 2017, the FAA stated, in part:

Also, while a definition for a cargo/baggage compartment in rotorcraft does not exist, 
the FAA has interpreted this as a compartment (enclosed area) that is separated from 
the cabin (passenger area). … Additionally, the FAA is not aware of any 
documentation that would prohibit Part 27 rotorcraft from carrying cargo in the 
cabin, even if a certification does not exist for that helicopter.



The NTSB submitted a follow-up question to the FAA asking: From a regulatory aspect: 
If an aircraft is not certified for a particular task, does it mean that the task is 
prohibited? The specific example that is being investigated is the carriage of cargo in the 
main cabin of helicopters certified under Part 27. Most rotorcraft operating manuals 
don't address the carriage of cargo. Most Part 27 helicopters do not have certification for 
the carriage of cargo. Does that mean the carriage of cargo in these helicopters is 
prohibited? 

On January 25, 2018, the FAA responded, stating, in part:

The FAA's Aircraft Certification Service (AIR) certificates designs that are compliant 
with the applicable airworthiness standards. AIR does not approve operations (i.e. 
particular tasks); operational approvals are issued by the FAA's Flight Standards 
Service (AFS). When AIR certificates a design for a certain operation, the certification 
only ensures the design meets the design requirements set forth by the FAA. Approved 
cabin cargo designs include pertinent safety information such as maximum weight of 
the cargo, location of the cargo in the cabin, and how the cargo is secured to the 
airframe. … As previously stated by FAA, if an FAA-approved cabin cargo 
configuration has been published for a specific aircraft, the flight manual for that 
aircraft is where the information will be found.  

As previously stated, review of the Airbus AS 350 B2 RFM found that it discusses 
required placards in the limitations section and states that a loading instruction placard 
is to be mounted on the side face of the control pedestal. No other information regarding 
the carriage of cargo in the cabin was found in the RFM. 

Regarding internal cargo, the Airbus AS 350 Systems and Descriptions Manual states, 
"further to removing the front [left seat] and folding back the rear benches, the cabin 
floor can be used to transport cargo. The eleven mooring points are embedded into the 
floor and are also used to attach the seatbelts." The manual also lists the "limit 
permissible force on a mooring ring" as 620 dekanewtons or 1393.7 pound-force. 

On April 21, 2017, Airbus stated in an email to the NTSB IIC that "it is the responsibility 
of the operator to define an adapted cargo, freight, or baggage securement that is in 
respect to the limitations permissible force on the floor stowing mooring rings." On 
June 26, 2018, the Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses pour la sécurité de l'aviation civile 
reported to the NTSB IIC that Airbus has developed a "cargo installation in cabin" 
procedure for the Airbus AS 350 series, which is currently in the certification process.

Helicopter Internal Cargo Securement

The US Army's Training Circular 3-04.4, Fundamentals of Flight, discusses the 
securement of internal cargo in helicopters and states:

Aircraft are subjected to G-forces resulting from air turbulence, acceleration, rough or  
crash landings, and aerial maneuvers. Since the cargo is moving at the same rate of 
speed as the aircraft, forward movement is the strongest force likely to act on cargo if 
the aircraft is suddenly slowed or stopped. Other forces which tend to shift cargo aft, 



laterally, or vertically will be less severe. Restraining or tie-down devices prevent 
cargo movement that could result in injury to occupants, damage to the aircraft or 
cargo, or cause the aircraft center of gravity to move out of limits. The amount of 
restraint required to keep cargo from moving in any direction is called restraint 
criteria and is expressed in Gs. The maximum force exerted by an item of cargo is 
equal to its normal weight times the number of Gs specified in restraint criteria. 
Restraint criteria are normally different for each type of aircraft and provided in the 
operator's manual. To prevent cargo movement, the amount of restraint applied 
should equal or exceed the amount of restraint required. Restraint is referred to by the 
direction in which it keeps cargo from moving. For example, forward restraint keeps 
cargo from moving forward and aft restraint keeps cargo from moving aft.  

A search revealed no regulatory guidance or best practices available from the FAA 
regarding the care, inspection, and maintenance of cargo straps used for internal cargo 
operations with helicopters.

Self-Induced Pressure 

The FAA's Helicopter Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-21, discusses effective 
aeronautical decision-making and, with regard to operational pitfalls, states, in part:

There are numerous classic behavioral traps that can ensnare the unwary pilot. Pilots,  
particularly those with considerable experience, try to complete a flight as planned, 
please passengers, and meet schedules. This basic drive to achieve can have an 
adverse effect on safety and can impose an unrealistic assessment of piloting skills 
under stressful conditions. These tendencies ultimately may bring about practices that 
are dangerous and sometimes illegal and may lead to a mishap. Pilots develop 
awareness and learn to avoid many of these operational pitfalls through effective 
single-pilot resource management training.  

Aviation Safety in Alaska

The NTSB's safety study, Aviation Safety in Alaska SS-95/03, discusses aviation safety 
issues with weather and risk taking in Alaska and states, in part:

Flying weather in Alaska can be quite variable depending on the climate zone and time  
of year. Although all parts of Alaska experience periods of instrument meteorological 
conditions (IMC), such conditions are frequent in the Aleutian Islands, Alaska 
Peninsula, southeast Alaska, and the Arctic Coast during the summer and early fall. 
Weather conditions can change rapidly in Alaska, and the vast distances between 
some reporting points will often conceal significant local variations in the weather. 
VFR flight into IMC usually involves poor pilot decision making, whether in initiating 
the flight or continuing it into adverse weather.  

Training Device and Simulator Usage

The operator was asked by the NTSB IIC if any aviation training devices (ATD), flight 
training devices (FTD), or full flight simulators (FFS) for training Airbus AS 350 pilots 



in Alaska in areas such as flight operations in flat light conditions, flight operations in 
degraded visual meteorological conditions, and IIMC recovery were utilized. The 
operator reported that they use the actual helicopter and real-world training scenarios 
when training their pilots for operations in flat light conditions and degraded visual 
meteorological conditions. The operator has their pilots use instrument hood devices to 
train for IIMC avoidance and recovery. Additionally, the operator uses the actual 
helicopter and an FAA Capstone Project training device to assist in training terrain 
avoidance. The operator further reported that they are in the process of acquiring a level 
5 FFS for the Airbus AS 350.

The NTSB has published Safety Alert SA-031, "Safety Through Helicopters Simulators." 
This document discusses the benefits of utilizing helicopter simulators and states in 
part:

Through simulator training, operators can provide pilots a valuable tool to ensure 
proficiency in emergency procedures, including autorotations, use of night vision 
goggles, recognition of degraded visual conditions, and recovery from unusual 
attitudes. Consistent, standardized simulator training will help prepare pilots for the 
unexpected and will decrease the risk of an accident. Simulators can be a helpful tool 
for operators to provide pilot training on degraded visual conditions, safe decision-
making skills, and IIMC encounters. By practicing potential emergencies, pilots will be  
better equipped to handle emergency situations.

 
 

 
 

Preventing Similar Accidents 
 
Reduced Visual References Require Vigilance

About two-thirds of general aviation accidents that occur in reduced visibility weather 
conditions are fatal. The accidents can involve pilot spatial disorientation or controlled 
flight into terrain.

Preflight weather briefings are critical to safe flight. In-flight weather information can 
also help pilots make decisions, as can in-cockpit weather equipment that supplements 
official information. In-cockpit equipment requires an understanding of the features 
and limitations.

We often see pilots who decide to turn back after they have already encountered 
weather, at which point, it is too late. Pilots shouldn't allow a situation to become 
dangerous before deciding to act. Additionally, air traffic controllers are there to help; 
be honest with them about your situation and ask for help.



Even when flying at night, visual weather conditions can also be challenging. Remote 
areas with limited ground lighting provide limited visual reference cues for pilots, which 
can be disorienting or render rising terrain visually imperceptible. Topographic 
references can help pilots become more familiar with the terrain. The use of 
instruments, if pilots are proficient, can also help pilots navigate these challenging 
areas.

See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_020.pdf for additional 
resources. 

The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents. Note that this 
should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA 
Regulations (FARs). 

 

 






 



Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge Michael J Hodges Adopted 10/01/2018
(IIC): Date:

Additional Participating Dwayne Edwards; FAA Juneau FSDO; Juneau, AK
Persons: Derek Gagne; Transportation Safety Board of Canada; Gatineau, QC

Romain Bevillard; Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses; Le Bourget, FN
Seth Buttner; Airbus (Technical Advisor); Grand Prairie, TX
Bryan Larimore; Safran (Technical Advisor); Grand Prairie, TX
Chad Klippert; Latitude Technologies (Technical Advisor); Victoria, BC
Joel Kain; TEMSCO Helicopters; Ketchikan, AK
Ron Gile; TEMSCO Helicopters; Ketchikan, AK

Publish Date: 10/01/2018

Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.

Investigation Docket:  http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=  93116

 
 



Night Offshore Training AS365N3 Accident in India (VT-PWF, 2015)
The Indian Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (IAAIB) has issued their report into 

the fatal loss of Airbus Helicopters AS365N3 VT-PWF, operated by Pawan Hans, while 

conducting night training in the ONGC Bombay High oil field on 4 November 2015.

Wreckage of Airbus Helicopters AS365N3 VT-PWF of Pawan Hans (Credit: IAAIB)

The Accident Flight: 319 seconds to Disaster
The helicopter took off with just the two crew aboard from the WIS Offshore 

Installation at 19:10 local time, heading for the Ron Tappmeyer drilling rig, alongside 

the EE Offshore Installation, 82 nm East of Mumbai.  The pilot flying needed to regain 

his night currency to be on night medevac stand-by, having last flown offshore at 

night 11 months earlier on 30 November 2014.



The IAAIB states:
1. The pilot on controls was flying during dark phase of moon at night after break 

of nearly a year.
2. 56 secs after takeoff…the autopilot was engaged in ALT and HDG modes. In 

these modes, the pilot adjust{s] power by the movement of collective stick. The 
helicopter was in cruise for about 3 minutes. The cruise altitude was between 
550ft and 650ft AMSL with Auto-Pilot engaged. About 98 secs prior to the crash,  
the autopilot (upper modes ALT and HDG) was disengaged.

3. The helicopter made a tail wind approach with speed of approximately 79 kts 
for Ron Tappmeyer which is to the south extremity of the South field with no 
other rigs nearby to provide ambient lighting which caused an abrupt loss of 
visual reference.

4. …the pilot slightly moved the cyclic stick backward and the collective stick 
downward. Consequently, the pitch increased and the power decreased. This 
maneuver looks like a standard approach procedure to decrease the speed. 
Thereafter, the pilot moved the cyclic stick slightly to the left and began a left 
turn.

5. The left turn was 50 seconds long with slight variations in roll attitude. The 
lateral acceleration remains between -0.03 and +0.09. The corrections did not 
lead to a roll attitude less than 12° to left.

6. After the Autopilot disconnection, the pilot was “hands on” and the attitude of 
the helicopter was consistent with the inputs on the flight commands.

7. No specific pilot inputs were recorded, except actions on the collective pitch in 
the last second of the recording.

8. The pilot flying has probably entered conditions ideal for black hole 
phenomenon because of loss of horizon wherein he was not aware about the 
direction he was proceeding to i.e. up or down / turning right or left. [Note we 
have discussed this phenomena before: HEMS Black Hole Accident: 
“Organisational, Regulatory and Oversight Deficiencies” and Deadly 
Combination of Misloading and a Somatogravic Illusion: Alaskan Otter]



9. The instructor cautioned, (though delayed), the pilot flying twice.
10. No audio warnings were recorded…except the “Decision Height” warning which  

triggered 4 seconds before the end of the recording and is consistent with the 
height of the helicopter at that moment (200 ft).

Both crew died after the helicopter impacted the sea at 116 knots.  The flight lasted 

just 5 minutes 19 seconds.  the Emergency Flotation System was not armed.
Operational Issues
The IAAIB observed:

There is no SOP [Standard Operating Procedure] for carrying out night offshore training. 

There are some references in the SOP issued for Night Ambulance Operation [medevacs].

Medevac is defined in the contract signed between ONGC and PHL, and PHL is providing 

the helicopter for medevac purposes but, it is not one of the explicit requirements of the 

contract.

We discuss some of the issues contracting for medevac in our article: The Tender 

Trap.  Also:

There is no document indicating procedure of taking weather (offshore) and transmitting 

the same to flight crew. The flight crew operating in offshore is not provided with 

accurate information on the visibility, cloud ceiling and cloud base.

There was also no mechansim to review comments made by instructors in training 

records.
Crew Resource Management (CRM)
The IAAIB states:

Having decided to go around, the flying pilot needed to get on to instruments and if he 

was disoriented, should call out so that the non-flying pilot can take over. This aspect is 

also emphasised in special points in the Medevac SOP.



The CVR readout brings out a lack of adherence to standardized checks and procedures 

and communication protocol between the crew. While the pilot on controls decided to go 

around, both pilots, perhaps, continued to fly VFR. Pilot monitoring displayed lack of 

situational awareness by not taking over controls. The crew thereby failed to engage in 

the important process of CRM.

There is a shortage of pilots and situation …aggravated due [to a] higher attrition rate of 

flight crew.

Safety Management Systems (SMS)
The operator’s SMS Manual has not been revised since it was issued the previous year 

nor had the required annual review been conducted.  The IAAIB say 

the DGCA accepted SMS Manual did…

…not contain “How to do” [instructions dor] the various functions mentioned therein. The 

Manual just remains a document without performance of any function at working level.

This suggests a manual we would call ‘shelfware‘.

Despite previous accident investigations recommending the formation of a “strong 

safety department”  it was observed that…

…the operator has not established the safety department in true letter and spirit [of the 

recommendations]. Even actions taken on recommendations have withered away with 

passage of time due [to] complacency and non supervision.   It is still continuing on ad-hoc 

basis and full fledged department is yet to be established.

Various organisational changes had occurred but no Risk Assessment was found by 

IAAIB for any of those changes.  No safety circulars or bulletins had been issued in the 

previous 2 years and safety training required by the SMS Manual for all employees 

had not been completed.  The operator’s SMS defined 18 key performance indicators 

but data was not being collated or shared.



ONGC’s SMS also lacks aviation specifics:

There is no documented safety system or procedure with ONGC to ensure Safety 

Assurance particularly for helidecks audits, certification and periodic inspections.

Although Pawan Hans had reported helideck problems to OGNC “no closed loop 

system exists to make these good in a timely effective manner”.

These short comings are disappointing as a 2012 accident involved ONGC tasking a 

new operator with a new 17D helicopter type to operate to 14D helidecks.  A non-fatal 

tail rotor strike promptly followed.
AAIB’s Analysis
The IAAIB comment:

As discussed earlier, disorientation or black hole approach Illusion can happen during a 

final approach at dark night over water beyond which the horizon is not visible. These 

conditions may produce the visual illusion of a high-approach perspective.

The position of Ron Tappmeyer was to the south extremity of the South field with no other  

rigs nearby to provide ambient lighting. As per the AIS and FDR the tail wind approach 

was made with speed of approximately 79 kts. This high speed approach would have 

caused an abrupt loss of visual reference.

The pilot on controls was flying during night after break of nearly a year. The fact that it 

was a dark phase of moon made this even more challenging. Some amount of dusk flying 

on instruments would have prepared the pilot flying for undertaking the night flying 

profile/ maneuvers.

As soon as he got airborne and set course for Ron Tappmeyer, the pilot flying has probably  

entered conditions ideal for black hole phenomenon because of loss of horizon as is 

corroborated by CVR replay. Under such conditions he was not aware about the direction 

he was proceeding to i.e. up or down / turning right or left.



The pilot flying probably continued to fly visually instead of getting on to instruments. 

Therefore on initiating the go around after realizing that he was high he entered into 

spatial disorientation extremely quickly.

The instructor was not disoriented and was aware that the helicopter was low. He had 

cautioned, (though delayed), the pilot flying twice. He however did not realize that the 

pilot flying was in total state of spatial disorientation and was unable to react to his 

caution. Nor did he take over controls.

Safety Recommendations
For Offshore Flying

1. The Helidecks from where night currency training are to be carried out may be 
identified by ONGC in association with the Helicopter operators and these 
helidecks should be provided with minimum landing aids for night offshore 
operations. DGCA may develop procedures for landing and takeoff utilizing 
these aids.

2. As far as practicable night flying to/from the floating vessels should not be 
carried out.

3. The existing SOP on offshore departure and arrival for Bombay High should be 
immediately reviewed.

4. DGCA may review the requirements regarding flight rules for offshore night 
operations and corresponding training and recency requirement.

5. ONGC should develop system and procedure for carrying out periodic audit of 
the helidecks from safety point of view. This audit should be linked to 
continued certification of the helidecks for operational purposes.

6. In addition to the automated means of ascertaining the meteorological 
information, a manual means of verifying and updating the visual elements of 
observation, i.e. cloud amount and height of base, visibility and present 
weather, may be developed. The latest weather report from each installation 
should be made available to the helicopter operator one hour before take-off.



General: Pawan Hans
1. Documentation is a weak area…. [A]ll the Manuals, procedures, processes be 

reviewed and amended to have cohesion of content. System of periodic review 
should be put in place and strictly followed.

2. PHL should immediately undertake the implementation of safety management 
system across the whole organisation by completion of training, reviewing the 
manual by including the procedures for the actions to be carried…, appointing 
key safety personnel…

3. Remedial measures should be put in place to reduce pilot attrition.
4. Crew should be indoctrinated in CRM, SOPs, good aviation practices, 

communication and assertiveness.
Our Comments
The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) Aviation Management 

Guidelines contains Guidance on Night Operations (published in August 2013 and 

written in 2009 and 2010 by a working group lead by Aerossurance’s founder, Andy 

Evans).  The Night Ops Working Group:

…conducted an investigation of all known civil offshore helicopter accidents at night 

which occurred between 1999 and 2007. Among other things, it was determined that 

the  likelihood of an accident is approximately six times higher at night than during the 

 day .  Two of the core accident components were Controlled Flight Into Terrain/Water 

(CFIT/W) and Loss of Control.

Uniquely for the IOGP AMG, this interim guidance Appendix uses a  bow-tie format  to 

clearly and concisely show threats and controls:



Night Operations Bow-Tie (Credit: IOGP via BFU)

The Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) Basic Aviation Risk Standard for Offshore 

Helicopter Operations (BARSOHO), launched in May 2015, which Aerossurance helped 

develop, contains a full set of contractible controls for night offshore operations and 

medevac.  This aligns with the HeliOffshore Safety Performance Model.

HeliOffshore have also produced new offshore approach path management 

guidelines specifically developed to improve the safety of offshore helicopter 

operations.  heliOffshore say:

The document provides significant new insights into five key elements that can make a 

meaningful difference in ensuring safe stabilised approaches in the offshore environment.

Steve O’Collard (CHC test pilot) and Mark Prior (former Bristow test pilot of M Prior 

Consulting) oversaw completion of the guidance.  Tim Rolfe, of Bristow Group, co-

leader of HeliOffshore’s Operational Effectiveness explains the initiative is about:

…providing crews with repeatable operating practices designed to manage flightpath 

control effectively and maintain awareness of the helicopter’s state [which] offers strong 

mitigation against any potential loss of control.



Other offshore night accidents to study include:
  AAIB Report 7/2008:  AS365N G-BLUN “when preparing to land on the North 

Morecambe platform, in the dark, the helicopter flew past the platform and 
struck the surface of the sea”.

  GCAA Final Report: B212  A6-ALV struck drilling rig leg when drifted back on 
night take off.

  CIAIAC Report A-002/2010 : AW139 EC-KYR, crashed in a controlled flight into 
water at teh end of a SAR exercise.

  AAIB Report 1/2011, EC225 G-REDU “the flight crew made a visual approach to 
the platform during which the helicopter descended and impacted the surface 
of the sea”.

Also see our articles:
  Night Offshore Winching CFIT 
  AAIB Report on 2013 Sumburgh Helicopter Accident 

Pawan Hans  AS365N3, VT-PWA Accident 13 January 2018
UPDATE 13 January 2018: Pawan Hans lose another AS365N3, VT-PWA, with all 7 POB 

off Mumbai.

UPDATE 30 January 2018: The press report twelve major accidents involving Pawan 

Hans helicopters took place between 2010 and 2018, during which 55 people lost their 

lives.  The independent directors are being appointed and FDM introduced.  See this 

ASN search: click here.

UPDATE 17 September 2019:  Lapses caused 2018 Pawan Hans crash

A pilot disoriented by the altitude [sic: should be attitude], poor communication between 

him and the co-pilot and a malfunctioning autopilot that hadn’t been set right although a 

test flight indicated a problem with the system caused the January 12, 2018 Pawan Hans 

helicopter crash that left seven people dead, a probe by the Aircraft Accident 

Investigation Board (AAIB) has found.

UPDATE 24 April 2020: Spatial disorientation probable cause of fatal 2018 PHL Dauphin 

crash



Cockpit voice recording transcript extracts revealed that both crew were fighting for 

control seconds before the aircraft hit the water. The pilot-in-command (PIC) had 

experienced spatial disorientation and about 20 seconds before the crash, had disengaged  

the autopilot. He froze on the controls, and repeated callouts and attempts to take over 

the controls by the pilot monitoring (PM) proved futile, the report noted. The crash was 

not survivable.

The 87-page accident report portrays glaring lapses at several levels, including the finding  

that a persistent malfunction in the autopilot’s “heading” mode went unrectified and 

likely contributed to the crash.   The report notes that “recommendations of earlier 

investigations having serious operational/safety implications are yet to be implemented 

by PHL in true spirit.” … the organization “went into denial mode instead of taking these 

observations in a positive sense,” the board observed.

Helicopters are provided to ONGC through contracts executed with companies such as 

PHL, Global Vectra Helicorp Ltd, Heligo Charters, etc. Almost all these operators have 

raised concerns in the past about hourly liquidated damages (LD) clause that imposes 

heavy penalties for operators not being able to provide helicopters as contracted. The LD 

clause puts pressure on operators to suppress minor defects and cannibalize spares and 

rotables from other aircraft. The board grimly noted that “there is preponderance of 

unsafe situations due to this [LD] clause”.



Alpine MAC ANSV Report: Ascending AS350B3 I-EDIC and Descending Jodel 
D.140E F-PMGV Collided Over Rutor Glacier
On 25 January 2019 Airbus Helicopters AS350B3 I-EDIC, operated by GM Helicopters, 

and Jodel D.140E  F-PMGV  of the  Megève Aeroclub, collided in mid-air over the  Rutor 

glacier, La Thuile, Italy.  The mid-air collision (MAC), caught dramatically on video, occurred 

in Class G  (i.e. uncontrolled) airspace while both aircraft operated under Visual Flight Rules 

(VFR).  Five of the six occupants of the helicopter and two of the three occupants of the light 

aircraft were killed. One occupant from each aircraft miraculously survived, albeit seriously 

injured.

Mid Air Collision of AS350B3 I- EDIC and Jodel D.140E F-PMGV over Rutor Glacier, La Thuile (Credit: ANSV)

The Air Accident Flight
Italy’s Agenzia Nazionale per la Sicurezza del Volo (ANSV) explain in their safety 

investigation report, issued on the 11 June 2021, that the Jodel D.140E had taken off 

from  Megève Altiport in France at 13:00 Local Time on a training flight, which was to 

include glacier landings.  The flight instructor on board had over 16,000 hours of flying 

experience.  The helicopter had picked up a party of skiers and their guide at 13:24 LT 

at  Lago dei Seracchi-Cascate   in Italy.  The helicopter pilot had 7,120 hours of experience. 



At 13:25:36 hrs the two aircraft collided at an altitude of c 9,100 ft AMSL about 900 m within 

Italy.  The wreckage was distributed over 250 m along a North-South axis.

Wreckage Distribution AS350B3 I- EDIC and Jodel D.140E F-PMGV at Rutor Glacier, La Thuile (Credit: ANSV)

The  helicopter was equipped with a  Kannad   406 ELT.  This did not activate.

Wreckage of AS350B3 I- EDIC (Credit: ANSV)

 

Wreckage Reconstruction of Jodel D.140E F-PMGV (Credit: ANSV)



ANSV Safety Investigation
Among the items recovered at the accident site were two GoPro cameras.  One was 

installed on the right front windscreen of the helicopter and the other on the helmet of the 

mountain guide, seated on the left front seat of the helicopter.. The following are 

screenshots from the pilot camera video.  They start at the take-off at Lago dei Seracchi and 

conclude at the impact.



Below are images from the mountain guide video at the time of impact:



Neither camera showed an indication of another aircraft until the impact. ANSV explain 

that:

An analysis of the environmental audio recorded by the pilot camera has been carried out. The 

audio recorded by the mountain guide camera was not usable.   From this analysis it has been 



possible to deduce, with difficulty, due to the excessive signal strength associated with engine 

and main rotor noise compared to human voices, that during the 65 seconds between take off 

and collision, the pilot and the mountain guide have discussed some aspects of the landing site 

(Vedette del Rutor) and ground tracks; the same analysis has not revealed any radio calls made 

by the pilot or answered by him during that time.

Based on the videos, the distribution of the wreckage and the observed damage, the ANSV 

reconstructed the following impact dynamics:

While the helicopter was climbing from Lago dei Seracchi-Cascate (Superiore)…at an altitude of 

2777 m AMSL, with a ground direction of 191°, and a GS of about 47 km/h, the collision took 

place in flight with the aeroplane, positioned a few feet higher than the helicopter and with a 

flight direction substantially similar to the latter.

The ANSV believe the Jodel aeroplane had most likely arrived in the area at 13:15 LT and 

after doing landing site recces was probably on final approach for its first glacier landing.

Based on GPS data…the helicopter’s climb rate in the last 30 seconds of flight was about 

1200ft/min.



Flightpaths of AS350B3 I- EDIC and Jodel D.140E F-PMGV over Rutor Glacier, La Thuile (Credit: ANSV)

The initial impact was between the forward blade of the helicopter and the right main landing 

gear of the aeroplane, followed by subsequent impacts of the blades against the lower side of 

the aircraft fuselage and the ventral part of the right wing.

Reconstruction of the Moment of Impact of AS350B3 I- EDIC and Jodel D.140E F-PMGV over Rutor Glacier, La Thuile  
(Credit: ANSV)

The aeroplane broke up into several parts in flight; the helicopter, deprived of the front part of 

the cockpit, with one of the main rotor blades partially missing and the other two seriously 

damaged, went upside down in flight, and with such attitude impacted the ground.



The investigators comment:

It is worth noting that both aircraft, although operating in isolated mountainous areas and in 

class “G” class airspace, where often no assistance/flight information is available, were not 

equipped with on-board anti-collision systems or systems designed to detect the proximity of 

other aircraft. In the type of flight conducted by the two aircraft in question on the day of the 

accident, the principle of “see and avoid”, as well as the execution of self-information radio calls 

on the expected frequency, represent safety nets sometimes not sufficient to prevent in-flight 

collisions.

On these safety nets, some human factors  (e.g. complacency, lack of attention, lack of 

perception, overload, task saturation during demanding manoeuvres, etc.) often have an effect, 

which may make them less effective than might be expected. A further “barrier” against possible 

in-flight collisions between aircraft operating under VFR could be the presence on board of 

systems capable of detecting the presence of other aircraft not acquired visually or through 

radio communications: in this regard, systems based on GPS receivers capable of calculating 

and transmitting the future position of the aircraft to other nearby aircraft equipped with 

similar systems, preventing the risk of possible collisions by sending alert messages to the 

respective crews, who thus become aware of the position of other aircraft with respect to the 

their own position. More advanced versions of such systems also provide the integration of an 

ADS-B receiver and transponder, which allows visibility on a greater number of aircraft among 

those that present a position and flight path with a risk of collision.

Systems such as those described above are present on a large number of general aviation 

aircraft; their presence on board, although constituting an additional safety net that has only an  

“alert” character, does not exempt pilots from the timely and careful application of the 

procedures and measures previously outlined (visual separation from other traffic and, in 

addition, self-information radio calls). In the present accident, the possible presence of systems 



similar to those described above on both aircraft would have allowed both crews to be aware of 

the presence of another aircraft operating in the Rutor area.

They go on to consider the human factors that affected the ability to see and avoid other 

traffic:

A common factor for both crews is the fact that, in the flight phases preceding the collision, the 

two aircraft had a flight path such that the sun was in an almost frontal position, which certainly  

influenced significantly the ability to perceive, even with peripheral vision, elements coming from  

other sectors than the frontal ones.

The wings and engine cowling of the Jodel reduced the pilot’s field of view and the 

helicopter, whose upper fuselage was painted dark blue, was in the shaded part of the 

valley till only just before the collision.  In addition, the Jodel pilot’s attention was likely 

focused on the imminent glacier landing.

Meanwhile, the helicopter pilot was seated to the right, and tall (1.9 m / 6 ft 3 in), so his 

view in the direction of the Jodel would have also been poor.

Restricted View of the Pilot of AS350B3 I- EDIC (Credit: ANSV)

Radio calls should have been made by both aircraft on 130.00 MHz.  The ANSV concluded:

It is reasonably probable that there was no radio contact between the two aircraft…



They also note that the topology in that areas restricted communications with ATC when 

operating close to the ground.

The ANSV also comment the complexity of the Italian AIP.
The ANSV Determination of Cause
The accident, which consisted of an in-flight collision between the two aircraft, was caused by 

insufficient look-out activity by both crews, which should have been carried out it in a more 

incisive manner considering the restricted area and the critical flight phases in which both 

aircraft were operating.

The contributory factors were:
 The probable absence of bilateral radio communications.
 The limited or no visibility available to both crews towards the sector occupied by 

the other aircraft.
 The sun position, in front of both aircraft.
 The comprehensibility of Italian AIP.
 Megève Aeroclub landing on the glacier in violation of Italian national law.

Six safety recommendations were raised (three on the AIP, two safety promotion and one 

to EASA on electronic conspicuity).

Safety Resources
The European Safety Promotion Network Rotorcraft (ESPN-R) has a helicopter safety 

discussion group on LinkedIn.  The UK Ai

The UK Airprox Board (UKAB) has released a video with tips for pilots on preventing mid air 

collisions:



There are six themes from previous incidents that the Board say: “can help cut the risks if 
pilots apply them every time they fly” (click on the image for more details):



Dynamic Rollover During HESLO at Gusty Mountain Site (Helitrans Airbus 
AS350B3e / H125 LN-OFQ)
The Norwegian Safety Investigation Authority (NSIA) has issued its safety investigation 

report on a helicopter accident that occurred near  Skjelbreitjørna , Sandnes, Rogaland, 

Norway on 6 April 2020.  It involved Airbus Helicopters AS350B3e / H125 LN-

OFQ of Helitrans, one of two Helitrans AS350s conducting Helicopter External Sling Load 

Operations (HESLO) to support construction of a 420 kV power transmission line for power 

utility Statnett.

Wreckage of Helitrans Airbus AS350B3e / H125 LN-OFQ after HESLO Dynamic Rollover (Credit: Norwegian Police 
via NSIA)

The Accident Flight
The NSIA report that the first tasks of the day for the pilot of LN-OFQ was to move a 

container weighing just under 1,100 kg from the rig area C42 near pylon 161 to pylon 151.

A 15 m longline was attached to the cargo hook under the helicopter. A 6 m  line extension was 

attached to the longline, which in turn was attached to a lifting yoke  for the 2 m high container. 

This meant the helicopter had to climb to a height above ground level of approximately 24 m to 

be able to lift the container off the ground.

The pilot (aged 38, with 3,228 total flight experience, 1,758 on type) had…



…trained as a helicopter pilot in the USA during the period 2008 to 2010. In the USA, he flew 

Robinson R22 and R44 and worked as an  instructor for a period. He returned to Norway and 

completed his conversion training to obtain a Norwegian commercial helicopter pilot licence 

(CPL(H)) in 2011. He started working at Helitrans the same year and was permanently employed 

from 2013.

The pilot took off at 08:39.  The helicopter carried 35% fuel (c 190 l / 150 kg). En route to 

pylon 151, the pilot noted that there was a strong southeasterly wind.

After depositing the load and landing alongside the pilot realised that while he 

had navigated to pylon 151 on the line under construction, the load was actually intended 

for pylon 151 on an existing 132 kV power transmission line about 10 NM further to the 

northeast, on the eastern side of the Høgsfjord.

Local Area and Powerline Sites (Credit: Norwegian Mapping Authority/ via NSIA)

While rotors running he…

…called the client Dalekovod using his mobile phone to clear up the misunderstanding. The 

commander said he was in doubt as to whether he could fly the helicopter across the Høgsfjord 



in the prevailing winds. He then called a colleague in rig area C32, approximately 2 NM east of 

the helicopter. They discussed the wind conditions. Following an assessment, the commander 

decided to fly the helicopter over to his colleague in rig area C32 and see how the conditions 

developed.

Positively:

The commander has explained to the NSIA that he felt no pressure from the client when he 

made the decision to move the container. For him, it was only natural to bring it to an easily 

accessible place and not leave it by pylon 151.

After almost 7 minutes on the ground, the pilot entered a low hover with the load to the 

front and right of the helicopter.  He then turned anti-clockwise “ensuring that the line was 

getting taut in view down below on his right-hand side”. The NSIA note that data from 

the  Appareo Vision 1000 lightweight video and flight data recorder fitted aided the 

investigation and showed that:

…the helicopter started rolling to the left, at the same time as the nose started to pitch up. The 

commander moved the cyclic stick forward and to the right  to counteract this movement, but 

the movement continued. When the helicopter had rolled 11.6 degrees to the left and with an 

upward nose angle of 6 degrees, moving the cyclic stick all the way to the right caused the 

commander’s right foot to slip off the right pedal. At the same time, a green diode on the cargo 

hook load indicator came into sight on the far right in the image, indicating that the load on the  

hook was less than 100 kg at  the time. The helicopter then started turning to the left.



Vision 1000 (Credit: Appareo)

Within 7 seconds of being in a normal position…

…the helicopter heading passed 59 degrees during the leftward turn, at the same time as the left  

roll to reached 31 degrees. It had a nose high angle of 5.1 degrees. Two green lights on the 

cargo hook load indicator  indicated that the load on the hook was at least 100 kg.

Eight seconds after the helicopter was in a normal position, the commander activated 

the  trigger switch on the cyclic stick to open the cargo hook. The helicopter was still turning to 

the left and had reached a heading of 24 degrees. The roll was 18.6 degrees to the left, and the 

nose had dropped to -4 degrees.



Two green lights (green arrow) can be seen on the far right in the image, indicating that
the cargo hook load has exceeded 100 kg. The commander pressed the switch on the cyclic stick
to release the cargo (red arrow). At this point in time, after spinning out of control, the helicopter

had turned 116 degrees to the left. The nose angle had dropped to -4 degrees. (Credit: NSIA)

As the helicopter continued to  turn, it started to roll to the right.

Nine seconds after being in a normal position, the helicopter had continued its leftward turn to 

a heading of 301 degrees and the angle of roll was 32 degrees to the right.   The rotation 

continued, and the helicopter was getting close to the ground.

Twelve seconds after being in a normal position, the helicopter’s main rotor hit the ground and 

the helicopter ended up lying on its right side with its nose pointing south. The helicopter had 

thus almost completed a full rotation to the left before it came to rest



Helitrans Airbus AS350B3e / H125 LN-OFQ Accident Site (Credit: Norwegian Police via NSIA)

When the helicopter hit the ground, various objects, including a tablet computer and a bottle of 

oil, were thrown around in the cockpit. The commander banged his helmet into  the door, 

damaging the helmet and causing the chin strap to come loose. The red light  indicating that the  

emergency locator transmitter [a    Kannad AP-H INTEGRA (ER)] had been triggered started 

flashing.   The commander’s right hand got trapped, but he quickly managed to free it. He then 

released his seatbelt and climbed out of the helicopter’s left side door. The engine continued to 

run for 19 seconds after the helicopter hit the ground.   Shortly after, the commander returned 

to the helicopter and switched off the electrical power and the emergency locator transmitter.

The pilot, who was wearing a helmet and restrained by a 4 point harness, sustained only 

minor abrasions and bruising.  The load overturned and came to rest 47 m from the 

helicopter after being released during the accident sequence.
The NSIA Safety Investigation
The wreckage was examined at the NSIA’s Lillestrøm facility.  They noted:

 The cockpit and cabin were relatively undamaged. Seats and seatbelts were intact 
and undamaged. The most obvious damage was that the right front door had 
been smashed in and both windows in the door were broken.



 The right-side skid and steps were knocked off and both cross tubes were broken on the 
right-hand side.

 Extensive damage to all three main rotor blades. All three starflex arms were broken, 
with a fracture surface of 45 degrees.

 All four suspension bars for the main gearbox were broken.
 The main gearbox had been pushed down into and ruptured the fuel tank  [this was not 

a crash resistant fuel system (CRFS0].   The hole in the fuel tank could have led to a 
major fuel leakage, but because of the position of the helicopter and the fact that 
the  tank was less than half full, only a small amount of fuel ran out.

 The engine was virtually without exterior damage.
 The tail boom was split in two places, and the tail rotor gearbox had come loose.

There was no evidence of pre-impact defects.  They examined the pilot’s helmet:

The chin strap came loose on the right-hand side and the helmet fell off during the crash. A 

detailed examination showed damage to the protective hard shell on the right side of the 

helmet, and the helmet was subsequently scrapped.

Helmet of of Helitrans Airbus AS350B3e / H125 LN-OFQ after HESLO Dynamic Rollover (Credit: NSIA)



One of the damaged areas was close to the right ear, near the chin strap attachment. It was 

also found that very little force was required to open the chin strap lock. The attachment 

mechanism of the chin strap worked correctly, however, in that it was not possible to pull the 

chin strap loose with the lock engaged.

The helicopter and the right cockpit door were lying over a large rock and the commander may 

have hit this rock with his helmet.    NSIA believes that his use of a helmet prevented any further 

injury.  

The NSIA commissioned a survey by a drone (or Unmanned Air System [UAS] / Remotely 

Piloted Air System [RPAS]), which was conducted shortly after the wreckage was removed.



3D illustration of the accident site, looking southeast, the day after the wreckage was
removed. The arrow on the left points to the rock on which the helicopter was lying. The hole in
the ground is for pylon 155. A rocky outcrop and steeply sloping terrain can be seen on the far

right. (Credit Nordic Unmanned via NSIA)



3D illustration of the accident site, looking northeast, the day after the helicopter was
removed. The hole in the ground is for pylon 155. (Credit: Nordic Unmanned via NSIA)

There are no exact data for the wind conditions that were applicable at the accident site. There 

were strong winds and gusts at the time the commander was to move the container  from pylon 

151 to rig area C32. Both the forecast and the reported wind direction was southerly or 

southwesterly.



This means that the wind probably flowed up the sloping terrain south of the accident 

site.  The NSIA note that the operator’s procedures for sling load operations (SOP 5.5.2 

Limitations) state:

Under conditions of turbulent air, the speed is reduced further. Maximum wind is normally 30 

kt, in mountain areas the maximum can be considered 15 to 20 kts. Wind conditions must 

always be considered by the commander on the spot.

On the day…

The operation took place in an open mountain terrain where strong winds and local  turbulence 

were to be expected.

Available weather forecasts and reports from Stavanger Airport Sola (TAF and METAR) show that 

a strong southerly to southwesterly wind with gusts up to 33–38 kt was expected. That exceeded 

the limit of 30 kt that Helitrans had originally set for sling load operations. The commander 

could therefore have refused to fly on the day in question, with reference to the limits set by the 

helicopter operator.

Hence:

It is conceivable that the decision to move the container from pylon 151 to rig area C32 was the 

result of a self-imposed pressure to  ‘clear up’ the misunderstanding that had occurred, and that 

the commander, at the very  least, wanted to move the container to a rig area. The decision may 

also have been  influenced by an overly optimistic assessment of the difficulties of flying in 

the prevailing winds.

The recorded video indicates there was a wind gust just as the sling came into tension.

The southerly wind could  therefore move the helicopter backwards and to the left unless the 

commander used the cyclic stick to counteract the movement.



The helicopter has rolled left to an angle of 11.6 degrees and has a nose high angle of 6
degrees. The commander has moved the cyclic stick all the way to the right, and his right foot has
just slipped off the pedal. A single green light can be seen on the far right in the image, indicating

a load of less than 100 kg (green arrow). (Credit: NSIA)

The image [above] shows that the cyclic stick had been moved all the way to the right without 

this stopping the leftward roll.   The NSIA believes that, at that point, the helicopter had come in 

a dynamic rollover situation. In this case, the

container, which was still on the ground, acted as a fixed point via the longline.

They explain that:

A dynamic rollover normally occurs if a helicopter has one skid on the ground at the same time 

as it is affected by a lateral force or movement. As the helicopter starts to pivot, the main rotor 

thrust will contribute to further pivot the helicopter around the skid. When the critical rollover 

angle is exceeded, dynamic rollover cannot be prevented by corrective cyclic control alone, and 

the main rotor will hit the ground. Dynamic rollover  is most likely to occur in sideways sloping 

terrain, but can also occur on a horizontal surface, for example if a skid gets caught in 

something in connection with take-off.



Dynamic Rollover (Credit: EHEST via ESPN-R/EASA)

A form of dynamic rollover can also occur if a longline or underslung load gets caught 

in something on the ground while the helicopter is moving horizontally.

In their analysis, the NSIA comment that:

The situation rapidly deteriorated. The commander lost control of the helicopter in less  than 

seven seconds. After that, the commander had no possibility of controlling the sequence of 

events even if he opened the cargo hook and released the longline.

The NSIA considers that the wind gust came at the worst possible time. Had it come a  little 

earlier, the longline would have been slack, enabling the commander to counteract undesirable 

movements without the helicopter pivoting into a dynamic rollover situation.   Had it come a few 

seconds later, the container would have been up in the air and there would have been no 

contact with the ground. That would have prevented any possibility of dynamic rollover and 

given the commander a better chance of withstanding undesirable wind loads.



NSIA Conclusions
The commander was to move a container in demanding wind conditions that could exceed the 

limit of 30 kt set by the helicopter operator.   When he nonetheless decided to move the 

container, the helicopter was affected by a wind gust at the worst possible time, causing it to 

crash as a result of dynamic rollover.

The NSIA pragmatically comment that:

It is difficult to define absolute regulatory limits that can be used as the basis for deciding 

whether or not to fly in demanding wind conditions. In addition, the commander must consider 

local wind conditions and perform a risk assessment of the operation.

Safety Resources



Inadvertent Entry into IMC During Mountaintop HESLO (Air Greenland 
Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT)
On 24 June 2019, during Helicopter External Sling Load Operation (HESLO) 

in Greenland inadvertent entry to Instrument Metrological Conditions (IMC) resulted in Air 

Greenland Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT impacting the ground.  The pilot escaped injury.

Wreckage of Air Greenland Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT at Dye One Comms Site (Credit: AIB Denmark)

The Accident
The Accident Investigation Board Denmark (AIBD) explain in their safety investigation 

report that the helicopter was moving fuel with a 30 m long line from a barge to the 

mountaintop Telesite Dye One communication site.  This waa at a former Distant Early 

Warning Line radar site at 4757 feet AMSL on Qaqatoqaq, near Sisimiut (formerly 

Holsteinsborg).



Air Greenland Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT Conducting HESLO from the Barge (Credit: AIB Denmark)

The pilot recalled the wind was 210°, 5 knots, no turbulence and there were fog and cloud 

in the vicinity of the telecoms site.



Telesite Dye One Communication Site at 4757 feet AMSL on Qaqatoqaq near Sisimiut, Greenland (Credit: via AIB 
Denmark)

The pilot was 36, had flown 3037 hours in total and had “extensive firefighting and 

mountain flying experience”, including operating with longlines.  The pilot was on a short 

term contract and completed their last Operator Proficiency Check (OPC) 4 months before, 

which included demonstrating a whiteout landing.  They had also completed the operator’s 

HESLO check in March and had been observed for 2 days in line flying under supervision.

The pilot had already successfully made 28 of the 30 planned movements of what appear 

to be 1000 litre IBCs, and the pilot had discussed with a Task Specialist (TS) at the barge the 

possibility of doing a second tasking before sunset.



Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT Making an Earlier HESLO Delivery at Dye One That Day (Credit: Air Greenland via AIB 
Denmark)

On the 29th lift, the helicopter started to climb, and…



…at approximately 400-600 feet above the ground, along the mountain ridge and passing 

approximately 2200 feet Mean Sea Level (MSL), the pilot called a TS at the telesite station in 

order to obtain an opinion on the visibility and presence of clouds at the mountaintop.   The TS 

reported that “actually only the telesite station itself was open, but the rest was foggy”. The pilot 

replied that he would “try to find his way up to the mountaintop”.

After several turns during climb and at various airspeeds, the pilot at approximately 4900 feet 

MSL on a westerly track, approached the agreed-upon delivery point, which was a footbridge 

along the station buildings.

The pilot was focused on the delivery point, a footbridge along the station buildings, and 

manoeuvring the helicopter.  While not explained, this presumably made filling the site’s 

fuel tanks easier for workers at the site than if the fuel had been delivered to the lower 

helipad.



Telesite Dye One Communication Site Greenland: Footbridge in Yellow, Lower Helipad in Red, Three Site Fuel 
Tanks Between (Credit: via AIB Denmark)

While approximately 150 feet above the ground, due to clouds/fog the pilot lost external 

visual references and started feeling spatial disorientated. Fearing the fuel tank might hit 

ground personnel or structure, the pilot “abruptly started flying rearward” intending to 

release the load.

In combination with various oscillating flight parameters, and an unstable external load, 

the pilot experienced partial loss of control of the helicopter.  After further rearward, 

descending, oscillating flight, the fuel tank collided with rocky terrain. Approximately 30 m 

further downhill the pilot successfully released the load using the electrically operated 

release control on the cyclic stick.

In a helicopter nose down attitude on a southerly track, at a high sink rate, and at a low height 

above the ground, the pilot regained partial visual references and noted that impact was 

inevitable. …approximately 100 meters downhill, the helicopter skids impacted with rocky 

terrain, and the long line entangled with rocks….



Wreckage of Air Greenland Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT at Dye One Comms Site (Credit: AIB Denmark)

The helicopter ended up on its right hand side with the nose section facing towards Telesite Dye 

One. The pilot felt unharmed and evacuated the helicopter through the left hand door.

Witnesses observing the sequence of events initiated a rescue mission.   G-forces activated the 

onboard Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT).

The helicopter was equipped with an Appareo Vision 1000 on-board data and image 

recorder. The BEA assisted by downloading data which was “of good quality and useful to 

the AIB safety investigation”.



Wreckage of Air Greenland Airbus AS350B3 OY-HGT at Dye One Comms Site (Credit: AIB Denmark)

Safety Analysis
AIB remark that:

In general, when operating in specific remote and hostile areas, the access to proper and 

reliable weather information before flight might be difficult or even impossible, which might 

make the preflight planning phase and the later on operational phase unpredictable and not 

fact-based leading to subjective decision-making processes. The above statement is an 

operational condition, when operating in such specific environments, which, in the general 

opinion of the AIB, requires operational creativity and innovation in order to optimize flight 

safety.



They do note that the operational weather minima in the operator’s Operations Manual 

Part B was “not fully comparable to the rules of the air (BL 7-1)”.

However, to the AIB, the limitation in the standard operating procedures of a cloud ceiling of 

600 feet seems to be more restrictive than the wording clear of cloud of BL 7-1 for operations 

in airspace class G.

Air Greenland Operations Manual Part B AS350 (extract)



Danish Regulations on Rules of the Air (BL 7-1) (extract)

The operator categorized HESLO as a high risk SPO (Specialised Operations), seemingly due 

to the need to conduct the task at low height above ground.  AIB comment:

Taking into consideration that the accident flight was a high risk SPO, the AIB, from a flight 

safety point of view, finds the limitation on cloud ceiling rational.

They observe that:



At the time of the accident, the pilot had performed several sling operations from the fjord to the  

mountaintop and presumably had a reliable knowledge of the general weather conditions at the  

mountaintop.

S-turns, instead of a straight route, at various airspeeds during climb in combination with the 

radio correspondence between the pilot and a TS at Telesite Dye One supports the premise that 

the weather conditions at the mountaintop were marginal for this sling operation.

The [selection of a delivery point of the] footbridge compared to the helipad required, in the 

opinion of the AIB, more pilot precision and head down external focus, which in combination 

with the actual weather conditions at the mountaintop probably reduced and/or eliminated pilot  

perception of changes to the available external visual cues.

The helicopter, while positioning at the mountaintop, most likely entered orographic clouds 

causing loss of pilot external visual references.

Upon loosing external visual references, the pilot feared the consequences of an intermediate 

release of the fuel tank or a fuel tank collision with obstacles and abruptly started flying 

rearward. This rationale of the pilot potentially prevented a more severe outcome.

Loss of external visual cues leading to spatial disorientation resulted in an emergency requiring 

release of the external load. The emergency procedure, though not specific for this type of 

emergency, stipulated release of the external load. However, the emergency procedure did not 

distinguish between a cargo hook and a main cargo hook release.

AIB are slightly contradictory as (emphasis added)…

In an emergency, the AIB considers a main cargo hook release (release of the external load and 

the  long line) to be more conducive to flight safety  than just a cargo hook release [as 

executed].

However:



The impact of the helicopter skids with rocky terrain at a shallow angle, and the tightening of 

the long line  slowing down the forward energy and reducing the final impact force, made the  

accident survivable.

Which just goes to show the dilemma drafting procedures and making decisions in an 

emergency!  The investigators opine that in relation to the hook release:

Taking into consideration the previous flying experience of the pilot (firefighting) and the sling 

operations of the day, the pilot most likely acted on stored routines…when trying to and finally 

successfully released the fuel tank at the cargo hook.

Further:

A potential launch of another sling operation at another location before sunset might have 

provoked a pilot self-induced commercial pressure and task fixation. Task fixation might have 

expanded the pilot risk tolerances leading to changes of perception of risks, and decision-

making processes during the sling operation.

AIB Conclusions
The helicopter, while positioning for the agreed-upon delivery point, entered orographic clouds 

causing loss of pilot external visual references.

While attempting to recover, loss of external visual cues led to spatial disorientation and a 

partial  loss of control of the helicopter.



Alaskan Airbus AS350B2 CFIT With Unrestrained Cargo in Cabin (N194EH 
of ERA Helicopters, 5 May 2016)
On 5 May 2016  Airbus   Helicopters AS350B2 helicopter N194EH, operated by 

Era Helicopters, suffered a Controlled Flight Into Terrain (CFIT) while on 

approach to a remote landing site on the Norris Glacier about 15 miles 

northeast of Juneau, Alaska. The pilot received serious injuries, and the 

helicopter sustained substantial damage. It was conducting a Part 91 as a 

visual flight rules (VFR) internal-cargo company flight.  Degraded conditions 

were reported in the area at the time of the accident.

Wreckage of ERA Helicopters Airbus AS350B2 N194EH (Credit: ERA via NTSB)



Flight Preparations
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety 

investigation report (released in November 2019) that:

Alaska Heli-Mush Inc, contracted with Era Helicopters to provide helicopter 

support for the movement of personnel, dogs, and cargo. The purpose of the 

flight was to transport camp equipment from Era Helicopters’ headquarters in 

Juneau to a remote dog camp on the Norris Glacier in the Tongass National 

Forest. Era Helicopters and Alaska Heli-Mush conducted heli-mushing 

operations for the Alaska tourism industry using a helicopter glacier landing 

permit issued by the US Forest Service.

The pilot conducted a formal flight risk assessment before the flight using Risk 

Assessment Form ERA A-003. The form had sections addressing crew 

qualifications, crew currency, duty period, flight profile, environment, and 

aircraft. The completed flight risk assessment form had a total value of 15, and 

no sections of the flight risk assessment were exceeded (crew qualifications, 

crew currency, duty period, flight profile, environment, and aircraft). The flight 

would have been prohibited if the total value was greater than 32 or any section 

limit was exceeded.

The Era Operations Manual – Part A General Procedures discusses internal 

cargo carried in passenger compartments and states: “For the purposes of 

clarity, baggage may be carried in a passenger compartment when properly 

secured and accompanied by a passenger. Cargo may only be carried in the 

passenger compartment during cargo only operations. The PIC shall ensure that 

all cargo, including baggage, on Company aircraft complies with the following: 

It is carried in an approved cargo rack, bin, or compartment installed in or on 

the aircraft; It is secured by an approved means.”



The operator reported that internal cargo loading is covered in company 

training and performed by company employees. The operator further reported 

that the only individuals who have documented cargo training are the pilots, 

and due to this, all internal cargo loading is supervised and/or approved post-

loading by the pilot who has the final authority for airworthiness of the 

helicopter.

The operator configured the helicopter’s cabin to facilitate the transportation of 

[850lb of] internal cargo.

It appears most was carried in the baggage bay.

The rear seat assembly was folded up against the cabin wall, and a lidded plastic  

box that contained a metal heater was placed on the cabin floor behind the 

pilot’s seat. A single cargo strap was secured to the rear seatbelt attachment 

points in front of the aft cabin wall and routed over the top of the plastic box 

from left to right in the cabin. The configuration of the single cargo strap 

provided lateral restraint; however, no forward restraint was present. The make  

and model of the single cargo strap, as well as the strap’s maximum load rating, 

could not be determined. According to cargo paperwork, the box and its 

contents weighed 50 pounds.

The Accident Flight
…at 1307, a weather report from the dog camp indicated a 300-ft ceiling and 5 

miles visibility. At 1341, the pilot departed on his first flight of the day from the 

heliport for the approximate 25-minute flight with an internal cargo load of 850 

pounds and no passengers.   The pilot was seated in the front right seat and was 

wearing a 4-point restraint system… The pilot did not wear and was not 

required to wear a flight helmet.



Flightpath of AS350B2 N194EH (Credit: via NTSB)

…the pilot reported that, during the approach to the dog camp over a large, 

featureless and snow-covered ice field, ceilings were “low,” and he observed “a 

lot of flat light.” He stated that, during the approach, he was in radio contact 

with the dog camp personnel. He reported that he was scanning his radar 

altimeter, which was showing 200 ft above ground level, and he had visually 

acquired the landing zone and dog camp when the helicopter struck the snow-

covered ice field and rolled over to the right.



Wreckage of AS350B2 N194EH (Credit: via NTSB)

After the impact, the pilot released himself from the fiberglass seat’s 4-point 

restraint system and attempted to perform an emergency shutdown. The dog 

camp personnel immediately responded to the accident site via snowmobile and 

rendered first aid to the pilot who they found lying on the snow. The accident site  

was about 3/4 mile from the dog camp landing zone near Guardian Mountain.

Dog camp personnel notified Era’s operational control center of the accident at 

1405 and Era’s Juneau base at 1408. At 1409, the operator’s base in Juneau 

initiated the emergency response plan.

Postaccident photos submitted by the operator showed that the cargo strap over  

the plastic box remained intact and that the metal heater had been ejected out of  

the plastic box during the impact sequence and was lying immediately behind 



the pilot’s seat on the snow. 

Cabin of AS350B2 N194EH (Credit: via NTSB)

The photos also showed a fracture of the [fibreglass] seatback at about shoulder 

height. Removal of the seat cushion showed a complete transverse fracture of 

the seatback, lower on the left side than the right side.



Cockpit of AS350B2 N194EH (Credit: via NTSB)

Review of the pilot’s postaccident medical treatment records indicated that his 

injuries included fractures of multiple left ribs and the left scapula, multiple left-

sided transverse and spinous process fractures, as well as injuries to the left 

lung, left kidney, and spleen, and an intimal tear in the mid-descending aorta.

FAA Responses to NTSB on Cargo in the Cabin
The FAA responded that:

The FAA does not require original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) to publish 

information regarding cargo loading. The certification assumption is that the 

helicopter will be used to carry people, unless indicated otherwise by the 

applicant. In the case of the AS350, Airbus did not indicate that anything other 

than passengers will be carried.

Any “approved” cargo installation will be explained in the Rotorcraft Flight 

Manual (RFM) limitation or supplement section – (what tie-downs are used, 



what straps are used, etc.); loading instructions (what areas in the cabin get 

loaded first, second, etc.); and procedures (walk around procedures will mention  

to verify cargo secured).

The NTSB however highlight that the AS350B2 RFM states that a loading 

instruction placard is to be mounted on the side face of the control pedestal 

and this states the “distributed loads maximum” for the rear cabin floor is 682 

pounds.  The FAA also commented:

Operators do not have certification approval to install cargo in the cabin unless 

it is mentioned in the RFM or [RFM supplement] RFMS (part of the [type 

certificate] TC or an STC) – installation instructions are provided in the flight 

manual. #

It is possible that there may be some operators that have been using existing tie-

downs/seat rails to tie down cargo in the cabin, and incorrectly assuming that 

this is a “certified” installation when in fact it is not. … The RFM or RFM 

supplement will be clear as to what is approved regarding internal cargo (if it 

does not mention how and where to install cargo, then it’s not certified).

However, confusingly FAA subsequently added several months later that:

…the FAA is not aware of any documentation that would prohibit Part 27 

rotorcraft from carrying cargo in the cabin, even if a certification does not exist 

for that helicopter.

A search by the NTSB “did not identify any regulatory guidance, advisory 

material, or best practices available from the FAA regarding the securement of 

internal cargo in helicopters or the care, inspection, and maintenance of cargo 

straps used for internal cargo operations with helicopters”.



Additionally:

On April 21, 2017, Airbus stated in an email to the NTSB {Investigator In 

Charge] IIC that “it is the responsibility of the operator to define an adapted 

cargo, freight, or baggage securement that is in respect to the limitations 

permissible force on the floor stowing mooring rings.”

On June 26, 2018, the Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la sécurité de 

l’aviation civile reported to the NTSB IIC that Airbus has developed a “cargo 

installation in cabin” procedure for the Airbus AS 350 series, which is currently 

in the certification process.

NTSB Probable Cause
The pilot’s failure to maintain terrain clearance while on approach to land in 

flat light conditions.

Contributing to the severity of the pilot’s injuries was the inadequately 

restrained internal cargo, which shifted forward during the impact and struck 

the pilot and/or the pilot’s seat.

Other Safety Resources
  Low Viz Helicopter CFIT Accident, Alaska  - this also featured CFIT and released 

cabin cargo and  occurred the day   after .



Wreckage of Temsco Airbus AS350B2 N94TH, Denver Glacier, AK (Credit: NTSB)

UK CAA Paper 2007/03: Helicopter Flight in Degraded Visual Conditions:

Final summary report on research conducted for the CAA by QinetiQ on 

helicopter flight in degraded visual conditions. The work comprised a review of 

accident data for the period 1975 to 2004, simulator trials using two test pilots 

and six representative accident scenarios, analysis of the simulator trials results  

including linking quantitative measures of visual scene content with pilot 

workload ratings, and a review of relevant civil regulations.



AS350B3/H125 Bird Strike with Red Kite
On 22 July 2020, Airbus Helicopters AS350B3e / H125 F-HJSC of Société LEI MOA struck a 

bird while descending to  Nîmes-Garons Airport that penetrated the canopy and injured a 

front seat passenger.

Airbus Helicopters AS350B3e / H125 F-HJSC of Société LEI MOA after Bird Strike with Red Kite (Credit: BEA)

The Incident Flight
The French Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la Sécurité de l’Aviation Civile (the BEA) 

explain in their safety investigation report (issued in December in 2020 in French only) that 

the helicopter took off from Annecy Airport with four passengers, for a private flight 

to Dieulefit, where one of the passenger was dropped off. The flight continued to Nîmes-

Garons Airport.  The helicopter had been cruising at 6,000 ft AMSL and began its descent 

towards Nîmes with a ground speed of around 140 kt.  The BEA recount that:

Passing 1,100 ft in descent, about 5 NM north-east of Nîmes Garons, the helicopter struck a bird 

which broke through the canopy. The passenger in the front left seat was injured and bleeding 

profusely. The bird probably struck him in the chest and shards of the canopy cut into his scalp. 



The pilot, for his part, was not affected…[and] assessed the helicopter’s flying qualities and 

decided to continue to destination. He then reassured the injured passenger while optimizing 

his route in order to reduce the time it took for the passenger to be taken care of by the 

emergency services on the ground.

After impact on the rear bulkhead, the bird lands on the general pitch control. This does not 

affect the handling of the flight because the level of friction set by the pilot in stabilized flight is 

high.

The pilot declared an emergency, requested medical assistance on arrival and proceeded 

to make a safe landing at Nîmes-Garons.
Safety Investigation
The helicopter was fitted with an Appareo Vision 1000 recording system.  As in many 

previous safety investigations, Vision 1000 provided useful data to the investigators.

The canopy was pierced on the passenger side, in the immediate vicinity of the central 

windscreen pillar, to a height of 78 cm and a width of approximately 40 cm. The metal upper 

part of the windshield pillar shows an impact mark of a few centimeters. This trace is located 20 

cm to the left of the central upright (looking from the back to the front).

Of note is that:

The turbine engine fire handle guard has moved out of its safety position. The pilot indicated 

that he had not touched it.

Fortuitously:

The fire handle has not moved. The rear cabin bulkhead and the rear seat backs show biological 

debris traces. The most important debris of the canopy among those found measures 

approximately 25 cm.



Part 27 helicopter certification standards in Europe and the US, unlike Part 29 for larger 

helicopters, do not have a birdstrike requirement (discussed further below).

The bird was identified as being a red kite.  The BEA suggest this weighed c 0.8 kg, though 

0.8-1.3 kg is the typical range for these birds.

Prior to the accident, the aerodrome operator had carried out an assessment of the avian 

risk in the vicinity of the aerodrome in accordance with the requirements of European 

Regulation No.139 / 2014, in particular its Annex IV Part ADR.OPS.B.020 relating to ‘reduced 

risk of collision with wildlife’.  The operator assessed that in the event sector, there is no 

identified hazard… [and this was]…considered to be an isolated case.
BEA Observations
No specific bird risk has been identified in the sector by the aerodrome operator. However, the 

risk assessment methods used do not allow the identification of isolated and / or random bird 

presences. They aim to take into account predictable high concentrations.

If the pilot had been injured in a manner similar to that of the passenger, the safety of the flight 

would have been compromised. Wearing a protective helmet with a visor by the pilot would 

reduce exposure to this risk. Due to exposure to other specific risks, this practice is widespread in  

aerial work.

During the investigation into the accident to the helicopter registered as F-GOLH which occurred  

in 2015...the BEA showed that the pilot, who was not wearing a protective helmet, suffered a 

head injury. Remaining lucid and agile despite his injuries, his intervention was decisive in 

limiting the consequences of the collision with the ground, in particular for the securing of the 

wreckage and the evacuation of the passengers. In the report devoted to this investigation, a 

non-exhaustive list of thirteen helicopter accidents is presented during which the wearing of a 

helmet contributed to limiting the pilot’s injuries when he was equipped with one or could have 

contributed to it if he had one been equipped.



Safety Resources
In a presentation on behalf of the Rotorcraft Bird Strike Working Group (RBSWG) to 

the 11th EASA Rotorcraft Symposium  in December 2017 it was revealed that in the US 94% 

of the current helicopter fleet is made up of types that never needed to meet a bird strike 

requirement. A helicopter accident (discussed below) and the Hudson A320 ditching, both 

in January 2009, were likely causes of a big increase in all wildlife strikes reporting across 

the US helicopter fleet.

While fixed wing aircraft predominantly strike birds during take-off and landing, two thirds 

of rotorcraft strikes occurred during the en route phase (where kinetic energy is highest). 

Only 8-9% occurred during approach and 9-10% during climb.  The presentation went on:

The largest single component struck by birds is the windshield with 47% on Part 27 and 40% on 

Part 29.   84-85% of all bird strikes occurred on components forward of the main rotor mast. 

This includes the main rotor which experienced 30%-33% of the strikes reported. Not one single 

record exists for windshield penetration on Part 29 rotorcraft certified to the FAA bird strike 

airworthiness standard established over 21 years ago.     This is statistically significant. For newly 



manufactured and existing rotorcraft, the RBSWG proposed to use a Risk-Based Safety-Tiered 

approach that scales the bird strike regulation based on the maximum number of occupants 

onboard. As the number of occupants increases, so does the risk exposure.

They also recommend:
 Reduce airspeed when practical
 Increase altitude as quickly as possible and practical
 Use taxi and landing lights

A new EASA Safety Information Bulletin (SIB) is expected in mid-January 2021 on helicopter 

bird strikes.



Air Methods AS350B3 Night CFIT in Snow (N530H)
On 26 October 2020 Air Methods Corp (AMC) helicopter air ambulance Airbus 

Helicopters AS350B3 N530H was destroyed when it suffered a Controlled Flight into Terrain 

(CFIT) 200 m from Whiskey Creek Airport, near Silver City, New Mexico.  The aircraft came 

to rest just 8 m from a house.  The pilot, the sole occupant, miraculously suffered only 

minor injuries.  The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) issued their safety 

investigation report, issued 20 August 2021.

Wreckage of Air Methods Airbus AS350B3 N530H After Night CFIT in Marginal and Deteriorating Weather (Credit: 
Local Police via NTSB)

The Accident Flight
A storm was approaching, and the intent was to relocate the aircraft from the AMC 

base at Gila Regional Medical Center (6097 ft AMSL) to the near-by Whiskey Creek Airport 

(6126 ft AMSL) where AMC had a rented hangar.



The accident flight departed at 23:34 local time. The pilot, who had flown 4200 hours, 1956 

on type, stated that night Marginal Visual Flight Rules (MVFR) conditions prevailed (which 

implies a ceiling between 1,000-3,000 feet and/or 3 to 5 miles visibility). The pilot 

described how precipitation turned from rain to snow when approaching the airport.  The 

flight followed Highway 180 and turned south towards the airport.  On the turn to finals, 

there was an increase in precipitation, and a reduction in visibility.

The aircraft impacted terrain in a level, or slightly nose-low attitude approximately 200 m 

NW of the airport, just 3 minutes after take-off.  The Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) 

did not activate, a common failure.

The nearest weather data was from Grant County Airport (5446 ft AMSL), 8 nm south of 

Whiskey Creek.  Visibility was 7 miles and ceiling 1300 ft AGL (i.e. c 6750 ft AMSL) at the time 

of the accident.



 
The NTSB Probable Cause
The NTSB determined the probable cause to be:

The pilot’s failure to maintain sufficient altitude above terrain while operating in reduced 

visibility due to snow showers.

Strictly, this is simply a statement of the circumstances of the accident.
Operator’s Recommendation to Repeat an Occurrence
In the accident report form, AMC recommend:

Avoid VFR flight in conditions below VFR weather minimums. Avoid VFR night flight in areas of no  

illumination or surface reference in poor visibility. Maintain an instrument cross-check when 

operating in areas of low illumination or low visibility. When encountering areas of deteriorating  

weather pilots should divert, abort, land or execute the IIMC recovery procedure in accordance 

with company guidance.

But What About Flight Data Monitoring?



There is no mention of any examination of flight data.  The   FAA changed Part 135 in 2017 

so that helicopter air ambulance operators had to comply with a new Flight Data 

Monitoring (FDM) System requirement, FAR 135.607:

After April 23, 2018, no person may operate a helicopter in air ambulance operations unless it is 

equipped with an approved flight data monitoring system capable of recording flight 

performance data.

FAA AC 135-14B Helicopter Air Ambulance (HAA) Operations explains that:

The FDMS should record digital or analog raw data, images, cockpit voice or ambient audio 

recordings or any combinations thereof which ideally yield at least the following flight 

information: • Location; • Altitude; • Heading; • Speeds (airspeed and groundspeed); • Pitch, yaw,  

and roll attitudes and rate of change; • Engine parameters; • Main rotor RPM; • Ambient acoustic  

data; • Radio ambient audio; and • Any other parameter the operator deems necessary (e.g., 

high definition video recording looking forward including instrument panel and forward cockpit 

windshield view, intercommunications system (intercom) between pilot and medical crew, 

communications with air traffic control (ATC), OCS, base operations, first responders at scene, 

hospital, etc.)

So while this sector was classified as a Part 91 positioning flight, it was required as air 

ambulance to have a suitable FDM System installed, and it would be very unusual to turn 

the system off for a positioning flight.
Safety Resources
The European Safety Promotion Network Rotorcraft (ESPN-R) has a helicopter safety 

discussion group on LinkedIn.  Read the ESPN-R (formerly EHEST) HE4 leaflet of Decision 

Making or watch their DVE video:






AW139 Brownout Accident with the Nigerian VP Aboard (Caverton 
Helicopters, 5N-CML)
On 2 February 2019 Leonardo Helicopters AW139 5N-CML of  Caverton Helicopters crashed 

while landing at a football pitch at Kabba, Kogi State on a VVIP flight with Nigerian Vice 

President  Oluyem i Oluleke “Yemi” Osinbajo on board.  All 12 on board escaped without 

injury, though the aircraft was destroyed.  The chartered commercial helicopter was being 

used because the Vice President was making an election campaign visit.

Caverton Helicopters Leonardo AW139 5N-CML at Kabba, Kogi State (Credit: AIB Nigera)

The Accident Flight
The Accident Investigation Bureau Nigeria (AIB Nigeria) say, in their safety investigation 

report (issued 28 July 2020), that the helicopter had positioned from Lagos to the 

capital, Abuja, that morning, landing at 10:00.

The helicopter was refuelled and the flight crew prepared for the VIP charter flight. At about an 

hour before the planned departure, the flight crew received the coordinates for the temporary 



landing sites at Kabba and Okene, and they were thus able to finalize their flight planning for 

the mission. According to the weather report from the Nigerian Meteorological Agency (NiMet), 

the prevailing weather at the football field was good with visibility over 10 km and no clouds 

below 5,000 ft. The Kabba landing area was an unpaved area comprising a football field located  

in the centre with two spectator stands on each side of the field. The elevation of the area was 

1,500 ft AMSL and…the field surface was characterized by scattered patches of grass and loose 

fine soil.   Although the landing area was not an approved heliport, it was suitable as a 

temporary helicopter landing site.

At about 13:46, the helicopter departed for Kabba as callsign NGR002.  At 14:20 in cruise at 

5000 ft AMSL, the Multi-Purpose Flight Recorder (MPFR) light came ON and the Crew 

Alerting System (CAS) displayed “FDR AND CVR FAIL”.  The crew actioned the 

appropriate Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) checklist successfully and so the flight could 

continue.

The flight crew stated that on initial approach, they carried out the pre-landing checks which 

included a landing brief for a ground helipad landing and a Landing Decision Point (or 

committal point) of 100 ft/20 kt indicated airspeed (IAS) based on the surrounding obstacles.

Nigeria Police Force Bell 412EP 5N-PEJ was flying in advance of the AW139, landing at 14:30.

The flight crew of NGR002 stated that they sighted the intended landing area as a result of the 

cloud of residual dust generated by the downwash of 5N-PEJ’s main rotor. The flight approached  

the landing area and the Pilot stated that he was able to take note of the area and the obstacles 

outside the landing area (spectators’ stands, football field goal posts, a car and people awaiting 

the arrival of the VIPs). After sighting the football field, the flight crew agreed on the selected 

landing area. NGR002 approached with the speed of 20 kt to about a 100 ft, and entered a 

hover to land. At about 50 ft above ground level, a brownout set in.



https://youtu.be/AIQY1O2wXts

The 2012 NATO RTO  Technical Report TR–HFM–162    Rotary-Wing Brownout 

 Mitigation:   Technologies and Training  describes brownout as “the condition where there is 

little or no out-the-cockpit window visibility caused by dirt and dust being stirred up by the 

rotor downwash and then re-circulated by the rotor blades of a helicopter during taking off 

or landing in an arid climate”.

The report notes that “Since NATO has been operating in the arid climates (e.g., Africa and 

Afghanistan), Rotary-Wing Brownout (RWB) is responsible for approximately 75% of 

coalition helicopter mishaps.”

The flight crew lost visual contact with the ground and external surroundings. They elected to 

use the Instantaneous Vertical Speed Indicator (IVSI) and Radio Altimeter (RAD ALT) as references  

to control the descent. The Co-pilot began radio altitude callouts “35, 30, l25, 20 and 15”. After 

the “15” callout, neither the Co-pilot, nor the Pilot could remember making or hearing further 

callouts. At about 14:34 h, the helicopter experienced a hard landing on the right main landing 

gear and rolled over onto its right side.   The five main rotor blades struck the ground and 

separated from the rotor head.



Caverton Helicopters Leonardo AW139 5N-CML at Kabba, Kogi State (Credit: Unknown)

The flight crew executed the emergency procedures, which included shutting off the engines and 

the fuel, and switching off the battery and the generators.

Evacuation of Caverton Helicopters Leonardo AW139 5N-CML at Kabba, Kogi State

https://youtu.be/MnXRCdjEhUk

The AIB Nigeria Safety Investigation
Safety Investigation: FDR
The MFDR malfunctioned 34 minutes into the accident flight, and thus no data from the 

approach and landing phases were recorded on the MPFR. However, the helicopter was fitted 



with a Quick Access Recorder (QAR) that recorded data but not audio. The QAR recorded 930 

parameters that covered the entire flight. The flight was reconstructed using the QAR data. The 

QAR recorded a vertical acceleration of 1.4 g at the moment of landing. The tri-axial 

accelerometers, located near the centre of gravity of the helicopter, were the primary source of 

acceleration data recorded.

According to Leonardo Helicopters, the helicopter was delivered equipped with 

[Honeywell] EPIC SW phase 6.2, and Caverton Helicopters did not apply the optional Service 

Bulletin to upgrade the 5N-CML EPIC system to SW phase 7. Therefore, the normal acceleration 

was filtered by the EPIC system, which caused some of the fastest acceleration spikes to be 

smoothed out. The filter on the tri-axial accelerometer was removed from the EPIC SW phase 7 

onwards. Hence, it was likely that the landing was significantly “harder” than the 1.4 g recorded. 

[The MPFR failure] was not a single isolated occurrence. The maintenance documentation 

showed that MPFR failures had occurred a few times before. In each failure instance, the MPFR 

component had been replaced, the system had been tested and found functional. However, the 

reasons for the failures had not been determined.

Safety Investigation: The Operator and their Procedures
Caverton was set up in 2001 to serve the onshore helicopter sector. Since then, the 

company has expanded into the  offshore oil and gas   operations.  They operate a fleet of 27 

aircraft (AW139s, Bell 407GXPs, Bell 412s, de Havilland DHC-6 Twin Otters, Sikorsky S-76Cs 

and Airbus H125s / AS350s). Caverton  Operations   Manua l Part A (OM Part A) states that 

“Aerodromes not listed in the OM Part C may be used on occasion; providing that the 

Director of Operations or Chief Pilot has authorised the operation” 10 Enhanced 

Operational Controls (EOCs) “are in place and documented”.  The OM A also stated that:

When operating in known or anticipated brownout condition during takeoff and landing, where 

recirculating dust may seriously impair visibility, the takeoff and landing techniques should 



slightly be adapted. Landing may be one of these methods depending on the conditions and the 

discretion of the commander.

1. Make a no hover landing, reducing to zero ground speed exactly at the point of landing

2. Make a running landing, but only if the surface is known to be level and firm the pilot should 

seek a small object on the ground that he can land near so that it can be good visual reference 

throughout the landing.

Safety Investigation: The Crew
The Aircraft Commander was Pilot Flying and had 4022 flying hours total time, 3769 on type 

and 1014 in command. They had flown about 50 hours of  VIP charter flights 

previously. They had flown 10 hours in the past 7 days and had two days immediately 

before the accident.  The Co-pilot was Pilot Monitoring and had 800 flying hours total 

time, 240 on type.  They had flown about 20 hours of  VIP  flights previously. They had also 

flown 10 hours in the past 7 days and had just two days off.
Safety Investigation: The Circumstances and Conduct of the Crew
The operator explained that as the landing site was only identified to the crew 60 minutes 

in advance, due to security reasons, a risk assessment and a classification of the intended 

landing sites could not be done as required by the OM A.  Aerial reconnaissance of the site 

is also required on arrival.

However, the  [Aircraft Commander] stated that when he approached the landing area, he was in  

a position to observe and take note of the landing area and the obstacles outside the landing 

area. In addition, the Pilot was in radio communication with the flight crew of the police 

helicopter that had landed four minutes earlier.

The AIB comment that:

Caverton Helicopters did not have a formal training programme for its pilots on take-offs and 

landings in brownout conditions, and the pilot and the co-pilot did not have formal training on 



flights in brownout conditions.   [In the 2012 NATO RTO report] specific training in brownout 

conditions was considered essential for safe operations…

The [OM Part A] recommended landing technique in brownout was to make a running landing 

and choose a noticeable feature on the ground in order to set up the approach and land at the 

designated landing zone.   The flight crew adapted a landing technique of “hover to land”. As the  

brownout occurred close to the ground, the sudden loss of visual references would have 

necessitated a transition from visual flying to flying on instruments.   The sudden degradation of 

visibility eliminated the visual guidance references, as well as distance and height perception.

It was likely that the brownout and the loss of visual references caused flight crew spatial 

disorientation and loss of situational awareness. As a result, the helicopter attitude may not 

have been level and a lateral movement may have taken place, which may have contributed to 

the hard landing and the breakage of the right landing gear.

Even if the flight crew had contemplated a go- around, they had passed their Landing Decision 

Point. Considering the confinement of the area with a goal post ahead of the helicopter, the 

flight crew may have felt committed to land. Although the Pilot was significantly experienced as 

regards helicopter flight hours, his experience and training in brownout conditions was limited. 

Having lost the visual references, the Pilot lowered the collective to bring the helicopter down, 

which resulted in a hard landing on the right main gear.

The immediate emergency procedure actions [by the flight crew] significantly contributed to the 

successful evacuation of the occupants from the helicopter.



Caverton Helicopters Leonardo AW139 5N-CML at Kabba, Kogi State (Credit: Unknown)

Safety Investigation: SMS Shelfware?
The operator had a Safety Management System (SMS), created by a foreign 

provider who self-proclaimed the resulting SMS as “fully functioning” in their marketing.   In 

their accident report the AIB are however critical of this SMS.  For example the SMS manual 

described a Management of Change process:

However, during post-accident interviews and further correspondence with the company, it was 

established that Management of Change process had neither been carried out at the time when 

the company-initiated VIP charter flight operations, nor when the company was already 

conducting VIP flight operations. Furthermore, neither Caverton Helicopters Management, nor 

the flight crew conducted risk assessment of this VIP flight to identify associated hazards that 

may pose safety risk to the flight, taking into account that the intended landing site at Kabba 

was an unprepared, temporary and unlicensed landing site.   Consequently, the safety barriers 



put in place by Caverton Helicopters did not work, as the required assessments were not done in 

this instance.

AIB Causal and Contributory Factor Conclusions
The flight crew encountered a brownout condition during the hover to land, which led to the loss  

of external visual references, spatial disorientation and loss of situational awareness resulting in  

a misjudgement of distance and ground clearance, as the flight crew tried to control the 

helicopter’s movements for landing. The helicopter landed hard and rolled over on its right side.

Contributing were:
1. Inappropriate landing technique used
2. Non-adherence to company procedures for known or anticipated brownout condition during 

landing
3. Lack of risk assessment, limited landing site preparation and planning prior to the 

commencement of the flight

Perhaps disappointingly the AIB fixate on the failure to follow procedures not that the OM 

A procedure was neither trained or, due the crew’s normal offshore operations, routinely 

practised.
Safety Recommendations
Two interim recommendations were rapidly made by AIB in February 2019.  In response to 

one the Nigerian CAA issued an All Operators Letter on brownouts.  In response to the 

other Caverton:

…initiated numerous improvements to the training programme, introduced a requirement for 

brownout training (recognition, avoidance and recovery from brownout conditions), reviewed 

the stabilized approach and un-stabilized approach procedures including amendments to the 

Operations Manual Part A, Sections 8.17.7.21 and 8.17.7.22. In addition, Operations Manual, 

Part A, Section 13 was amended with regard to brownout conditions, the conduct of 

reconnaissance flight, new helicopter landing sites and night operations.



The Caverton recommendation remains open until the NCAA approved the OM Part A 

change.  One additional action taken following the internal SMS investigation was that two 

additional barriers associated with “Challenging airfield flight conditions” were added to 

the FATO BowTie.  Its not stated if these were embedded in training or procedures.

The AIB now also recommend that NCAA conducts an SMS audit of Caverton Helicopters.

Safety Resources

 On 30 July 2020 an emergency service    AS350 in Brazil (PR-MJX) impacted a building while 

making a brownout landing:

https://youtu.be/DJcoyHuU0wg



SAR Crew With High Workload Land Wheels Up on Beach
On 9 August 2016, a Search and Rescue (SAR) Leonardo AW139 of the Japan Coast Guard 

(JCG), JA968A, made a wheels-up landing on a beach in Miyagi Prefecture, Japan.  The 

aircraft had been called out on a rescue mission in a small cove in the wake of a passing 

tropical storm.
A Japan Coast Guard AW139 (JA973A) (Credit: Hunini)

History of the Flight

According to the Japan Transport Safety Board (JTSB) safety investigation report, as the 

aircraft was descending through 150ft on approach to enter a hover in the cove, the aural 

warning that the landing gear was still up sounded.  The aircraft commander requested 

that the co-pilot cancel the alert.

Japan Coast Guard SAR AW139 JA968A Accident Site (Credit: JTSB)



At the same time the aircraft was experiencing considerable turbulence and the Aircraft 

Commander was cautious to avoid an over torque.  The crew successfully winched two 

survivors aboard and it was decided to land on the adjacent beach to pass the casualties 

to a shore party.  The beach was sloping and their was a risk of debris and so the crew 

were attentive to those hazards, however the pre-landing checklist does not appear to 

have been followed according to the JTSB.

On landing…well you may have guessed…the pilot realised that his eye line was lower than 

usual…

Having landed wheel up, the Aircraft Commander, then lifted the helicopter, lowered the 

gear and landed again.  The aircraft, which did have a mechanic onboard, was 

subsequently flow back to Sendai Airport.

The aircraft had suffered damage to the lower fuselage, namely:
1. Deformed outer skin panel, deformed frame at the fuselage bottom and the damaged Heli-

Tele antenna
2. VHF 2 antenna damaged
3. upper cover of the hoist light collapsed and deformed
4. Search light glass cracked

Damage to the Belly of Japan Coast Guard SAR AW139 JA968A (Credit: JTSB)



JTSB make no comment on why the JCG unusually do hoisting wheels up.

JTSB Probable Cause
…the Rotorcraft suffered damages because it had landed without extending the landing 

gear.

Regarding why it had landed without extending the landing gear, it is probable that various 

tasks were occurred in short time span and at same time other crews on board were also 

focusing on their own various tasks, so that they could not carry out necessary corporation 

or support, and because the workload of the captain continued to be high, there were not 

enough time for the captain to shift his mind from the rescue operation to the landing 

procedure, as the result, he forgot the check prior to the landing prescribed in the flight 

manual and did not check the landing gear condition.

Safety Actions
JCG actions included:

 Re-educating, re-training and examining flight for captains and co-pilots;
 Re-education of Sendai Air Base personnel on the implementation of Crew Resource 

Management (CRM)
 Emphasising the application of checklists and briefings
 Continuations of periodic CRM training and sharing the contents of each flight debriefing 

systematically to utilize those for practical CRM education
 Emphasising compliance with Operating Manual and the division of crew roles
 Continuation of safety audits
 Dynamic risk assessment of landing sites



SAR Helicopter Loss of Control at Night: ATSB Report (Careflight AW139 VH-
YHF near Darwin, NT)

On 13 May 2018 Leonardo Helicopters AW139 VH-YHF of HEMS 

operator Careflight, while descending during a nighttime search, the aircraft entered 

a degraded visual environment, developed a high rate of descent, an autohover 

mode was inappropriately selected and came within 31 ft of impacting the 

ground.  The aircraft was also then flown on for one more flight after the related 

159.5% over-torque.  We look at the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) 

safety investigation report issued 16 April 2020.

Flight Path Careflight AW139 VH-YHF During Night SAR LOC-I (Credit: ATSB / Leonardo)

The SAR Tasking, Aircraft Equipment and Preparations

On the evening of 13 May 2018 the Australian Maritime Safety Authority 

(AMSA) Rescue Coordination Centre (RCC) tasked the crew of VH-YHF, to locate 

an active Emergency Position-Indicating Radio Beacon (EPIRB) 21 nm north-east of 

Darwin International Airport, Northern Territory in the vicinity of a waterway called 

Salt Water Arm, popular with recreational anglers.



The aircraft was operated single pilot (front right seat), an ‘ Aircrew Officer (ACO)’, a 

dual qualified winch op and winchman (right hand cabin doorway)  and a ‘Flight 

Nurse’ (rear of the cabin), who was “not expected to be involved in the operation of 

the aircraft in flight”. The Pilot and ACO were equipped with AN/AVS-9 green 

phosphor Night Vision Goggles (NVGs).   The ATSB explain that the rest of the Night 

Vision Imaging System (NVIS):

• NVG-compatible cockpit lighting

• NVG-compatible cabin lighting

• 2 x 450 W incandescent forward facing steerable search lights

• 1 x 450 W incandescent steerable search light by winch

• White flood lights at the front and back of the aircraft.

The operator required the use of NVIS for all visual flight rules (VFR) flights at night.

The Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA) provided the Operator with an exemption 

to Supplement 60 of the AW139 rotorcraft flight manual. The exemption allowed the 

ACO to operate from the rear cabin of the aircraft during flight below 300ft and for 

landing at unimproved sites.

The Operator listed the responsibilities of an ACO in their operations manual 

as “Under direction of the pilot assist with the operation of all aircraft equipment and 

systems during the conduct of VFR, NVG and IFR operations” and “operate the 

winch, dispatch, and recovery of personnel and assist the pilot in maintaining 

clearance from obstacles by lookout and reporting over the intercom”.

The ACO was expected to work from both cockpit and cabin.  CASA’s position was 

that “they supported the role of the ACO in the front left seat” and “preferred 

operators to land” for the ACO to transfer positions, but ‘climb-throughs’ did occur.  



The operator seems to have recognised this risky manoeuvre was unusual as 

everyone had to be reported.  ATSB state that the crew believed the tasking would 

“most likely” need use of the hoist, and so with a nearby search area with limited 

landing opportunities the ACO was in the cabin.

ATSB note that:

The helicopter’s autopilot was a 4-axis system with enhanced 3-cue flight director 

(FD). The FD is capable of controlling the helicopter’s movement in the pitch, roll, 

yaw, and vertical axis. The installed version of the FD had auto-hover functionality 

(HOV) mode, yet did not offer SAR modes that can mark, return, and transition down 

to a selected target.

Engaging the system instructs the autopilot to make control inputs to bring the 

aircraft to a hover at the height showing on the RADALT at the time the pilot presses 

the switch.

The manufacturer did not intend for HOV mode to be engaged with a high vertical 

speed, though it did not preclude a pilot from doing so. If engaged with a high 

vertical speed, the system would show as engaged and the autopilot would make 

adjustments necessary to attain the height designated by the pilot. This would 

induce a magnitude of overshoot relative to the vertical speed at time of 

engagement.



Conduct of the Incident Flights

At about 2000, the crew departed Darwin Airport with good visibility. At that time, a 

five-metre tide was receding from Salt Water Arm.

Search Area (Credit: ATSB)

There was little illumination as the moon had set at 1653, and the sun had set at 

1830. There was limited celestial light available through the gaps in the clouds which 

were forecast as scattered cumulus and stratocumulus clouds at 2,000 ft, with cloud 

tops to 10,000 ft.   Smoke from outlying grass fires drifted across the search area 

below 7,000 ft, reducing visibility to 4 km in places.   The crew could not easily detect  

the smoke due to low illumination.

As the crew arrived and commenced the search, smoke became evident.



The ACO described visibility as 5 km but dropping in and out due to large amounts 

of smoke. 

These conditions are common for the region, and recent check flights for the crew 

had been conducted in similar conditions. During the flight, the beam of the search 

light would reflect off smoke and ash. 

Backscatter from the beam was affecting visibility, reducing NVG image quality, and 

reducing peripheral vision.   As a result, the beam required frequent adjustment. The 

ACO contacted the RCC and advised that limited visibility may hamper the 

operation.

Direction Finding readings from the EPIRB were erratic so locating the beacon was 

problematic.  The crew conducted a visual search from 800 ft above ground level 

(AGL) but to identify a potential target while using NVG, needed to descend to 400 ft 

AG.

The company operations manual highlights three critical instruments for the initial 

stage of the approach:

• attitude indicator, to avoid incorrect attitude adversely affecting airspeed and rate of 

descent

• vertical speed indicator, to make up for the reduced visual cues for rate of descent

• radio altimeter, to incorporate a visual and audible warning that is set at 400 ft as a 

defence against unexpected rates of terrain closure.

The crew flew the descent to the target visually, using searchlights to ensure the 

approach and departure paths were clear of obstacles. The intent was to decrease 

rate of descent and airspeed before activating auto-hover (HOV) mode at 400 ft 

AGL.



At 2110:30, the crew commenced an approach from the north to a point of interest in 

Salt Water Arm. The pilot reported visibility on approach to the target as good to the 

north-west, and dark to the north and east. During this approach, the pilot lost visual 

references.

Critically:

At 2110:40, the pilot activated HOV mode. At this time, the helicopter had already 

developed an undesired high rate of descent.

FDR Careflight AW139 VH-YHF During Night SAR LOC-I (Credit: ATSB / Leonardo)

At the point of activation of HOV mode, the aircraft was at 430 ft, pitched 19.7 

degrees nose-up, and descending at over 1,300 ft/min with a ground speed of 14 kt. 

The autopilot increased collective pitch to 48 per cent to arrest the rate of descent.



The ACO had a better view of the ground below and advised the pilot of a high rate 

of descent.

The ACO provided advice twice more to the pilot before transitioning to an 

emergency call of ‘Climb! Climb! Climb!’   The pilot was by now receiving clear visual 

cues and detected a rapid rate of closure with the ground.

At 2140:46, at a height of 280 ft with a rate of descent of 1,630 ft/min…the pilot 

overrode aircraft automatics and used forward cyclic and collective to reverse the 

rate of descent. The pilot directed his attention to the attitude indicator and the 

picture outside. The pilot increased collective pitch to 77 per cent. At this point, the 

rate of descent increased to 1,952 ft/min, indicative of onset of vortex ring state.

Occupied with the recovery procedure, the pilot flew solely through the outside 

picture and the attitude indicator. The aircraft descended to a height of 31 ft AGL 

before attaining a positive rate of climb.

The pilot had noticed an Amber caution light but this extinguished before he had 

chance to read the caption.  The ATSB opine that any further delay overriding the 

autopilot would have been catastrophic.

The aircraft landed back at base at 21:58 and the crew debriefed.  As they thought 

that a Main Gearbox (MGB) over torque may have occurred, they called an engineer 

(seemingly on call but off-site).

The duty engineer asked the crew to check the CAS system for messages. If an 

over torque occurred, a white status message saying “MAINTENANCE” would be 

present. This would signal a requirement to download and analyze data from the 

aircraft’s central maintenance computer (CMC).



Example AW139 Maintenance Message (Credit: Leonardo / ATSB)

The “MAINTENANCE” message is significant because following exceedance of a 

limit such as torque, it will illuminate after landing. The presence of the 

“MAINTENANCE” message is a cue to an aircraft maintenance engineer (engineer) 

to investigate and rectify the cause of the message before cancelling the message.

The ATSB say “the pilot estimated the extent of a potential over-torque to be within 

operational limits”, without any indication why that was considered likely.  The crew 

did not detect a maintenance message, for reasons the ATSB don’t explain, so the 

engineer advised no further action was required.

The crew then briefed for a second flight to complete the tasking, adopting a different 

search strategy.  They departed at 22:54 and flew along the river’s tributaries at 

1,000 ft using the autopilot, with the pilot on instruments and the ACO visually 

searching from the cabin.



A 14 ft metal hulled boat with two occupants was detected in complete darkness and 

an a Northern Territory Water Police vessel vectored to the scene.
Detecting the Over-torque

The next day the crew asked an engineer to download the CMC.  The limits for all 

engines operative are 110% for 5 minutes and 121% for 5 seconds.  He found that a:

…main gearbox over-torque to 159.5% had occurred during the first flight.

The extent of the over-torque was such that the helicopter should not have been 

flown until the engine and airframe manufacturers declared the helicopter 

serviceable.   This meant that the crew had departed for their second flight of the 

previous evening in an aircraft of uncertain airworthiness.

Five days later, the engine manufacturer confirmed that the engines were 

undamaged and suitable for service.

 The helicopter manufacturer advised that the helicopter’s main gearbox was 

serviceable and required inspection of oil for metal contamination at 50 flight-hour 

intervals. The engineers carried out the necessary actions, and subsequently 

returned the helicopter to service.

Risk Management of Deteriorating Weather and Loss of Visual References 

The operator recognised the risk of deteriorating weather and loss of visual 

references during a SAR flight and that this could result in a loss of control leading to 

an aircraft accident.  Controls for the prevention of loss of visual references were:
 Training and checking, to ensure that crews have relevant experience of similar 

conditions, all crew know how to assist in the approach and landing phase, and that 
procedures are being correctly followed.

 Maintenance of good CRM, to ensure effective mission management and decision 
making aboard the aircraft.

 Keeping the ACO current to assist the pilot with management of the flight.

Their recovery controls were:



 Equipment fit, ensuring that the aircraft is appropriately equipped and has a 
functioning RADALT and Attitude Indicator.

 Sound knowledge of procedures and limits for visual illusions and inadvertent 
instrument meteorological conditions (IIMC).

 Crew preparedness: Use of simulator training to ensure crews have exposure to 
implementing correct technique in recovery procedures.

 Crew Resource Management: Ensuring unambiguous and timely communication in 
situations requiring urgent action.
ATSB Safety Analysis: Operator’s Risk Management

There were…gaps in the implementation of all of the documented controls:

• Training and checking achieved the aim of creating relevant experience, yet an 

identified limited practice opportunity reduced efficacy.

• Crew resource management (CRM) lapsed in a missed announcement of loss of 

visual references. CRM was, however, restored to good effect in recovery.

• The aircrew officer (ACO) was trained yet not positioned to assist the pilot in 

managing the approach.

There were no preventative controls that helped crews to define limits of visibility 

beyond the description of visual flight rules (VFR) minima.

The operations manual stated: “Illumination levels are significantly affected by moon 

position and strength, cloud presence, and cultural lighting and during NVG 

operations; illumination levels have a profound effect on the ability of the NVG to 

clearly discern terrain at distance. Visibility is also affected by the usual day time 

issues of dust, snow, moisture, bushfire smoke and other atmospheric obscurants”.

However, the operations manual offered no guidelines on interpretation of factors 

affecting visibility or definition of acceptable limits. This meant the crew had to 

interpret marginal conditions during operations and decide if the minima were 

sufficient. This meant that the organisation did not set its own tolerance for risk in 

this regard.



During the event, CRM, the well-rehearsed recovery drill, and use of the attitude 

indicator were all vital in recovering control of the aircraft. The documented and 

implemented recovery controls worked as intended.

ATSB comment later on the risk reduction if the aircraft had been operated with 

another crew member.
ATSB Safety Analysis: NVIS

Studies have shown that NVG performance can lead pilots to revert to a daytime 

model of operation (Rash, 2010), leading them to overlook the threats and 

complexities of operating with NVG. The operator’s operations manual clearly 

reminded crew…that the use of NVG carries limitations and risk.

The search area was an area of low-contrast terrain for NVIS operations. This meant 

that elements of the terrain reflected similar amounts of celestial light, creating a low-

quality image in the NVG. This lack of detail reduced visual cues [which] most likely 

led to difficulty in perceiving the aircraft’s attitude and estimation of terrain clearance 

( Parush  et al., 2011).

Airborne particles affect the image that NVG produce. The cues that would normally 

be relied upon for loss of visual meteorological conditions (VMC) may not be 

present. Operating unaided, light sources begin to disappear as obscurants 

increase. Under NVG, as obscurants reduce the light energy reaching the goggles, 

NVG will continue to amplify the light signal, disguising the worsening visibility (see 

CAAP 174-01 11).

An early decision to use a recovery drill if visual references are lost is also vital to 

ensure entry into IMC does not develop into a loss of control or controlled flight into 

terrain.



ATSB Safety Analysis: Degraded Visual Environment (DVE)

Conditions of degrading visibility create ambiguity. This ambiguity can stall decision-

making, as two contextually different situations are faced ( Orasanu  and others,  

2001).

Pilots tend to underestimate the likelihood of loss of control and overestimate their 

ability to continue to control the aircraft if visual references are lost (Wiggins and 

others, 2012).

Humans also often incorrectly believe that changes will be easy to detect in their 

environment. Unless someone observes a change while it is taking place, there is a 

good chance it will not be picked up ( Wickens  & McCarley, 2008). While searching 

outside for cues, changes on instruments can be missed.

ATSB Safety Analysis: Single Pilot Operation

Monitoring is a fundamental tool to boost threat and error management (Flight Safety 

Foundation, 2014).   While there is a clear benefit to multi-crew operations, there is 

no requirement for multicrew in Australian search and rescue (SAR), and emergency 

medical services (EMS).

Crucially the ATSB note that:

Crew in the back of an AW139 cannot hear alarms from the cockpit. The 400 ft 

warning from the Radio Altimeter (RADALT) and the 150 ft warning from the aircraft 

are only available to front seat crew. The aircraft descended through 400 ft at 1,430 

ft/min. The pilot resumed manual control at the time of the emergency climb call as 

the aircraft passed through 280 ft, 3.5 seconds later.



Had there been a second person in the cockpit monitoring the approach, their first 

indication of a loss of visual reference, if not announced by the pilot, would most 

likely be an unusual combination of attitude and vertical speed. The aircraft had 

developed an unusually high 900 ft/min rate of descent 12 seconds before passing 

through 400 ft. This information may take a monitoring ACO a second or two to 

process. Once processed, however, the ACO is in a position to call for a go-around, 

and to provide accurate information to the pilot regarding the aircraft state much 

sooner in the sequence.

While facing a high risk of encountering a degraded visual environment, the 

requirement to have the ACO in the rear cabin for winch operations degraded the 

crew’s defences against loss of control. The addition of another trained crewmember 

would be an ideal risk control for operations in potentially degraded visual 

environments.

ATSB Safety Analysis: Detection of the Overtorque

Analysis of the central maintenance computer (CMC) required an to access the CMC 

through a laptop.  ATSB take the rather odd view that this is “often impractical” for a 

24-hour operation in a “remote location” (actually the aircraft’ normal main operating 

base it the Northern Territory’s capital city).  They also refer oddly to nuisance 

warnings resolved 6 months earlier.
ATSB Safety Analysis: Automatic Hover (HOV) Modes

HOV can be engaged while the helicopter has a high rate of descent.

It would display as engaged even though it could be subject to a considerable 

overshoot, outside of the system’s capacity to recover before impact with terrain.



At the height engaged, the mismatch between reference height and actual radar 

height would have triggered a PFD message ‘HTLM’ and an aural callout of 

‘ALTITUDE, ALTITUDE’ after about 2.5 s, as the aircraft passed through a point 

between 39 ft and 70 ft below the reference height. The pilot input came 4.2 s after 

engagement of automatic hover.

Without the correct mental model of HOV mode operation, time taken to interpret 

autopilot performance may have delayed manual recovery actions.

ATSB Findings: Contributing Factors
 During the search for a transmitting beacon, the helicopter crew planned to approach 

to a hover near a target. However, low celestial illumination and drifting smoke 
created a high risk of encountering a degraded visual environment. This resulted in a 
loss of visual references on approach.



 During the approach to hover in a degraded visual environment, searching outside 
for visual cues drew the pilot’s attention away from the flight instruments. This 
resulted in flight instruments not being referenced when they were needed.



 The required position of the aircrew officer in the rear of the helicopter prior to 
descent negated the benefit of having a trained and competent crewmember to 
assist the pilot, resulting in a degraded monitoring capability in the approach to 
hover.



 While on approach in a degraded visual environment, without the protections of flight 
instrument use or monitoring, the helicopter entered an uncommanded, undetected 
high rate of descent, resulting in a transmission over torque during recovery.





ATSB Findings: Other Factors that Increased Risk

 Auto hover had no design limit on vertical speed for engagement, which permitted 
overshoot following engagement with high rate of descent.



 As the aircrew could not confirm the existence of an exceedance, and a 
maintenance message was not detected on the Crew Alert System, the aircraft was 
operated despite requiring an inspection.

ATSB Findings: Other Findings

 Application of good CRM and practiced recovery techniques supported the crew in 
restoring control.



 The emergency position-indicating radio beacon was not registered to the current 
owner, and was incorrectly placed in the boat. The placement scattered the beacon’s 
signal, leading to loss of accuracy in direction-finding equipment. As a result, mission 
complexity and time taken to rescue were increased.

FINAL REPORT LINK-

https://www.atsb.gov.au/media/5777636/ao-2018-039_final.pdf



Swedish SAR AW139 Damaged in Aborted Take-off Training Exercise 
(Swedish Maritime Administration SE-JRM)
On 30 October 2019 a serious incident occurred to Swedish Maritime 

Administration (SMA) Leonardo AW139 SAR helicopter SE-JRM at Visby Airport, Gotland that 

resulted in substantial damage.

SMA SAR Leonardo Helicopters AW139 SE-JRM With Damaged Landing Gear After Training Accident (Credit: SHK)

Background to Training



The Swedish Accident Investigation Authority (SHK) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued 7 October 2020) that the flight was a training flight for a new SMA SAR pilot 

focused on confined area take-off and landings.

The student pilot was experienced, both as a helicopter pilot and on the helicopter type [c 4000 

hours on the AW139].   However, the student pilot had not practised the take-off profile in 

question previously, except in a simulator in the week prior to the occurrence. Nevertheless, the 

simulator that was used did not have a full visual field downwards through the lower windows 

(‘chin windows’), which is necessary if it is to be possible for the exercise to be performed in 

accordance with the type certificate holder’s rotorcraft flight manual (RFM).

The flight profile…involves the helicopter climbing vertically…and then commencing a climbing 

reverse manoeuvre that continues until the helicopter has reached a ‘decision altitude’.   This 

means that, from there, the pilot is able to dive to increase speed and fly over obstacles ahead in  

the event of the failure of one engine.

Intended Take-Off Profile (Source: Leonardo AW139 RFM via SHK)

Should an engine failure occur before the take-off decision point has been reached, the intention  

is for it to be possible to land the helicopter at the original take-off site. It is important that the 

pilot maintain visual contact with the take-off site until such time as the TDP has been passed…



So that it is possible to…maintain continuous contact with the take-off site through the chin 

window, the pilot flying the helicopter has to yaw it [by 10-15 degrees] once they reach 40 feet.

Take-Off Profile Yaw above 40 ft when Pilot Flying is in the Right Hand Seat (Source: Leonardo AW139 RFM via SHK)

[The RFM] contains images of the pilot’s visual impression through the chin window at various 

altitudes.



Example Take-Off Profile Image at 150 ft when the Pilot Flying is in the Left Hand Seat (Source: Leonardo AW139 RFM  
via SHK)

It is also  [specifies] how much engine output is to be increased from hover prior to take-off and 

then from the state at which the helicopter transitions from climbing vertically to climbing 

backwards up to the TDP.

The Training Exercise
The SHK comment that:

The exercise had been run through carefully during the simulator training and an alternative to 

the initial yaw had been discussed. The student pilots had been given the opportunity to move 

sideways instead  [as] the yaw itself may overload the student pilot and because there were 

certain limitations with regard to downward vision in the simulator, which were accentuated 

when yawing the helicopter.

The exercise is normally not particularly dramatic and does not require the rapid monitoring 

and maneuvering that are characteristic of, for example, emergency landing and autorotation 

exercises. Nor is the exercise deemed to lead to an increased risk that requires the emergency 

services to adopt a higher state of readiness.

No specific abort criteria were discussed during the exercise.

The training was being conducted using the Visby base’s on stand-by AW139.

In order to maintain readiness during the training flight, the helicopter was equipped with 

material and fuel for a potential mission. In addition, it was necessary for the exercise to take 

place close to the standby crew so that the helicopter could be handed over quickly in the event 

of a potential mission.

The aircraft mass was 5809 kg.  This training exercise is recommended to be conducted at 

5650 kg or below in the RFM.



The instructor was sitting in the right front seat and the student pilot was sitting on the left, both  

were using the installed safety belts.   The accompanying student pilot was sitting on a bench by 

the front wall of the cabin, without a safety belt.

SHK describe how…

The training began with the student having to handle practiced engine failure from hovering at 

heights 5, 10, 20 and 30 feet…

Wind speed was low, 5 knots gusting 8 knots.  The instructor then demonstrated a take-off 

and landing of the flight profile with a simulated engine failure before TDP, then…

…the student pilot began performing an equivalent take-off and landing profile involving a 

simulated failure of one engine. The exercise was performed perpendicular to the runway 

direction because the wind was westerly and and the exercise requires headwind or very limited 

crosswind component.

During the exercise, there was a tendency for the helicopter to land a little too far forward. 

Consequently, the instructor decided to perform an additional exercise.

During the introductory demonstration by the instructor take-off began with a 13-degree yaw. 

FDR data from the demonstration also shows that the take-off profile was performed by the 

book, with the engine output and attitude being adapted during the climb.

During the student pilot’s first exercise, the yaw was slightly lower and began at a later stage 

than specified in the manual.

There was no yaw during the student pilot’s second attempt.   The initial reverse became 

problematic [and] the student pilot was not able to maintain a constant visual reference of the 

landing site in the chin window in accordance with the description in the RFM.

During the continued reversing climb towards the TDP, the instructor made the assessment that 

the angle had become too sharp to allow the helicopter to return to the take-off point in the 

event of an aborted take-off. As a result, the instructor extended the procedure slightly in order 



to give the student pilot the opportunity to correct the angle and return to the intended flight 

profile. This resulted in the helicopter continuing past the maximum recommended altitude of 

400 feet up to 430 feet.

The climb took 42 seconds.

When they reached the decision altitude, the rate of climb had decreased slightly and when the 

decision was made to simulate one engine in-operative, the helicopter was not climbing but 

descending a little while continuing to reverse.

When the instructor activated the training mode for simulating flight with one engine 

inoperative, the indicator for engine output showed a simulated loss of power in one engine. The  

student pilot reported `torque split’ and pushed the collective [sic] forward so that the nose was 

dropped markedly with the aim of transitioning from reverse motion to forward motion.

However:

The rate of descent increased and soon after the pilot raised the nose markedly, up to 20 

degrees nose up, in order to reduce the effect of the preceding manoeuvre. At this stage, the 

student pilot again lost sight of the landing site. Immediately after this, the crew felt a large and 

unexpected descent.

[T]he instructor had his left hand on the collective. There is a button on the collective called the 

‘torque limiter’, which reinstates the power output from the engine when pressed.   The instructor  

has stated that the way he was gripping the collective did not allow him to activate this function 

and that he made an immediate instinctive decision to focus on manoeuvring the helicopter 

using the limited engine output that was available. He did not want to move his gaze to the 

collective to look for the button, which under the prevailing circumstances could result in a loss 

of valuable seconds.



Leonardo Helicopters AW139 Collectives with Torque Limiter (TQ LIM) Button Circled: Note Different Tactile Design to  
Aid Identification by Touch (Credit: SHK)

The rotor speed of 102 % was maintained down to 270 feet and the vertical speed (V/S), ‘the 

descent’, increased to 1,650 feet/min. For a short time the vertical speed increased to over 2,000 

feet/min. A nose-down movement was initiated, which resulted in vertical speed of over 3,000 

feet/min., at the same time as some forward motion was being obtained. The collective was 

raised and the rotor speed fell to 87.1 %, which causes the OEI training mode to deactivate 

automatically, at that same time, the FDR data recorded that the rotor speed was low (`Rotor 

Low’).



SMA SAR Leonardo Helicopters AW139 SE-JRM Flight Profile from FDR Data: Note Training Conducted Into Wind (Credit:  
Leonardo via SHK)

The altitude was approximately 70 feet when the nose was raised, at the same time as the 

collective continued being raised in order to increase power. The vertical speed decreased in the 

final seconds to approximately 1,200 feet/min. before the helicopter made contact with the 

ground and bounced before the forward motion generated was checked.



 

FDR data indicates contact on the left main wheel at 6.1 m/s vertical speed (20 ft/s) and a 

vertical acceleration of 3.38 g.  The landing gear had been tested at maximum gross weight 

at 2.8 m/s (9.2 ft/s).  As SHK point out a “13.9 % reduction in mass cannot itself compensate 



for the 218 % increase in vertical speed” especially as kinetic energy is dependent on the 

square of velocity.

The crew perceived the contact with the ground as a hard touch-down, but not so hard that it 

was felt to be damaging. The intention was to take-off once again when the student pilot in the 

cabin noticed that the helicopter’s [left hand exteral] liferaft had been released… The crew then 

shut down the engines and informed the tower of what had happened.

The three occupants were uninjured.  The HR Smith 503-16 emergency locator transmitter 

(ELT) did not activate.

Structural damage occurred to the left landing gear and its attachments to the fuselage. 

Damage also occurred to panels and beams around the fuel compartment in the cabin.

Damage to SMA SAR Leonardo Helicopters AW139 SE-JRM After Training Accident (Credit: SHK)

[A] leak from the helicopter’s landing gear hydraulics that was later detected was cleaned up by 

the airport’s fire and rescue service…

SHK note that analysis of the CVR revealed that while communication was normal early in 

the exercise, during the critical phase the dialogue ceased.
Organisational Factors
The SHK comment on the relatively high turnover on nominated managers within the SMA 

helicopter operation.  They also comment that there had been a big reduction in the pool 

of instructors after a change in terms and conditions in 2018.



It has emerged during interviews that the limited availability of instructors has resulted in 

difficulties for training operations.

One person has kept training operations running almost single-handedly. At the same time, 

there has been limited insight into the details of training components for those not directly 

involved in day-to-day training. The training components have not been evaluated or risk 

assessed. Nor has any audit or similar been conducted in order to see how closely the training 

components adhere to the descriptions that have been drawn up or the specified curriculum.

Nevertheless…feedback suggests that the training programme had prepared the prospective 

pilots for their future duties in a good way.

The Maritime Administration has made various attempts to plan to get new qualified instructors 

approved by the Swedish Transport Agency. It has repeatedly been difficult to get this planning 

to correspond to the testing sessions arranged by the Transport Agency. According to the 

Maritime Administration, there have been too few of these sessions, and they have been too 

infrequent.

SHK Safety Analysis
During the student pilot’s second attempt, there was no yaw and the student pilot has stated 

that they lost the visual references during the initial reversing climb. This resulted in impairment 

to their spatial orientation, which in turn had an impact on their chances of finding an 

acceptable reversing profile. This resulted in the reversing climb being too steep.

Prior to the session in question, the instructor and the student pilot had not discussed or 

established conditions for when the exercise could be aborted. Nevertheless, there was always a 

basic pattern for aborting an exercise. When the instructor says ‘my controls’, the student pilot 

has to hand over control to the instructor or commander. No such takeover of control took place  

during the session in question.



The student pilot was very experienced on the helicopter type and felt confident in the cockpit. 

He was well acquainted with the handling of the instruments and controls. The instructor also 

had great confidence in the student pilot’s ability to complete the training component. In 

advance, there was nothing to suggest that the student pilot would have any specific difficulties 

completing the component in question.

Both…stated that the reversing climb was perceived as acceptable and… they did not believe 

there was any need to abort the exercise. However…the helicopter was outside of the exercise 

profile in question throughout pretty much the entirety of the reversing climb. During this part 

of the flight, the instructor also gave the student pilot several instructions with the aim of trying 

to correct the profile and speed.

When the instructor activated training mode in order to simulate one engine inoperative 

they had already passed 400 feet,  the recommended upper limit for performing the 

exercise, the helicopter was  descending slightly while still reversing and the student pilot 

had already lost visual references to the take-off site.  Continuation of the exercise…

…may be explained by the confidence the instructor had in the student pilot…[as they]…had 

completed the previous exercises in an excellent and rapid manner.

When “training mode” was activated and the nose was immediately dropped markedly in order 

to transition to forward motion, at a stage where there was no longer upward movement, the 

height gain (`ballooning effect’) in which the kinetic energy upwards is utilised during the 

transition, and on which the procedure is based, was absent.   Instead, the descent and the 

speed increased in an undesirable way.

In order to correct this, the nose was raised markedly, which resulted in a nose-up attitude of 

approximately 20 degrees. With the nose as high as this, with close to the maximum mass for 

the exercise and one engine in training mode, the result was a sudden and rapidly accelerating 

descent.



The silence in the communication between the instructor and the student pilot that occurred and  

the failure to inactivate training mode indicates that the crew was not prepared for the 

manoeuvre to have this outcome. Both the student pilot and the instructor have stated that it 

was only at this time that they felt the exercise went outside of what was expected, but neither 

the student pilot nor the instructor felt the nose-up attitude was as radical as it actually was.

The instructor had his left hand on the collective, but was not prepared to quickly inactivate 

training mode by, for example, pressing the torque limiter button.   Activating the torque limiter 

or inactivating the training mode switch at an early stage would probably have resulted in a safe  

end to the exercise.

At a late stage, when the pilots increased the collective pitch in order to reduce the rate of 

descent close to the ground, and the rotor speed fell to 87 %, training mode was inactivated 

through the inbuilt safety function. The rate of descent decreaesd but the altitude was too low to  

avoid a hard landing. The fact that the rate of descent decreased with the increased power 

output and lift confirms that this was not a vortex ring state…

…there were several occasions when it would have been reasonable to abort the exercise… 

However, it is easy to draw this conclusion in retrospect, especially given the outcome.   It is…

SHK’s opinion that ahead of every exercise component, there is a need to run through which 

abort criteria that should apply and how various situations are to be managed.

The SHK then go on to opine on the value of phased training, slowly building up the 

exercise scenario.

[T]he Swedish Maritime Administration should review how the procedures are described in the 

training documents and identify if and in such a case what deviations occur in relation to the 

type certificate holder’s flight manual, RFM. Such a review should include the current education 

and focus on whether concrete interruption criteria need to be formulated, both from a learning 

and a safety perspective.



They also comment on the importance of measures taken to ensure adequate resourcing 

for the organisation and the challenges of ensuring the aircraft is available at an adequate 

mass for exercises.
SHK Determination of Causes and Contributory Factors
The cause of the accident was that the exercise was performed too far outside the exercise 

profile without the risks of this being identified.

A contributing factor was that there were no clear criteria indicating when and how the exercise 

was to be aborted.

An underlying cause at the systemic level was that the ancillary aviation safety organisation, 

including the safety and monitoring functions, did not have sufficient insight into how various 

elements were to be practised and had not conducted any assessment of risks in conjunction 

with the performance of the exercise as a result of a lack of staff and staff turnover, including 

the nominated persons.

SMA Safety Actions
 This exercise is not longer carried out in the helicopter and is only conducted in the 

simulator.
 A review and reworking of operational manuals OM-A, OM-B and OM-D was 

expected to be completed in September 2020.
 A new Nominated Person Crew Training (NPCT) was recruited and appointed sin 

April 2020.
 More Instructors were recruited and appointed in May 2020. There are currently 4 

Pilot instructors and 2 each for Hoist Operators and Rescue Swimmers.
 The Accountable Manager and Aviation Manager have quarterly reviews of the 

flight safety situation with SMA Senior Managers.

As a result of these actions the SHK noted they would refrain from raising any further 

safety recommendations.
Other Safety Resources
In 2004 the UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) reported on an occurrence 

to Sikorsky S-76C G-JCBJ of JCB during a similar exercise.  This was the third accident in the 



UK involving damage to an S-76 during practice of rejected vertical or short field take-off 

profiles. All three occurred during very light wind conditions.  In August 2004, the UK 

CAA issued a communication that recommended that operators of the S-76 “conducting 

vertical and short field rejected take-off manoeuvres carry out an analysis of the risks 

associated with these manoeuvres with a view to mitigating the risks as much as possible”.



http://aerossurance.com/helicopters/aw139-a6awn-ditching-uae/

ADA AW139 A6-AWN Ditching off UAE, 29 April 2017: Final Report
Leonardo AW139 A6-AWN, operated by Abu Dhabi Aviation (ADA), made a precautionary 

ditching off the coast of the UAE near Mubarraz Island on 29 April 2017.

AW139 A6-AWN Being Salvaged (note: the EFS bags were deflated during salvage) (Credit: GCAA)

The aircraft (MSN41213, a long-nose 139 built in the US in 2009) capsized before 

salvage.  This occurrence was subject to investigation by the Air Accident Investigation 

Sector (AAIS) of the UAE General Civil Aviation Authority (GCAA).  Their final report was 

issued in January 2019.
History of the Flight
The investigators report that the helicopter…

….departed Abu Dhabi International Airport, with two flight crew members and five 

passengers, for Dhabi II oil rig, located 33 nautical miles (nm) off the coast of Abu Dhabi in 



the Arabian Gulf. Four passengers disembarked after arrival at Dhabi II at 1231 LT, and the 

Aircraft continued towards oil rig BUNDUQ, approximately 78 nm further north-west.

One minute into the climb after departing from Dhabi II, the flight crew received a high oil 

temperature warning for the main rotor gearbox (MGB) at approximately 490 feet (ft).

AW139 MGB (Credit: Leonardo Helicopters via AAIS, CGAA)

The observed oil temperature was 109°C, when the Commander discontinued the climb and 

selected to descend to 500 ft. This action was taken to reduce power and the load on the 

MGB and was advised in the quick reference handbook (QRH). The flight crew decided to 

divert to the closest heliport, on Mubarraz Island, 18 nm from Dhabi II.

Because the oil temperature continued to increase, the Commander decided to descend to 

200 ft in preparation for a possible ditching. While descending through 210 ft, and with an 

oil temperature of 119°C, the flight crew heard a loud grinding noise emanating from the 

gearbox area. The Commander…decided to ditch the Aircraft.

The crew activated the [AeroSekur] aircraft flotation system prior to touchdown, and the 

inflated bags kept the Aircraft afloat during the evacuation of all occupants into the life raft,  

from where they were rescued by the coast guard.



Salvage of ADA AW139 A6-AWN (Credit: AAIS, GCAA)

As the left aft float slowly deflated, the Aircraft started to tilt and capsize.

Emergency Flotation System
The Operator provided annual practical safety and emergency procedure (SEP) training 

[which] featured warnings that flotation bags should not be deployed in-flight.

The Rotorcraft Flight Manual contained the following warning:

The failed aft left flotation bag displayed a tear in the vicinity of the composite cover 

remains, and delamination of seams near the pillow inflation valve and of the main 

chamber.



Damage Left Aft Float ADA AW139 A6-AWN (Credit: AAIS, GCAA)

The tear was most likely caused by the in-flight activation of the flotation system, when the 

float cover fragmented due to the inflation of the flotation bag.   An inspection of the Aircraft  

identified that the shear-bolts (attaching the upper edge of the float covers) had not sheared 

causing fracture of the composite covers leaving the remains attached to the Aircraft.

Left and Right Aft Composite Float Cover Damage ADA AW139 A6-AWN (Credit: AAIS, GCAA)

The Aircraft manufacturer advised that this type of failure was evident during the 

certification process when the floats are deployed in-flight, resulting in a downward 

deployment instead of a sideway deployment of the flotation bags.

The seam delamination on the flotation bag was probably caused by the rapid inflation of 

the flotation bag to operational pressure. This is supported by the Operator’s flotation bag 



reliability data, which indicated that a high number of flotation bags had failed the annual 

inflation test because of multiple defects, including seam delamination. This issue was 

known to the flotation bag manufacturer and was addressed by reducing the inflation test 

pressure. However, this action did not significantly reduce the failure rate.

Life Rafts, Evacuation and ADELT Deployment
The flight crew activated the life raft handles, which were located near the cockpit doors. 

The Copilot did not experience any problems with the inflation of the raft, but the 

Commander’s raft did not deploy. Post-Accident testing of the raft system could not 

determine the cause of the failure to deploy, however, the activation handle housing was 

found loose and with significant play. It is therefore possible that while it appeared that the 

activation handle had been fully extracted, excessive play prevented the complete handle 

extraction and so prevented activation of the inflation valve and the deployment of the rafts.

An AW139 Flight Crew Raft Deployment Handle, the Raft Sponson Location and a Deployed Raft (Credit: AAIS,  
GCAA)

The cabin and the flight deck doors cannot be used as exits during a ditched landing as they 

may let water into the Aircraft and could damage the emergency flotation system during 

opening.

The Copilot reported that when he pulled the left window panel as described in the 

emergency evacuation procedures, the window panel cracked in the area of the pull handle 

creating a hole in the panel. The Copilot was able to pull the panel inwards by using this 



hole as a holding point. The two flight deck window panels were not found during the 

recovery of the Aircraft, whereas the cabin window [through which the passenger escaped] 

was recovered.

The crew did not deploy the Crash Position Indicator (CPI), or Automatically Deployed 

Emergency Locator Transmitter (ADELT).  The landing was sufficiently gentle that the g-

switch did not activate…

…leaving the water activated switch as the sole mechanism to achieve activation and 

deployment of the ADELT. The lack of saltwater evidence in the water activated switch 

cavity suggests that it had not been sufficiently submerged during the ditching, or that 

water was prevented from entering the switch for other reasons. It is possible that the 

inflation of the floats prior to ditching and the subsequent tilting of the Aircraft, prevented 

filling of the water activated switch and the activation of the ADELT.

ADELTs have not had a stunning service experience as the UK Civil Aviation Authority 

(CAA) reported in CAP1144.  In the case of the last AW139 ditching (B-MHJ in Hong Kong 

Harbour in 2010) the ADELT did activate.
Oil Cooler Fan
The Investigation further identified that the MGB oil temperature increased because the 

MGB oil cooling fan failed due to bearing damage, which resulted in the loss of airflow 

through the oil cooler.

The MGB oil is cooled by ambient air from the top of the open gearbox fairing, which is 

forced through an oil cooler by the attached oil cooling fan. The cooling fan is encased in a 

housing as an assembly and is driven by a drive shaft from the accessory gearbox, which is 

attached to the MGB. The MGB oil cooling fan assembly was removed from the Aircraft and 

send to Leonardo Helicopters for a forensic examination. The manufacturer (Technofan) 

disassembled it in the presence of the IIC, ANSV, Leonardo Helicopters, and Technofan 



representatives. It was found that the fan shaft had lateral play of 5.3mm. The fan was not 

attached to the shaft and was touching the outer shroud.

AW139 A6-AWN Oil Cooler Shaft and Bearing Debris (Credit: GCAA)

The left bearing was completely degraded, showing signs of overheating, with the inner 

bearing race physically expanding from 11mm to 18mm. The right shaft bearing was 

destroyed and, together with its seal package, extended from the housing by 4.8mm. The 

shaft thread was stripped and showed signs of extensive heating near the lower end. The 

balls and ball cages from both bearings were destroyed.

The complete fragmentation of the top bearing created radial play of the fan shaft, allowing 

the fan to contact the housing and producing the grinding noise heard by the flight crew. 

This radial play also overloaded the drive shaft until it fractured at the designated shear 

point.

The investigators note that:

The fan manufacturer’s 1997 bearing specification sheet lists a speed limit of 14,000 rpm for 

the lower fan bearing, while the fan operational speed is 16,000 rpm. The fan manufacturer 

justifies the selection of the bearing by referencing speed limits of 17,000 rpm, according to 

the bearing catalogue, which has since been revised [see report appendix 6]. The bearing 

manufacturer explained that the limiting speeds provided in their literature are theoretical 

values and should have required in-situ verification by the user.



Of all fan assemblies received by the manufacturer, 23.3 percent required a repair prior to 

an overhaul and 43 percent of these assemblies were removed from service due to bearing 

problems. The Investigation believes that the fan manufacturer’s initial selection of the fan 

assembly bearings was based on assumed limiting speeds below the actual fan operating 

speeds, and that the failure rate indicates that the selected bearings are not appropriate for 

the required life, anticipated load, or rotational speed limit.

The bearings are grease packed and have seal plates to protect the bearings from dust and 

to contain the lubricant.

New and overhauled fan assemblies are issued by the fan manufacturer with a 5-year shelf 

life. However, the bearing manufacturer provided a 3-year shelf life for the bearings, only 

provided they are kept in their original packing and are stored in dry, moderate 

temperature conditions.   The Investigation could not determine whether the storage and 

transport conditions of the fan assembly between the overhaul and the installation, had 

contributed to the bearing failure. However, the Investigation believes that uncontrolled 

transport and storage conditions may have a direct effect on the internal bearing lubricant.

While installed Health and Usage Monitoring System (HUMS) monitors the transmission 

and the rotors, the MGB oil cooling fan is not monitored.  Not surprisingly no adverse 

trend was therefore recorded.
Handling of the Emergency
The MGB oil temperature started to rise when both crew members were focused on flying 

the approach and landing on the oil rig. This most likely explains why the high oil 

temperature went unnoticed and was also not identified during the subsequent takeoff two 

minutes later, when the Offshore Before Takeoff Checks were completed.



QRH AW139 MGB Temperature (Credit: Leonardo via AAIS, GCAA)

In the final moments prior to ditching, the crew made decisions based on the procedures 

described in the quick reference handbook (QRH) and the Operator’s procedures manual 

when they diverted to the nearest heliport, and when the Commander decided to descend to 

a lower altitude to reduce power and reduce the load on the gearbox. The repeated attempts  

to communicate with Mubarraz Island, and the ongoing communication with the Operator’s  

operations department at a critical time, distracted the flight crew from troubleshooting the  

problem.

The investigators go on:

The normal MGB oil pressure, and the lack of abnormal vibration were not considered by 

the flight crew to help them gain a better understanding of the situation. The international 

accidents literature contains details of historical helicopter accidents where an in-flight 

main gearbox failure has led to catastrophic consequences. The flight crew stated that their 



knowledge of such accidents had encouraged them to discuss the possibility of ditching 

before the Aircraft descended to 200 ft altitude. The sudden abnormal grinding noise that 

was heard from the vicinity of the main gearbox area triggered the crew response to ditch 

the Aircraft.

The intent of the QRH is to provide the flight crew with procedures that can be implemented 

in time-critical situations, during emergencies or during system malfunctions. The 

Landing/Ditching procedure was contained in the Engine Failure Shutdown section of the 

emergency procedures. It described, in four steps, the handling of the Aircraft. The last step 

after touchdown provides information to initiate the Ditching Procedure in Supplement 9 of 

the rotorcraft flight manual (RFM), and includes 20 steps from pre-ditching checks to the 

evacuation.

The 4-step Landing/Ditching procedure in the QRH did not provide additional information 

and does not display any warnings regarding the use of the flotation system in flight…

The Investigation believes that the QRH did not provide the flight crew with sufficient 

information to follow the critical steps necessary for a successful ditching in a time-critical 

situation. A warning in the QRH that the in-flight deployment of the flotation system may 

result in damaged flotation bags, could have led the flight crew to use the automatic 

deployment system during ditching. The reference to Supplement 9 of the RFM is only 

considered adequate for situations where sufficient time allows the flight crew to plan for 

ditching.

Safety Actions
ADA 

ADA conducted a fleet check.

No further cooling fan defects or degradation of the fan bearings were detected.



ADA reduce the inspection interval in their approved maintenance program from 1,200 

hours to 600 hours and initiated a review of flotation bag failures during maintenance.

ADA also…

…introduced an over-water emergency scenario, conducted in the simulator, involving a 

power-on ditching and a check of all the required practical safety and emergency 

procedures.

Leonardo

Leonardo Helicopters issued Service Bulletin SB 319-490 on 7 August 2017, calling up a 

visual inspection of un-installed cooling fans for evidence of fan shroud rubbing, a 

roughness check of the bearings, and application of a slip mark on the fan shaft nut. Cooling  

fans which are installed on aircraft also require carrying out a clearance check between the 

fan blades and the fan shroud.

Additionally, a new maintenance task (63-47) was introduced to carry out an operational 

check for the clearance between the fan blades and the fan shroud. This check also includes 

a visual inspection for any signs of shroud rubbing and is scheduled every 600 hours.

The requirements for the Maintenance Manual task 39-A-63-20-03-00A-310A-A were 

amended to include cleaning of the MGB oil cooler and fan, and inspection of the fan shaft 

nut’s slip mark, and were introduced by Service Bulletin SB 319-490. The interval for this 

task remained at 1,200 hours.

Leonardo Helicopters revised the quick reference handbook to provide a new emergency 

procedure and additional notes for a high MGB OIL TEMP indication.

Safety Recommendations
The AAIS issued the following six safety recommendations:

 Leonardo SR01/2019:  Review the ditching instructions published in the quick reference 
handbook (QRH) to include necessary information and explanatory warnings for a 
successful ditching in a time-critical situation



 GCAA SR02/2019: Ensure that the Operator review the effectiveness of their ditching 
procedure training to ensure that flight crew members apply appropriate procedures in 
an emergency situation.

 EASA SR03/2019: Ensure that Leonardo Helicopters, in association with the cooling fan 
manufacturer (Technofan), review the reliability of the MGB oil cooling fan assemblies, 
and the appropriate selection of the bearings for their application.

 EASA SR04/2019: Ensure that Leonardo Helicopters review and assess the in-service 
reliability and service life limits of AW139 flotation bags to determine whether the 
flotation bag maintenance program is adequate.

 EASA SR05/2019 Ensure that Leonardo Helicopters review the design of the automatically 
deployable emergency locater transmitter (DELT) system, particularly the position of the 
water activated switch, to ensure that the system functions in a similar ditching scenario.

 EASA SR06/2019: Ensure that Leonardo Helicopters review the main gearbox (MGB) oil 
temperature warning system with the aim of introducing a cautionary temperature range 
to alert the flight crew that the MGB oil temperature is rising toward a critical level.



Fixated on Landing: The Dangers Of Ignoring SOPs
Aug 20, 2019 Richard N. Aarons | Business & Commercial Aviation 


O  EMAIL
 SHARE





COMMENTS 0 
 

AIC

Air Niugini Flight 73, a Boeing 737-8BK with 12 crew and 36 passengers, descended into 
Chuuk Lagoon, skipped across the water like a skimmed stone, then sank in shallow 
water 1,500 ft. short of Chuuk International Airport’s Runway 4 threshold. The crew was 
executing an RNAV (GPS) approach to the Western Pacific island airport, and descended 
below the MDA in heavy rain, while ignoring 17 EGPWS alerts — specifically eight “SINK 
RATE” and nine “GLIDESLOPE” calls.

Six passengers suffered serious injuries and one was trapped in the wreckage and died. 
The crewmembers and surviving passengers exited the aircraft through over-wing exits 
and doors and were promptly rescued and brought to shore by Chuuk state government 
boats and other watercraft operated by the Red Cross, Transco, the U.S. Navy and 
private citizens who were first on scene.

The accident occurred on Sept. 28, 2018, at 09:24 local time (23:24 UTC). The aircraft — 
P2-PXE (PXE) — was conducting a scheduled passenger flight from Pohnpei to Chuuk in 
the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).

So what happened? How did a highly experienced crew fly their perfectly performing 
airplane into the lagoon? The answer is found in what follows — mostly from the 
investigation done by the Papua New Guinea Accident Investigation Commission (AIC).



Pohnpel approach flight path (top); Depiction of aircraft in relation to Chuuk International Airport Runway 04 
threshold (bottom). Credit: AIC

The Flight

The pilot in command (PIC) and copilot began their day in Pohnpei at about 07:05 local 
(21:05 UTC) for a flight to Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, via Chuuk. The scheduled 
departure time was 07:50 local (21:50 UTC). The aircraft departed from Pohnpei at 8:22 
local (22:22 UTC), with the PIC at the controls (PF) for the sector to Chuuk. The copilot 
was the support/monitoring pilot (PM).



A flight mechanic rode the jump seat. Happily, at least for the investigators, he used a 
smartphone to record the Chuuk approach from about 3,000 ft. for recreation purposes. 
The video abruptly ended upon impact, but the phone survived and provided clear 
imagery of the cockpit environment and instruments.

The captain was 52 years old and a native of Papua New Guinea. He held a PNG ATP and 
was typed in the Boeing 737 series. He had accumulated 19,780 hr., some 4,900 as PIC 
and 2,300 in the 737. He had flown 44 hr. in the previous 30 days and 18 in the last 
week.

The Australian national first officer (F/O) held a PNG ATP and was typed on the 737 
series. He had accumulated 4,618 hr., 1,800 hr. command time and 368 hr. as a B737 
copilot. He had flown 43 hr. in the previous 30 days and 9 hr. in the last week.

The climb and en route segments were conducted without incident — entirely routine. 
Prior to top of descent (TOD), the crew briefly discussed settings for the brakes and 
flaps. The copilot asked the PIC if they should use flaps 30 and the PIC replied “Yeah, 
flaps 30 would do; 141 plus 5 ah. . . .” The discussion continued around whether to use 
flaps 30 or 40.

The copilot entered the relevant data into a Boeing Onboard Performance Tool (OPT) 
program for the electronic flight bag (EFB) he was carrying and determined the use of 
flaps 40 would reduce the landing distance required by about 150 meters. He informed 
the PIC and the PIC agreed to select flaps 40 for the final approach segment.

The pilots then briefly discussed the approach and missed-approach procedures, the 
latter should a miss become necessary if they found themselves in IMC at the MAP — 
HAMAX waypoint. (See the approach plate.) The approach briefing was not the detailed 
discussion required by their airline SOPs. Indeed, the missed approach procedure was 
just a cursory mention of DAMAY waypoint and did not cover the procedure, nor the 
flight path to be followed. The landing checklist was given a similar haphazard briefing.

At 08:54 local (22:54:36 UTC), regional ATC (named San Francisco Radio) contacted the 
crew with the following decent clearance:

“ATC clearance. Niugini 73, descend to reach FL 340 by time 23:05Z, requirement to 
reach FL 340 by time 23:05Z, and report level, FL 340. Cruise, FL 340, to Chuuk airport, 
report arrival. Report leaving FL 280, flight level 180 and flight level 080, time, time 
check, 254 and a quarter.”



For illustration only. Not for navigational purposes. 

At TOD, the captain stated to the copilot that they were already high and needed to 
initiate their descent immediately. The crew descended out of FL 400 at 22:56:18, at a 
rate of 944 fpm. At FL 340, the copilot reported to ATC that they were maintaining FL 
340. Both pilots talked for 2 min., trying to recall and clarify the instructions that they 
had been given.

At 23:05:14, while maintaining FL 340, the PIC stated to the copilot that they were high 
on profile and needed to descend to get back on the required descent profile.



At 23:08:16, the PIC said, “Alright, we are catching back on profile, so just keep the 
speed up.”

The copilot contacted Chuuk radio at 23:08:54 and requested a weather update. Chuuk 
acknowledged and asked the crew to standby. The PIC, realizing that they were still high 
on profile, instructed the copilot to go on VNAV.

At 23:11:00, Chuuk radio reported to the crew that local weather was: “wind variable at 
5, visibility 14 scattered 012 charlie bravo, broken 120 overcast 280, temperature 26, dew 
point 25, altimeter 2973.”

Although Chuuk essentially was VMC, a single storm cell — the “scattered charlie bravo” 
— was moving around in the area. During the approach sequence, the cell moved 
between the MAP and the runway threshold. Thus, the approach would be conducted in 
VMC until the aircraft reached the MAP. As we’ll see, the crew ultimately continued the 
approach beyond the MAP and slipped into IMC. Here are the highlights:

23:11:25 (09:11 local): The copilot reported passing FL 180 to San Francisco Radio.

23:15:59: Fifteen nm from Chuuk while passing 8,600 ft., the copilot made an inbound 
broadcast call stating their intention to track to the RNAV (GPS) Runway 4 from the east 
southeast. Moments later, the copilot contacted San Francisco Radio, and reported 
passing 8,000 ft. on descent.

Prior to commencing the approach, while descending through 4,000 ft., the PIC stated, 
“Alright, the missed approach is . . .” and the copilot did not respond. The PIC did not 
continue his statement/question with respect to the missed approach briefing.

23:20:53: The PIC stated to the copilot: “OK, we’re on RNAV at 041 and I’ll go 1,000.” 
Shortly afterward at 23:21:07, the copilot made a general broadcast, stating that the 
flight was established on 041 inbound via the RNAV (GPS) Runway 4.

23:21:27: The PIC called for gear down and flaps 15 and stated, “We just configure as we 
can. . . .” Again, the PIC did not complete his instructions to the copilot.

23:22:33: The copilot mentioned to the PIC that there were some showers in the area 
and the PIC acknowledged by stating, “That must be some storm, but it’ll be out soon.” 
(The cell returns were red on the airborne weather radar.) The PIC called for the landing 
checklist, but the only callouts made by the copilot were for landing gear, flaps, and 
lights and runway in sight.

23:22:42: The PIC said to the copilot: “Ah, we’ll probably just go down on the PAPIs.” 
Seven seconds later the PIC said, “Alright flaps 30, flaps 40.”

23:22:54: The PIC said, “Landing checks.”



At the EGPWS 1,000-ft. altitude callout, the copilot told the PIC, “OK, stable.” Four 
seconds later the PIC said, “Continue.” The copilot then said, “and visual, 900 cloud 
base.”

23:23:41: The copilot set the missed approach altitude on the mode control and shortly 
afterward, when passing 625 ft. (677 ft. radio altimeter), with the aircraft above the 3-
deg. glideslope, the PIC disconnected the autopilot and stated, “I’m going back on 
profile.”

23:23:43: While passing 548 ft. (602 ft.) on descent, the aircraft entered a storm cell and 
heavy rain and the PIC called for the wipers to be activated. (The PIC stated during the 
investigation interview that he had already made the decision that it was visual up ahead 
with the runway edge lighting to continue for landing at that stage.)

23:23:49: The PIC said, “OK, landing.”

23:23:52: The copilot said, “Visual, one red” (pause) “three whites.”

23:23:53: EGPWS electronic voice called out “MINIMUMS.”

23:24:00: As the EGPWS called out “SINK RATE, SINK RATE” the PIC said, “I just 
wanna get on profile” (over the top of the last “SINK RATE”).

23:24:03: The EGPWS called out repeated “GLIDESLOPE, GLIDESLOPE, 
GLIDESLOPE.”

23:24:06: The EGPWS callout repeated “SINK RATE, SINK RATE,” and the PIC said to 
the copilot, “That’s fine, I’ll just go a little bit more.”

23:24:09: The EGPWS callout repeated “GLIDESLOPE, GLIDESLOPE.”

23:24:11: The copilot rapidly asked, “See the runway?”

23:24:12: EGPWS called out “100 GLIDESLOPE” and the PIC said, “Monitor airspeed. 
OK got it.” (The FDR recorded a “GLIDESLOPE” alert, but it was overridden by the 
EGPWS “100 ft.” call and was not recorded on the CVR.)

23:24:13: The EGPWS called out repeated “GLIDESLOPE.”

23:24:17: The EGPWS called out “SINK RATE, SINK RATE.” The copilot called rapidly 
with high intonation: “Too low! We’re too low! We’re too low! We’re too low!”

The airplane impacted the lagoon surface 2 sec. later.



Glideslope and sink rate aural alerts graphic plotted using derived data. Credit: AIC

The Investigation

The AIC began its look at the situation with the copilot’s use of the Boeing EFB. Boeing’s 
OPT EFB software was designed to assist pilots with takeoff and landing performance 
calculations by taking inputs for aircraft, runway and weather data and calculating 
expected airplane behavior. When Air Niugini purchased the OPT, Boeing provided 
unique, aircraft-specific configuration data for all of Air Niugini’s Boeing fleet.

The copilot used the Boeing OPT to calculate the approach and landing performance. 
The crew’s decision for the selection of flaps 40 was solely based on the Boeing OPT 
calculation done by the copilot on his EFB. The PIC did not query the source and method 
used to calculate and determine these operational figures. He agreed without verifying 
the data or instructing the copilot to verify the data using an approved onboard 
performance document.

The Air Niugini Flight Performance Office had issued the Boeing OPT to 65 Boeing 
captains and F/Os for training only. The investigation determined that the copilot’s use 
of the OPT was not in accordance with Air Niugini’s Flight Crew Operating Manual 
(FCOM) and Standard Operating Procedures Manual (SOPM).

The use of the EFB diverted the copilot’s attention from his primary flight duties, said 
the AIC. The analytical and methodical procedures outlined in the SOPM and FCOM 
were overlooked during that time. The 150-m landing distance buffer calculated from the 
EFB was not checked against the approved onboard charts and tables.

“The recorded information from the CVR revealed that the PIC’s tolerance and non-
questioning of the copilot’s use of the EFB, and his subsequent adherence to the data 
derived from the EFB, was not in accordance with ICAO Annex 6 and the operator’s 



SOPM,” said the AIC report. “Therefore, both pilots based their approach and landing 
performance assessment entirely on the calculations from the Boeing OPT contained in 
the EFB.”

During the flight, before the top of descent (TOD) briefing, the oral communications 
between the PIC, the F/O and air traffic control were conducted in normal tones and in 
an orderly manner. “However, during the approach, below 10,000 ft., communication 
between the pilots was minimal and not in accordance with SOPs, and they were not 
using standard phraseology,” said the AIC. “The PIC’s intention to continue the landing 
was reinforced when he asked the copilot to continue the landing checklist immediately 
prior to the EGPWS 1,000-ft. annunciation. However, the CVR indicated that the only 
items covered were landing gear, flaps and lights.”

The copilot did not provide effective monitoring and operational support to the PIC and 
did not recognize the unstable approach. The evidence showed that he was unaware of 
the developing unsafe conditions. “Due to his lack of situational awareness and vigilance, 
he was unable to recognize the need to correct the ever-increasing dangerous rate of 
descent below the glideslope,” said the AIC.

At the minimums call, the copilot stated “three whites” with reference to the PAPI 
indicating high above the glidepath. The aircraft was not on the correct flight path and 
the rate of descent significantly exceeded 1,000 fpm with the glideslope indicator 
showing a rapid deviation from half-dot low at the MDA, to two-dots high within 9 sec. 
after passing the MDA in IMC.

The pilots were not complying with Air Niugini SOPs and demonstrated that they were 
not situationally aware, and that their attention was channelized. “Their actions 
indicated that they were fixated on a particular aspect and did not address the alerts and 
take corrective action,” said the AIC. “The PIC said that he found the Boeing 737-800 
aircraft laterally less stable with flaps 40 compared with flap 30s setting, resulting in 
lateral overcorrections of the aircraft after he disconnected the autopilot.”

Both pilots stated during interviews with investigators that they disregarded the constant 
“GLIDESLOPE” and “SINK RATE” aural alerts.

Video footage of the cockpit NAV display taken by the cockpit jump seat occupant 
showed an area of heavy rain (cockpit radar returns) on the approach in front of the 
aircraft immediately after the MAP. The missed approach track was outside the 
boundary of the storm cell and rain. However, the storm cell was between the aircraft 
and its intended landing runway.

“If the crew had made the missed approach at the MAP,” said the AIC, “they would have 
avoided the heavy rain.”



The investigation determined that when the aircraft entered the rain, all visual reference, 
if established earlier, would have been lost. The PIC informed the AIC that visual contact 
with the runway was lost in the final 30 sec. of the flight.

“It is inconceivable that the PAPI or the runway were visible to either pilot as the aircraft 
was descending farther below the glideslope in the rain,” said the AIC. “From 307 ft. 
[364 ft.] the PFD displayed a red warning: PULL UP. That warning was generated by the 
EGPWS when the rate of descent exceeded a specified limit.

“However, under the circumstances where the PIC’s attention was channelized, and the 
copilot was not effectively monitoring the displays and was lacking vigilance, that visual 
cue PULL UP was missed by both pilots. There was no aircraft-generated aural hard 
warning to alert the crew to the approaching disaster.”

There was ample information available to the flight crew from the EGPWS alerts and 
warnings to alert the pilots that the approach was unstable and, therefore, a hazard 
existed, said the AIC. Company SOPS state, “If a deviation exists at or below the stable 
approach gates [1,000 ft. AGL in IMC or 500 ft. AGL in VMC] the PM shall make the 
relevant deviation call followed by the word “unstable.” The PIC shall announce “Go-
around” and an immediate go-around procedure shall be conducted.”

From the time the autopilot was disconnected at 625 ft. (677 ft.), the aircraft was never 
in a stabilized approach and, therefore, a go-around should have been conducted 
immediately. Yet, the copilot was completely unaware of the hazardous situation 
unfolding and did not challenge the PIC and did not attempt to take control of the 
aircraft from the PIC and execute a go-around, in accordance with company instructions 
that require taking over when an unsafe condition exists.

“The PIC’s actions were consistent with him being trapped in the condition called 
‘fixated on one task’ or ‘one view of a situation even as evidence accumulates,’” said the 
AIC. “He intended to land the aircraft, and in doing so disregarded the alerts [EGPWS 
‘SINK RATE’ and ‘GLIDESLOPE’] indicating an unsafe condition.”

The AIC hired an aviation medical practitioner who has specialized in aircraft accident 
and serious incident medical and psychological investigations for more than 20 years. 
The expert examined all relevant evidence and provided the AIC with an assessment and 
findings. No evidence of fatigue was presented.

Inattention (or decreased vigilance) has been a contributor to operational errors, 
incidents and accidents worldwide, said the AIC. Decreased vigilance manifests itself in 
several ways, which can be referred to as hazardous states of awareness.

These include:



(1) Absorption: A state of being so focused on a specific task that other tasks are 
disregarded.

(2) Fixation: A state of being locked onto one task, or one view of a situation, even as 
evidence accumulates that attention is necessary elsewhere, or that the particular view is 
incorrect.

(3) Channelized attention: A mental state that exists when a person’s full attention is 
focused on one stimulus to the exclusion of all others. This becomes a problem when the 
person fails to perform a task or process information of a higher priority and thus fails to 
notice or has no time to respond to cues requiring immediate attention.

(4) Fascination: An attention anomaly in which a person observes environmental cues 
but fails to respond to them.

(5) The “tunneling or channelizing” that can occur during stressful situations, which is 
an example of fixation.

The AIC said it chose the term “fixation” to describe the PIC’s state of alertness, which 
provides a clearer idea of “being locked onto one task” than does “absorption.” Several 
findings support this tunneling or channelized condition, for example:

The PIC’s attention became fixated on landing the aircraft.

The crew did not respond to 13 EGPWS aural caution alerts and the PULL UP visual 
warning. The PIC did not change his plan to land the aircraft, although the aircraft was 
in an unstabilized condition. The other tasks that needed the crew’s attention were either 
not heard or disregarded. The auditory information about other important and 
hazardous things did not reach their conscious awareness.

The PIC flew an unstabilized approach. His intention to continue to land the aircraft, 
from an excessively high rate of descent when in IMC and below the minimum descent 
altitude, was a sign that his attention was channelized during a stressful time.

The PIC’s decision to continue in IMC past the MAP and not conduct the missed 
approach was flawed. In choosing the landing option rather than the go-around the PIC 
fixated on a dangerous option.

Formal Findings

The AIC issues a list of “findings” rather than determining a “probable cause.” Based on 
the preceding analysis, the AIC made these findings:

The investigation determined that the flight crew’s level of compliance with the Air 
Niugini SOPM was not at a standard that would promote safe aircraft operations.



The PIC intended to conduct an RNAV GPS approach to Runway 4 at Chuuk and briefed 
the copilot accordingly. The descent and approach were initially conducted in VMC, but 
from 546 ft. (600 ft.) the aircraft was flown in IMC.

The flight crew did not adhere to the Air Niugini SOPM or the approach and pre-landing 
checklists. The RNAV (GPS) Rwy 04 Approach chart procedure was not adequately 
briefed.

The RNAV approach specified a flight path descent angle guide of 3 deg. The aircraft was 
flown at a high rate of descent and a steep variable flight path angle averaging 4.5 deg. 
during the approach, with lateral over-controlling; the approach was unstabilized.

The FDR recorded a total of 17 alerts, specifically eight SINK RATE and nine 
GLIDESLOPE. The recorded information from the CVR showed that a total of 14 EGPWS 
aural alerts sounded after passing the MDA, between 307 ft. (364 ft.) and the impact 
point. A “100 ft.” advisory was annunciated, in accordance with design standards, 
overriding one of the GLIDESLOPE aural alerts. The other aural alerts were seven 
GLIDESLOPE and six SINK RATE.

The investigation observed that the flight crew disregarded the alerts and did not 
acknowledge the “minimums” and 100 ft. alerts — a symptom of fixation and 
channelized attention. The crew were fixated on cues associated with the landing and 
control inputs due to the extension of 40-deg. flaps.

Neither pilot was situationally aware nor did either recognize the developing significant 
unsafe condition during the approach after passing the MAP when the aircraft entered a 
storm cell and heavy rain. The weather radar on the PIC’s navigation display showed a 
large, red area indicating a storm cell immediately after the MAP, between the MAP and 
the runway.

The copilot as the support/monitoring pilot was ineffective and was oblivious to the 
rapidly unfolding unsafe situation. He did not recognize the significant unsafe condition 
and, therefore, did not realize the need to challenge the PIC and take control of the 
aircraft, as required by the Air Niugini SOPM.

The records showed that the copilot had simulator training for EGPWS alert TERRAIN; 
however, there was no evidence of simulator check sessions covering the vital actions 
and responses required to retrieve a perceived or real situation that might compromise 
the safe operation of the aircraft. Specifically a sustained unstabilized approach below 
1,000 ft. AGL in IMC. 

The PIC did not conduct the missed approach at the MAP despite the criteria required 
for visually continuing the approach not being met, including visually acquiring the 
runway or the PAPI.



The PIC did not conduct a go-around after passing the MAP and subsequently the MDA 
even though: The aircraft had entered IMC; the approach was unstable; the glideslope 
indicator on the PFD was showing a rapid glideslope deviation from a half-dot low to two 
dots high within 9 sec. after passing the MDA; the rate of descent exceeded 1,000 fpm 
and was increasing; there were EGPWS SINK RATE and GLIDESLOPE aural alerts; and 
the EGPWS visual PULL UP warning message was displayed on the PFD.

“This report highlights that deviations from recommended practice and SOPs are a 
potential hazard, particularly during the approach and landing phase of flight, and 
increase the risk of approach and landing accidents,” said the AIC. “It also highlights that 
crew coordination is less than effective if crewmembers do not work together as an 
integrated team. Support crewmembers have a duty and responsibility to ensure that the 
safety of a flight is not compromised by noncompliance with SOPs, standard phraseology 
and recommended practices.”

The lesson here is clear. Once again, we see an unstabilized approach lead to loss of life 
and aircraft. All airline and most business aviation SOPs call for an immediate missed 
approach if the situation becomes unstable. And it should go without saying that once a 
crew finds itself back in IMC below minimums, it’s time to hit the TOGO button.



                        Bell 407 - Bird Strike

Deadly Dusk Air Ambulance Bird Strike (Air Methods, B407, N620PA)
On 19 November 2017 

Air Methods Corporation (AMC) air ambulance Bell 407  N620PA crashed south of Stuttgart, 

Arkansas.  The helicopter was en route in Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) from Pine 

Bluff, Arkansas to pick up a patient in Helena, Arkansas.  The pilot and two 

medical personnel on board were fatally injured.

Wreckage of Air Methods HEMS B407 N620PA after Striking Geese (Credit: NTSB)

The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report that:



The helicopter was transmitting its position to the company via satellite communications. At 

1855:50,  the helicopter transmitted that it was heading 070°, travelling 116 knots at 1,252 ft 

mean sea level   [so c 1,000 ft AGL]. This was the last recorded data point.

Air Methods informed the NTSB that:

Air Force SAR advised Company Operational Control Center of an ELT activation for the 

aircraft at 2015. The aircraft wreckage was located by local law enforcement some time prior to 

2100, in a rural area approximately 22 nm ENE of the Pine Bluff Regional Airport (KPBF).   The 

terrain in the crash area is…relatively flat, with mixed woodland and meadow terrain  features.

The aircraft had just passed over the 33,832 acre Bayou Meto State Game Area to the 

west.  Witnesses reported ‘thousands’ of geese in the local area.

https://youtu.be/PVjG84dTTKE

NTSB Safety Investigation
A weather study conducted for the accident area did not reveal any weather hazards around the 

time of  the accident. Both the sun and the moon were more than 15° below the horizon, and 

dark night conditions existed with no illumination from the moon.

The helicopter was found on the bank of a reservoir on its right side….

All major components of the helicopter were accounted for at the site. A post-impact fire 

consumed a majority of  the fuselage.



Wreckage of Air Methods HEMS B407 N620PA after Striking Geese (Credit: NTSB)

Fragments of the pilot’s night vision goggles were located in the area of the pilot controls 

(company policy required pilots and one [medical] crewmember to wear night vision goggles 

during night flights.)



No pre-impact anomalies were detected during postaccident examination of the helicopter 

airframe or engine.

However:

During the on-scene portion of the investigation, numerous geese, ducks, and cranes were 

observed in the reservoir and at another nearby reservoir.

Multiple bird remains were found from the cockpit area to the first bulkhead. The Arkansas 

Crime Laboratory, Little Rock, Arkansas, conducted an autopsy on the pilot. The cause of death 

was multiple injuries. The autopsy noted white bird feathers embedded in the pilot’s coveralls 

and right boot.

Samples from the bird remains were sent to the Feather Identification Laboratory, Smithsonian 

 Institution, National Museum of     Natural History , Washington, DC.

In all the lab received 12 bags of debris.  These were subjected to DNA and microscopic 

analysis.



Snow Goose Bird Debris from Air Methods HEMS B407 N620PA (Credit: Smithsonian via NTSB)

Samples submitted to the Smithsonian contained remains from snow geese, which typically have  

an average weight of 4.8 and 5.48 lbs for females and males, respectively.

The NTSB note that:

The Bell 407 is certificated under 14 CFR Part 27 as a normal category rotorcraft. As such, there 

are no bird strike safety requirements for the windshield. Transport category rotorcraft do have 

a requirement under   14 CFR 29.631   to be designed to ensure capability of continued flight 

and/or landing, however the design requirement assumed a single 2.2 lbs bird. The accident 

involved numerous birds in excess of 4  lbs each.



A review of the FAA Wildlife Strike Database  found a strike report for November 17, 2011, about 

0705  [Local Time]  the pilot of a Cessna 210 airplane reported striking a snow goose near the 

area of  the accident site.

The US Air Force developed a Bird Avoidance Model (BAM)  that analyzes and correlates bird 

habitats, migration patterns, and breeding characteristics with key environmental and man-

made geospatial data. This model  is used by military pilots and planners to monitor bird activity  

for strike mitigation purposes. Civilian pilots are not required to use the [free, online] model and 

the investigation was unable to determine if the accident pilot was aware of the available 

information.

At dusk, the strike probability for the accident area was forecast to be severe, and at night, the 

strike probability reduced to moderate.

In their analysis the NTSB comment:



While the helicopter flight controls were continuous, it could not be determined if the bird strikes  

jammed the pilot’s controls and/or  incapacitated the pilot.

…there was no moon illumination to enhance the NVG effectiveness, and it is unlikely that 

the pilot would have been able to visually detect the birds before impact.

NTSB Probable Cause
An in-flight loss of control due to bird strikes.

Safety Resources
The European Space Agency (ESA) is managing the FlySafe project in Europe, initiated at the 

initiative of the Belgian and Dutch military, covering Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium 

and the southern edge of the North Sea.  This gives bird activity predictions based on radar 

data.

In a presentation on behalf of the Rotorcraft Bird Strike Working Group (RBSWG) to 

the 11th EASA Rotorcraft Symposium  in December 2017 it was revealed that in the US 94% 

of the current helicopter fleet is made up of types that never needed to meet a bird strike 

requirement. A helicopter accident (discussed below) and the Hudson A320 ditching, both 

in January 2009, were likely causes of a big increase in all wildlife strikes reporting across 

the US helicopter fleet.

While fixed 



wing aircraft predominantly strike birds during take-off and landing, two thirds of 

rotorcraft strikes occurred during the en route phase (where kinetic energy is highest). 

Only 8-9% occurred during approach and 9-10% during climb.  The presentation went on:

The largest single component struck by birds is the windshield with 47% on Part 27 and 40% on 

Part 29.   84-85% of all bird strikes occurred on components forward of the main rotor mast. 

This includes the main rotor which experienced 30%-33% of the strikes reported. Not one single 

record exists for windshield penetration on Part 29 rotorcraft certified to the FAA bird strike 

airworthiness standard established over 21 years ago.     This is statistically significant. For newly 

manufactured and existing rotorcraft, the RBSWG proposed to use a Risk-Based Safety-Tiered 

approach that scales the bird strike regulation based on the maximum number of occupants 

onboard. As the number of occupants increases, so does the risk exposure.

They also recommend:
 Reduce airspeed when practical
 Increase altitude as quickly as possible and practical
 Use taxi and landing lights

They also say:

The location of bird concentrations during seasonal migrations and the local bird nesting and 

roosting habitats, should be made available to the rotorcraft operator/pilot for preflight 

planning to minimize the potential for bird strikes.   Air carriers and general aviation operators 

working with the Flight Safety Programs and Flight Service Briefing should identify and publish 

the known locations and probability of bird concentrations.   This information on bird 

concentrations should be incorporated into alert bulletins, flight service notice to airmen 

(NOTAM) and other systems presently used to inform flight crews of flight hazards.

The Flight Safety Foundation’s (FSF) Basic Aviation Risk Standard Offshore 

Helicopter Operations (BARSOHO), which has been fully aligned with 



the HeliOffshore Safety Performance Model (SPM) since February 2017, states in Controls 

7.1 and 7.3:

Where known bird migratory routes or bird reserves are identified, flight crew must plan cruise 

altitudes greater than 3,000 feet Above Ground Level (AGL) wherever practical.

Aircraft routing must consider bird sanctuaries, known nesting areas and migratory bird paths 

as far as practical.

The BARSOHO Implementation Guidance states:

While the risk of in-flight collision with birds cannot be eliminated, it is recommended that 

strategies be considered by flight crew to minimize exposure to this threat when operating in 

areas of known migratory routes. Statistics reveal that the risk of birdstrike significantly reduces 

when aircraft are operated at higher altitudes.

An EASA Safety Information Bulletin (SIB) is expected shortly on helicopter bird strikes.

About 8% US military of all Class A, B and C aviation mishaps from fiscal 2011 through 2017 

resulted from wildlife strikes, according to data obtained by Military Times.



Crash Unveils Safety Culture Clash, 
Part 1

This is the first of a three-part article series on analyzing a Bell 407 crash. 

Many words have been written about safety culture, but attaining that culture 
remains a somewhat elusive goal. CEOs, managers, chief pilots and even pilots 
tell themselves they’ve done everything they can do to achieve a good safety 
culture, and then an accident happens. The leaders are shocked, and then they 
begin to find out that not everyone in the organization believed the safety 
culture was good. That can lead to some hard feelings.

Safety culture was at the heart of the investigation into the crash of a Bell 407 
helicopter air ambulance flight in 2019. When the NTSB released the docket of 
factual information halfway through the investigation, over a thousand pages 



of interviews with current and former employees revealed that many of them 
felt pressured into flying in marginal or unsafe conditions, and that the 
management wasn’t listening to them. The company’s immediate response 
was anger and disbelief.

The investigation may be an object lesson in not taking your safety culture for 
granted. There also may be some lessons in how not to handle an investigation 
if one comes your way.

The accident flight, which took place on Jan. 29, 2019, was a Part 135 helicopter 
air ambulance flight from Mount Carmel Hospital, Grove City, Ohio to Holzer 
Meigs Emergency Department in Pomeroy, Ohio, about 69 nm away. The 
purpose of the flight was to pick up a patient, and onboard were the pilot, a 
flight nurse and a paramedic. The operator of the flight was Viking Aviation, 
doing business as Survival Flight. 

Another pilot, who had been on duty during the evening shift, started the 
helicopter at 06:23. The accident pilot boarded the helicopter and, using an 
onboard satellite radio, contacted the company’s operations control center 
(OCC) at 06:25. She confirmed the flight’s destination and obtained the 
geographical coordinates for Holzer Meigs. 

It was still dark when the helicopter took off at 06:28 Eastern Standard Time. 
Typical Ohio wintertime weather conditions prevailed, with overcast skies, 
freezing temperatures, and about 7 miles visibility. Marginal visual flight rules 
(MVFR) conditions were forecast for the area along the route, with an overcast 
between 2,200 and 2,800 ft AGL, a 30-60% chance of light snow and surface 
winds of 10-15 kt. from the west. 

There was a winter weather advisory for rapidly falling temperatures, flash 
freeze conditions, scattered snow showers, and up to an inch of snow 
accumulations possible. Three nearby airports reported gusty winds of 10-20 
kt. and visibilities as low as 3 miles. Two AIRMET’s were valid for the area 
warning of moderate turbulence and moderate icing.

Shortly after takeoff the company OCC specialist called the pilot to request her 
risk assessment for the flight, and she replied “I’m green in all categories.” She 
got information about the patient who was to be picked up and promised to 
provide the OCC with a flight plan.

The company’s preflight risk analysis scored four factors: environmental 
factors, aircraft status, human factors and flight type. Colors were used to rate 
each factor--green for normal, amber for intermediate risk and red for out of 



limits. An amber-critical rating was used for factors approaching out of limits 
conditions.

The helicopter climbed to and leveled off at 3,000 ft. MSL, just below an 
overcast deck, and proceeded southeast at 120-140 kt. Three minutes after 
leveling off, the pilot noticed snow beginning to fall and started a descent. 
After reaching 2,000 MSL, she again climbed, and again encountered snow. 
From 06:47 to 06:50 she continued her descent, and at 06:50 she began a 180-
deg. turn to the left.

The helicopter continued to descend and struck a tree about 30 ft. above the 
ground. The elevation of the wreckage area was from 850-980 ft. and the 
wreckage was aligned along a northwesterly heading. One of the main rotor 
blades was embedded in a tree. The other three blades stayed attached to the 
rotor hub and were found about halfway down the 600 ft. wreckage path. 
There was no fire and no evidence of engine failure. There were no survivors.

The next part of the article series will cover the investigation.

Crash Unveils Safety Culture Clash, 
Part 2



This is the second of a three-part article series on analyzing a Bell 407 
crash. The first part outlined the conditions before takeoff and the fatal flight.

Representatives from the FAA, Survival Flight, Rolls-Royce engines and 
Woodward were parties to the investigation. In addition, the Transportation 
Safety Board (TSB) of Canada was an accredited representative and Bell 
Textron a technical advisor to the investigation.

An airworthiness group documented the accident site.They removed the 
engine electronic control unit (ECU), some of the cockpit instrument gauges, 
and the main rotor and tail rotor hydraulic actuators for further investigation. 
Data downloaded from the ECU showed there was no engine failure and 
examination of the rotor actuators showed no abnormalities. 

The Bell 407 helicopter, N191SF, was manufactured in 1996 and was powered 
by a single turbine engine. It was purchased by Survival Flight in 2017 and 
modified to an air ambulance configuration in 2018. It had 1,179.7 hrs. of flight 
time and 5,058 landings, and it had last been inspected a month before the 
accident.



The helicopter had no autopilot and was not certified for IFR flight. However, 
it was well equipped with avionics. It had a radio altimeter and a dual Garmin 
GTN 650 system. The Garmin GTN 650 incorporated a helicopter terrain 
awareness and warning system (HTAWS). There was a Garmin G500H 
electronic flight information system with primary flight instrumentation, 
navigation, a moving map, and flight information service–broadcast (FIS-B) 
weather.  Also installed was a Garmin GTS800 traffic collision avoidance 
system, a Garmin GTX 345R transponder and a night vision system. 

The two Garmin GTN 650s were recovered and an NTSB vehicle recorder lab 
specialist was able to power them up. The only information stored was the 
location of one airport. There were no stored flight plans in either device.

14 CFR 135.607 requires air ambulance helicopters to be equipped with an 
approved flight data monitoring (FDM) system. To comply, the accident 
helicopter had an Outerlink IRIS lightweight flight data recording system. It 
provided satcom communications, an internal attitude heading reference 
System (AHRS), and recording of certain flight parameters and intercom voice 
information. The IRIS system can also record video, but no cameras were 
installed on the helicopter.

The system was not designed to be crashworthy and the company did not 
routinely download and analyze the FDM data. However, much of the 
recorded data was recovered from the accident flight.

Unfortunately, the audio recording quality was poor. A specialist downloaded 
the audio file and a flight data group examined it. The Outerlink file provided 
only short and intermittent pilot remarks. Radio communication between the 
OCC and the pilot were integrated into the resulting transcript and it helps to 
show the timeline of events.

The flight parameter files were of better quality. Data was recovered from 
both onboard and satellite uplink sources. There was a two-minute data 
dropout near the end of the recording.

An NTSB performance specialist used data from the Outerlink FDM system, the 
ECU, and automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) to reconstruct 
the flight path. In the last minute of flight, there were changes in speed, large 
control inputs and large changes in pitch attitude. Despite the data dropout, 
the specialist was able to construct a 5,900 ft. arc ending near the crash site, 
which showed the helicopter was in about a 22-deg. left bank as it descended 
during the final moments of the fight. 



The performance study also compared collective pitch and rotor torque to 
determine if icing was affecting the rotor blades. Because that relationship did 
not change, the study concluded that icing was not affecting the rotor blades.

There was a 10 second whining sound recorded near the end of the audio 
recording. A sound spectrum study compared the noise to common helicopter 
sounds such as the rotors and gearbox to the sound of a bird striking the 
aircraft. The study concluded that the sound was aerodynamic in nature, 
either from a plenum, a horn type sound, or an open window. 

The 32-year-old pilot had been hired in April of 2018, nine months before the 
accident. At the time she had helicopter and instrument helicopter ratings on 
her commercial pilot certificate, and she held a helicopter and instrument 
helicopter flight instructor certificate, as well. She had a second-class medical 
certificate with no limitations. 

When hired, she had logged 1,855 flight hours, and since completing training 
at Survival Flight she had logged an additional 83.3 hours, all in the Bell 407. 
During her initial training at the company she had successfully performed a 
GPS approach, a missed approach, instrument navigation, unusual attitude 
recovery, and flat light, brownout and whiteout recovery procedures. 

She had been working day shifts from 0700 to 1900 for the six days before the 
accident, and had spent each night at home. She was the base safety 
representative and was described by other pilots as very approachable and 
proactive about safety.

Survival Flight is headquartered at Batesville, Arkansas, and operated 15 bases 
in six states at the time of the accident. The company operated 16 helicopters 
and one Pilatus PC-12 airplane and employed 70 pilots. Only the PC-12 was 
authorized by the FAA to operate under IFR. The Grove City base, Base 14, 
opened in May 2018, seven months before the accident. It was staffed with 
four pilots.

Helicopter air ambulance operators with more than 10 aircraft are required 
by 14 CFR 135.619 to have an operations control center. Survival Flight’s OCC 
was located at the company’s headquarters in Arkansas. Staff at the OCC take 
flight requests from hospitals and first responders and forward those requests 
to pilots at the appropriate base.

On the morning of the accident, the OCC took a call from the Holzer Meigs 
medical facility requesting patient transportation to a hospital in Columbus, 
Ohio. The technician at Holzer Meigs had already called two other helicopter 



air ambulance companies and had been turned down. The pilot for MedFlight, 
called first, turned the flight down because the icing probability was greater 
than 75% and because snow squalls were present on the HEMS (helicopter 
emergency medical services) Weather Tool. The pilot for HealthNet 
Aeromedical Services turned the flight down due to low ceilings and icing.

A free website, weatherturndown.com, provides a means for medical 
transport services to see if other companies have refused to take a requested 
flight. The technician at Holzer Meigs did not mention she had been turned 
down twice, and the Survival Flight OCC specialist did not ask. The specialist 
said she was monitoring the weather turndown website, but apparently the 
two turndowns had not yet been logged by MedFlight and HealthNet. 

When the Survival Flight evening duty pilot at Grove City took the phone call 
from his OCC, he took only 28 seconds to decide to accept the flight. He then 
contacted the accident pilot, who was on her way to the base, and asked if she 
would take the flight. He did not brief her on the current conditions, except to 
say there was “good weather.” He said in an interview he had been sleeping 
when the OCC call came in.

There is no evidence that either pilot checked the weather conditions for the 
flight before it took off. The accident pilot apparently accepted the judgment of 
the evening shift pilot and deferred completing the flight risk assessment she 
was supposed to do. 

The final part of this article series will evaluate the company’s safety culture.

Crash Unveils Safety Culture Clash, 
Part 3



This is the last of a three-part article series on analyzing a Bell 407 crash. The 
first part outlined the conditions before takeoff and the fatal flight. The second 
 part  analyzes the accident investigation.

An operational factors/human performance group was formed to examine and 
document the pilot’s background, company policies, training and supervision, 
and other operational details. As part of their work, they interviewed 28 
people associated with the company, including OCC staff, medical crew, pilots 
and management. They also talked to people at the hospital and took written 
statements from other persons of interest. In all, they accumulated 1,146 pages 
of interviews and statements.

The results showed a marked contrast between the company’s stated policies 
and its actual practices. 

The evening duty pilot at Grove City on the morning of the accident had rated 
conditions as amber for weather, and later replaced it with green. When the 
NTSB graded conditions using the methods in AC 135-14B, “Helicopter Air 
Ambulance Operations,” including the turndowns by other operators, it 
resulted in a score that would have cancelled the flight.

Why did the flight depart in unsafe conditions? Comments made by the staff 
help to explain why the two pilots failed to do the flight’s risk analysis.

Of 23 current or former employees interviewed, 11 said pilots were pressured 
to take flights. Three of the eight pilots interviewed said they were not able to 



make a “red” risk assessment. When one pilot said his base was “red” for 
maintenance, the director of operations (DO) called and said “why are you 
red...that’s not the way we do things.” When a helicopter had a hot start, 
management refused to allow an engine inspection until the mechanic 
threatened to quit. The engine was damaged.

Pilots were reprimanded or criticized for declining a flight. A medical crew 
member said when pilots turned down flights for weather, “the chief pilot of 
the company...would call within about 10 minutes and would cuss out our 
pilots and belittle them...saying...we need to take these flights...he would yell so 
loud on the phone that you could hear it...just standing within earshot.”

A pilot turned down a flight due to 35-50 kt. winds and low ceilings. Both the 
DO and chief pilot called the pilot to question his decision. A pilot who turned 
down a flight for low ceilings was told by a manager, “get that helicopter flown 
back to the [hospital]” because she “wanted [it] back on the helipad for the 
visual effect.”

Company management expected pilots to depart from the helipad within 7 
minutes of receiving a call. One pilot said he was criticized for waiting beyond 
that time to allow the engine temperatures to move into the green range.

Two former employees reported they were terminated shortly after voicing 
safety concerns and turning down flights, and one current employee was 
demoted after voicing his safety concerns.

Investigators obtained a poignant letter written by the flight nurse who died in 
the accident. The letter detailed many examples of harassment and 
intimidation of crews by one pilot in the base. She described flying in 
conditions that were “only black and a ton of clouds and precipitation.” The 
letter was written to company human resources officials about six weeks 
before the accident.

Even though the company had a safety reporting system, the safety director 
admitted he had only received one incident report in a year and a half.

When helicopter air ambulance companies check the weather turndown 
website for possible charters, it’s called “reverse helicopter shopping.” Several 
current and former Survival Flight staff said it was a common company 
practice to use the weather turndown site to find flight requests. 

Survival Flight distributed a quick reference guide to hospitals that said, in 
part, “Our weather minimums are different, if other companies turn down the 



flight for weather–CALL US. If we can fly to you safely and take the patient 
safely to another facility...WE WILL.” 

Survival Flight’s Response

The NTSB released its docket of factual reports to the public in November 
2019. According to a letter from an attorney working for Viking Aviation (dba 
Survival Flight), immediately after the docket was released, customers In Ohio 
terminated contracts with the company and a client hospital in Oklahoma City 
decided not to refer patients to the company anymore. He also said the 
company was now unable to find employees who were willing to work for the 
company.

The company publicly released arguments about the docket factual material, 
including the interviews, and proposed the cause of the accident was “an 
object, presumably like a bird” striking the airplane. 

On Dec. 4, 2019, the NTSB’s director of aviation safety wrote a letter to Survival 
Flight’s party representative reminding him that he and his company had 
agreed to the NTSB’s party agreement, which says parties may not comment 
publicly about the ongoing investigation or make analytical comments about 
the cause of the accident. The letter was a final warning before removing the 
company from party status.

In January 2020 the company’s attorney accused the NTSB of using the 
investigation to “advance a dispute with the FAA” and complained that their 
management personnel were not allowed to be on investigative groups. He 
complained of factual errors even though three of the company’s employees 
were full members of investigative groups and all concurred with the facts in 
the NTSB’s technical review. The attorney’s letter was sent to officials all over 
Washington, D.C., including the FAA administrator and the Department of 
Transportation secretary.

Management personnel are routinely excluded from investigative groups as a 
matter of long standing NTSB policy.

Conclusions and Recommendations

When the NTSB analyzes all the information gathered by investigators, it takes 
into account the possibility that some people interviewed might not be entirely 
candid and that some people may have a grudge against a company. In the 
winnowing of the data, it’s a consistent pattern of data and remarks that leads 



to sound conclusions. In the Survival Flight investigation, the pattern of poor 
safety practices stood out.

The Board described safety culture as “the product of individual and group 
values, attitudes, perceptions, competencies, and patterns of behavior that 
determine the commitment to, and the style and proficiency of, an 
organization’s health and safety management.” The company’s safety director 
described the company’s culture as “pretty good,” but the evidence showed 
otherwise. 

The NTSB’s probable cause for the accident was “Survival Flight’s inadequate 
management of safety, which normalized pilots’ and operations control 
specialists’ noncompliance with risk analysis procedures resulted in the 
initiation of the flight without a comprehensive preflight weather evaluation, 
leading to the pilot’s inadvertent encounter with instrument meteorological 
conditions, failure to maintain altitude and subsequent collision with terrain. 
Contributing to the accident was the FAA’s inadequate oversight of the 
operator’s risk management program and failure to require Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 135 operators to establish safety management system 
programs.”

In a board member statement appended to the report, Chairman Robert 
Sumwalt remarked that “denial is the enemy of change.” The other board 
members joined in his statement. The company CEO, chief pilot and attorney 
had attacked the credibility of the witnesses and, speaking of the board’s 
findings about their culture, said “That’s not who we are. That’s not us.” The 
NTSB chairman said the only ones who could fix the problems was the 
company’s management.

The Board made recommendations to the FAA, the National Weather Service 
and Survival Flight. The recommendations to the company included 
improving flight risk assessment procedures, tracking pilot duty times, 
improving shift change briefings, establishing a safety management system 
(SMS) and developing a flight data monitoring system.

In a July 2020 response to one of the recommendations, the company’s DO said 
they were aggressively embracing the need to address the recommendations 
and expected to fully comply with all of them by October 2020. As of Dec. 1, 
2021, two of the six were closed acceptably and the others were ongoing. They 
had implemented an FDM program and were implementing an SMS 
program. 



Roger Cox
A former military, corporate and airline pilot, Roger Cox was also a senior 
investigator at the NTSB. He writes about aviation safety issues.



Bell 407 Rolls-Royce 250-C47B Uncontained Engine Failure after Bearing 
Failure (N120HH)
On 24 June 2020 privately owned Bell 407 N120HH was destroyed after an 

uncontained Rolls-Royce 250-C47B engine failure near Long Marston in Warwickshire, UK.

Bell 407 N120HH on Fire c78 Seconds After Landing (Credit: Pilot via AAIB)

The Accident Flight
The UK Air Accidents Investigation Branch (UK AAIB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (published 30 September 2021) that:

The pilot collected the helicopter the day before the accident from Thruxton Aerodrome, 

Hampshire, where it had been undergoing an annual maintenance check.   The maintenance 

work package included…the 300-hour maintenance inspection on the engine.   Unscheduled 

work arising from this maintenance included replacement of the main transmission freewheel 

unit and pitch horns. The latter resulted in a requirement for a torque check on the main rotor 

mast assembly after the helicopter had flown 3 to 4 hours.

Almost one hour was flown that day and several flights were intended on the day of the 

accident, intended to culminate in a return to Thruxton for the torque check.



Before the first [55 minute] flight the pilot completed a walk-around, which included opening the  

engine cowlings and checking the fluid levels; he did not find any abnormalities.

Bell 407 N120HH Before the Accident Flight (Credit: Pilot via AAIB)

The engine oil level was showing as FULL on the sight glass.   The pilot reported that the oil tank 

sight glass was clear and simple to read. By slightly nudging the helicopter he could clearly see 

the oil level moving.

The oil level was still at FULL prior to the second flight, a private sightseeing flight 

from Wellsbourne Mountford Aerodrome, Warwickshire over the Malvern Hills.  On board 

was the pilot and one passenger.



Bell 407 N120HH Route (Credit: AAIB)

Two witnesses noticed the helicopter as it was flying towards Wellsbourne (Witness 1 and 2). The 

first witness was just south of Bidford-on-Avon. He saw the helicopter flying towards him from 

the west and could see the helicopter clearly through his binoculars. He described seeing what 

looked like a “contrail” coming from above the cabin but below the rotor. He watched the 

helicopter as it passed overhead and flew to the east; the ‘contrail’ continued throughout this 

time. In the distance he saw it turn to the south but did not see the accident.

The occupants were not aware of the ‘trail’ behind the helicopter

The second witness, who was near Dorsington described seeing “white smoke” coming from the 

helicopter and took a couple of photographs.



Bell 407 N120HH with Smoke Trail (Credit: Witness via AAIB)

As it passed him, he heard a “popping noise”, saw the smoke turn grey and saw the helicopter 

descend to the ground near Long Marston.

The helicopter was flying at approximately 1,800 ft amsl (approximately 1,700 ft agl) and 118 kt 

with the engine torque at 70 to 75%. The first indication in the cockpit of a problem was an 

amber [Full Authority Digital Engine Control] FADEC FAULT light on the Caution and Warning 

Panel (CWP).

Bell 407 N120HH Cocpit Instrumentation (Credit: Pilot via AAIB)



When the pilot checked the instruments, he saw the NR [Main Rotor Speed] was at 100% and the 

NP [Power Turbine Speed] was at 90%. In normal powered flight NP is equal to NR.

He recalled looking at the torque and seeing a “5” but could not remember if it was fifty 

something percent or 5%, he did not recall the NG [Engine Gas Generator Speed]. The other 

engine instruments appeared normal.

The pilot…

…reduced the throttle slightly to match the throttle position to the NG then selected the FADEC 

mode to manual . He tried moving the throttle slightly and the engine responded as expected; he  

then selected the FADEC back to automatic. A few seconds after he did this an amber FADEC 

DEGRADED light illuminated on the CWP.

This was about 45 seconds after the initial warning and NR and NP were unchanged.

He increased the throttle slightly again to bring NP to just below NR to confirm he still had 

control of the engine. He then returned the throttle to the FLY detent. At this stage the pilot 

recalled there had been no audible warnings and he just had the two cautions on the CWP… The 

passenger also remembered just seeing the two lights.

Approximately 27 seconds after the second caution light…

…there was a “mechanical snapping noise”, a violent yaw to the left, the red engine out warning 

illuminated, the torque dropped to 3% and a horn was heard. The pilot recalled a continuous 

horn, but the passenger recalled an intermittent horn. Other cautions and warnings also 

illuminated but the pilot did not recall which ones. He realised the engine had failed and 

immediately “fully” lowered the collective and moved the cyclic control rearwards to slow to 60 

kt. Once established in autorotation he selected a field and made a MAYDAY call on the 

Wellsbourne frequency.

The pilot executed an autorotation into wind into a field.



[T]he pilot had not flown with an instructor or practiced an engine failure and autorotation for 

just over three years prior to the accident flight.

As soon as they were on the ground the passenger smelt smoke and the pilot noticed an 

“off white coloured” liquid on the windscreen.  They exited the aircraft uninjured and saw 

flames below the rotor head. 

Bell 407 N120HH on Fire c30 Seconds After Landing (Credit: Pilot via AAIB)

This B407 had not been fitted with an optional fire detection and warning system, so the 

pilot was unaware of the fire previously.

Apart from the tail section, the helicopter had been badly damaged by fire. There were distinct 

impact marks on the tail boom indicating contact with a main rotor blade and the tail rotor 

drive shaft, which had sheared. There was no indication that the vertical fin and tail skid had 

struck the ground on landing, the landing skids did not appear to be splayed, they were not 

cracked and there was no other structural indication of a hard landing.



Bell 407 N120HH Wreckage (Credit: AAIB)

The AAIB Safety Investigation
The AAIB explain that:

The helicopter was not fitted with a flight recorder, nor was it required to be.   The helicopter 

had been retrofitted, under a Supplemental Type Certificate, with a Primary Flight Display (PFD) 

and a Multi-Function Display (MFD).   The PFD and MFD store flight parameter data, once per 

second, on an internal memory card, with both units sharing and storing the same data. The 

system configuration on N120HH did not record engine related data. Warnings and cautions are  

not recorded.   Despite severe thermal damage, data was recovered from the PFD and the 

[engine Electronic Control Unit] ECU.

The AAIB fused data from these two sources:

The earliest recorded faults were at 1117:17 hrs (almost 40 minutes into the flight], both relating  

to torque sensing. As torque is sensed using oil pressure, this may be the first recorded 

indication of a loss of oil rather than a fault with the electronic sensing system. The loss of 

torque sensing means that the reversionary governor would not have been capable of taking 

control; however, there would have been no effect on engine operation if the primary governor 



was in control. While the loss of torque sensing would have affected the cockpit torque 

indication, it would not have triggered a CWP alert.

At about 1117:58 hrs, the ECU control status switched from being governed by the power 

turbine, to reaching a control limit and then being in a flameout situation.



The pilot reduced the collective within about four seconds, the NR dropped to 69% before 

increasing again to 82%. The recorded NR then stayed between 68% and 82% until the collective 

was raised during the landing, approximately 60 seconds after the flameout.

The recorded NR during the autorotation was below the 85% lower NR limit in the [Rotorcraft 

Flight Manual] RFM.

After the flameout, the IAS reduced over about 30 seconds to stabilise between 75 kt and 82 kt 

before reducing as the helicopter approached the landing flare. The descent rate varied around 

-2,000 ft/min until approaching the ground when it was smoothly reduced. The pitch up for the 

flare started at approximately 70 ft, with an IAS of 74 kt. A ‘g-force’ parameter showed little 

activity during the landing. The limited sample rate of the parameter means it is unlikely to have  

recorded the peak force experienced during the landing.

The [engine Measured Gas Temperature   MGT dropped sharply to 700°F at the point of flameout  

and then with some initial variation climbed to 1,080°F by the time the helicopter landed. 

Throughout the ECU recorded period of continuous data, the NP stayed at 0%. The torque was 

4% at the start and dropped to 0% at the point of flameout. NG dropped to zero within about 

seven seconds at which point the ECU recorded a fault with the secondary NG sensors.

The 300-hour engine inspection included “oil flow checks to ensure that sufficient oil was 

being circulated round the system and not being restricted by the build-up of carbon on 

components”.  This had been found satisfactory.

The oil filter and No 1 bearing pressure reducer were also cleaned and both [Magnetic Chip 

Detectors] MCDs were checked. The only other component in the oil system that was disturbed 

was the oil cooler fan, this required re-balancing on refit following removal to enable lubrication  

of the tail rotor drive shaft splines. The combined engine and fuel assembly filter did not require 

maintenance. The last time that the oil system main supply and return pipes were removed was 



130 flying hours prior to the accident flight when the rear engine firewall was replaced due to 

cracking.

Oil found on the tail boom matched engine oil.  Examination of the wreckage revealed that:

The engine casing was ruptured and inspection of the interior of the engine showed that the 

[Gas Producer / Gas Generator] GP turbine shaft had sheared and that both GP rotor discs had 

burst.

Bell 407 N120HH Ruptured RR 250 Engine Casing (Credit: AAIB)

Parts of GP1 had been retained but other parts had escaped the energy absorbing ring and were  

located both within the engine bay and on the ground near the wreckage.



Rolls-Royce 250-C47B (Credit: RR Via AAIB)

Rolls-Royce 250-C47B Turbine Section (Credit: RR Via AAIB)



There was evidence that some [oil system] interconnections had been severed by the released 

turbine rotor discs.

Bell 407 N120HH Projectile Analysis (Credit: AAIB)

Detailed engine examination revealed no evidence of ingestion of debris into the 

compressor but that:

The GP1 rotor shaft had fractured and the tie-bolt which locates the GP turbine rotors had 

sheared in overload in line with the GP1 disc and shaft, separating the curvic couplings in the 

process.   [T]his was assessed as secondary damage resulting from the breakup of the GP turbine  

discs.



Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B GP Turbine Tie-Bolt Fracture (Credit: RR via AAIB)

Computerised Tomography (CT) scan showed the No 8 bearing was “dry with no evidence 

of oil or carbon residues”.



Rolls-Royce 250-C47B Bearings (Credit: AAIB)

Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B No 8 Bearing (Credit: RR via AAIB)

The bearing was removed with the remaining GP1 rotor shaft section seized in place. Detailed 

inspection found the cage had seized onto the outer race due to overheating. This type of 

damage typically occurs when the cage expands into the race while it is rotating. The designed 

split in the outer race was noted to gape, and likely to indicate excessive hoop stresses from the 



thermal expansion of the cage. The assembly was stripped to inspect the ball bearings. All the 

balls were misshapen with none of the original contact surface remaining. The inner race 

exhibited smearing on the rear lip indicating the balls were sliding rather than rolling over the 

circumference.

Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B No 8 Bearing (Credit: RR via AAIB)

Inspection of the outer race also noted a circumferential burr to the front lip. This would also 

correlate with the condition of the bearing degrading prior to the disc fragmentation.

The PT bearing support structure showed contact damage on its hub face. The axial aligned 

labyrinth air seal was displaced radially from axial movement and orbiting of the rotating GP 

rotors.



Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B Power Turbine Support Contact Damage (Credit: RR via AAIB)

Both the No 6 and No 7 roller bearings had disintegrated, with no distinguishable material 

remaining other than remnants of the inner and outer race.

The No 5 bearing, on which the power turbine rotates, showed dark carbonated residues from 

the increased thermal environment during the event. There were no obvious signs of wear and 

the bearing assembly rotated freely

The spline adaptor which transmits torque from the GP turbine assembly into the GP turbine to 

compressor coupling shaft had splayed radially indicating high temperature and forward 

movement of the GP turbine assembly,



Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B Splined Adaptor Damage (Credit: RR via AAIB)

Approximately half of the GP1 disc was recovered from the engine bay, which comprised of eight  

separate fragments (not including the shaft) of varying sizes.



Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B GP1 Disc (Credit: RR via AAIB)

Detailed inspection of the disc showed the features of failure to be those associated with 

overload only with no evidence of structural degradation due to overheating. Further analysis of 

the turbine blades showed evidence of grain structure degradation due to overheating induced 

by friction which is indicative of a heavy rub against another structure. The heat affected 

structure indicated frictional temperatures in the rub region were in excess of 1,150°C which was  

high enough to cause plastic deformation in the aerofoil structure.

Approximately one eighth of the GP2 disc was recovered.



Bell 407 N120HH Rolls-Royce 250-C47B GP2 Disc (Credit: RR via AAIB)

The largest fragment of rotor was examined and found to have failed in overload, with multiple 

radial cracks in the machined face of the rotor rim. The remnants of the turbine blade were 

found to have experienced similar heating effects to the blades on GP1.

A review of the Rolls-Royce 250-C47B service history identified 7 previous oil loss events 

since 2002.  Two, N407KH and 5N-BIC, involved uncontained turbine disc failures.



In each case there were:
 Torque meter indication faults observed prior to the engine power loss.
 Oil deposits found externally on the aircraft fuselage or ground.
 Significant damage to the GP rotor thrust bearings and caused associated 

secondary damage.

In five cases there was evidence of incorrect installation of oil system components.
AAIB Safety Analysis
The AAIB determined that:

There was no evidence of an oil fire having occurred in or around the bearing cavities. From the 

condition of the bearings it was concluded that a bearing failure was the most likely initiating 

factor for the failure of the discs.

The No 8 bearing operates in the hottest part of the engine and the damage it sustained could 

be accounted for by either a mechanical failure or extreme overheating. However, the nature of 

the damage to the bearing was more typical of overheating.

The AAIB believe that a local restriction in oil supply was unlikely but that it is .

…probable that during the accident flight the helicopter developed an oil leak which caused the 

smoke trail and led to the under reading of the torque meter. The fact that the oil on the tail 

boom was not thermally degraded indicates that the leak most likely occurred prior to the 

uncontained engine failure and consequent fire.



Given the extent of the fire which destroyed most of the oil system components, it was not 

possible to determine the source of the oil leak.

With insufficient oil to lubricate and cool the No 8 bearing it would have overheated and started 

to fail, eventually causing the bearing to lose its ability to provide axial and radial location of the  

GP turbine shaft. This axial movement of the shaft would have caused contact between the GP 

turbine splined adaptor and the PT drive shaft resulting in frictional heating. The spline adaptor 

was splayed radially by this contact indicating that the GP rotor was still intact and generating 

load, which is further evidence that a failure in the GP assembly was not the initiating event.

As the spline adaptor splayed, the GP rotor would have decoupled from the compressor allowing  

the turbine to momentarily overspeed and orbit off-centre. The increasing temperature, lack of 

lubrication and change in load on the No 6 and 7 bearings would have resulted in their 

destruction as they countered the high-speed orbiting of the GP turbine shaft. While the No 6 

bearing supports the PT, it is located in very close proximity to the No 7 bearing and would have 

been similarly affected by the high temperatures and loads.

Damage to the PT bearing support structure and aerodynamic blades show that the GP rotors 

made contact with the static structure. The heating effects from the friction resulted in plastic 

deformation of the blade material. This would have initiated cracks on the rims of the discs 

where the loads were highest. The overspeed would have accelerated rapidly until the stresses in  

the turbine rotors were too great and resulted in failure of the discs in overload. While the GP2 

rotor is designed to have a higher burst speed than GP1 (such that once GP1 bursts GP2 would 

normally decelerate), the contact with the PT support structure due to the axial movement of the 

GP rotor had the effect of reducing the GP2 burst speed. The effect was a near simultaneous 

release of both GP rotor discs.

The applicable certification requirements require the containment of blade debris, not a 

disc burst.



The precise source of the fire and when it started could not be positively determined. The most 

likely source was from the released GP rotor fragments severing oil and or fuel pipes [with 

escaping engine airflow providing an ignition source].

Fuel continued to flow after landing as the fuel valve had not been shut.

The pilot was not aware of the fire during the descent and said he did not have time to switch 

the fuel valve OFF.

The manufacturer highlighted that the requirement to shutoff the fuel valve is already captured 

in the emergency procedures published in Section 3 of the Bell 407 RFM and covers the safety 

measures necessary for the pilot to safely land the helicopter in the event of an engine failure or 

in-flight fire. Both emergency conditions require the throttle to be rolled to the off position, 

followed by switching the fuel shutoff valve off. However, to provide more information to pilots…

“The manufacturer is revising the data section of the Bell 407 Rotary [sic] Flight Manual to add 

the following clarification in section 1-25-D for the Fuel Shutoff Valve: ‘Shutoff valves isolate fuel 

from the engine compartment during shutdown or in the event of an engine fire’.

Also:

The helicopter manufacturer added information to the supplementary material to the Bell 407 

Rotary [sic] Flight Manual to inform pilots that unusual torque indications might be the result of 

a loss of engine oil.

Two AAIB Safety Recommendations were made regarding the Failure Mode and Effects 

Analysis (FMEA) for the engine, and the fire resistance and crashworthiness of rotorcraft 

components. 



Loss of Bell 412 off Brazil Remains Unexplained 
(Lider B412 PT-HUW near Petrobras P-07, Campos Basin)
On 27 March 2013, Bell 412SP PT-HUW of Líder Táxi Aéreo suffered an accident on 

approach to the Petrobras P-07 semi-submersible production installation in the Bicudo 

field in the Campos Basin off Macaé.

The Accident Flight
The Brazilian accident investigation agency CENIPA issued their safety investigation 

report on 29 March 2021, an unimpressive 8 years and 2 days after the accident.  They 

explain that the helicopter had departed on a c20 minutes inter-field flight from the FPSO 

Rio De Janerio to the P-07 with two crew and one passenger.  The Aircraft Commander, a 

former military pilot, had approximately 6000 hours of flight time, 1000 on type.  The Co-

Pilot had 1800 hours, 200 on type.

At the time…it was raining, with continuous wind of 360° and 25kt, and clouds at 2,500ft…. On 

approaching the platform, close to the landing area, the weather conditions deteriorated, 

impairing visibility.

At the time of the final approach for landing on the P-07 platform, the pilots reported hearing a 

noise followed by a strong vibration in the aircraft.

The images from the platform camera recorded a flare, with a large pitch up angle, performed 

by the helicopter however, on an interview; the pilot did not manifest having performed such a 

maneuver.



Sudden Pitch-up of Lider B412 PT-HUW on Approach to Petrobras P-07 (Credit: via CENIPA)

The maximum intentional pitch up is limited to 30º in the Bell Rotorcraft Flight Manual.  

While not clarified in the report, we believe the Aircraft Commander was the Pilot Flying.  

CENIPA do not report any interview feedback from the Co-Pilot (who would therefore have 

been Pilot Monitoring), nor is there any further analysis of the video recorded.

Afterwards, the crew made a right turn, aborting the landing and starting a descent 

for emergency landing [ditching] in the water.

The impact occurred with low rate of descent and low speed of horizontal displacement.

This suggests a controlled ditching was achieved rather than a more severe water impact.  

CENPIA note the sea was “rough”, though no numeric scale was given.  On contact with the 

sea the helicopter immediately rolled over  and the main rotor blades struck the water.  The 

emergency flotation system reportedly activated automatically, and the aircraft remained 

floating inverted.



Lider B412 PT-HUW Submerged Prior to Salvage Attempt (Credit: via CENIPA)

The three occupants evacuated the aircraft via the emergency exits, presumably 

underwater, without assistance.  They were recovered uninjured by Fast Rescue Craft (FRC) 

from the P-7.  They had previously undertaken Helicopter Underwater Escape Training 

(HUET), but no other detail is recorded on their egress.  It’s not clear if they were equipped 

with an emergency breathing system, but we suspect this was unlikely in Brazil in 2013.  

There is no mention on how their life jackets performed or what life rafts were fitted.

Subsequently, during an attempt to salvage the aircraft via strop attached to the Main 

Rotor Head, the Main Gear Box separated from the fuselage, which sank in water depth of 

111 m.  Its not clear why, but some past salvage attempts have failed if the lift is not 

paused to allow water to drain from the cabin.



Failed Salvage of B412 PT-HUW at the Moment the MGB Broke from the Fuselage (Credit: via CENIPA)

CENIPA Safety Investigation
The investigators comment that:

[T]here was no way to determine whether the attitude shown in the video recording was 

intentionally performed by the pilot or if it was the result of some other factor. It was not 

possible to rule out the hypothesis that the meteorological conditions at the time of the aircraft’s  

approach impaired the pilots’ visibility. In this way, there may have been a late perception of the 

helideck approach and, in order to slow the aircraft, the pilot performed a flare with a high pitch  

up angle. Although the pitch up limits specified in the aircraft’s Flight Manual were probably 

exceeded, it was not possible to associate this attitude with the following events.

According to reports from the crew, on the final approach for landing, they heard a noise 

followed by a strong vibration, which would have forced the crewmembers to decide for an 

emergency landing in the water, to avoid total loss of control of the aircraft.



The investigators did examine the Main Rotor Head and Main Gear Box.

In the examinations performed by the DCTA [military test laboratory], on the parts that could be 

recovered, it was possible to verify that there were rubbing marks in the coupling of the Tail 

Rotor Drive Quill.

Tail Rotor Quill of Lider B412 PT-HUW (Credit: via CENIPA)

However, if the decoupling of this component had occurred during the flight, the helicopter 

would have been subjected to rotational movements around the vertical axis, due to the loss of 

the anti-torque effect of the tail rotor, which did not occur.

According to a report issued by the DCTA, in relation to the Flexible Coupling on the Main 

Driveshaft, the marks and fractures found on the tips of its teeth seemed to indicate a 

decoupling.



Flexible Drive Coupling of Lider B412 PT-HUW (Credit: via CENIPA)

However, it also points out that, for a greater degree of certainty, it would be necessary to 

analyze the gear that it uncoupled, but it got stuck to the part of the helicopter that sank. Thus, 

it was not possible to conclude whether or not there was an uncoupling of the axis in flight. The 

reports cited did not address whether the damage presented occurred before or after the impact  

with water. CENIPA note that because the “aircraft remained on the bottom of the sea” this 

“prevented the collection of evidence and the analysis of its [other] systems”.It is very 

surprising that, as the site of the wreckage was known and there would be extensive 

subsea operations vessels and Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) available in a busy oil 

and gas basin, a further attempt to recover the fuselage, or at least survey the wreckage 

and recover the Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) and Flight Data Recorder (FDR), was not 

conducted.



CENIPA Conclusions
Beyond confirming the circumstances of the accident discussed above, CENIPA did not 

identify a specific cause.  They did postulate two potential contributory factors, however:

The meteorological conditions at the location of the occurrence may have impaired the crew’s 

situational awareness, making the notion of approaching the helideck difficult.

It is possible that there was an inadequate assessment by the pilot about the aircraft’s speed 

and height parameters in relation to the platform at the time of the approach.

CENIPA Safety Recommendations
Upon publishing the report 8 years after the accident, CENIPA recommend the Brazilian 

regulator, ANAC:

Disseminate the lessons learned in the present investigation to the platform operators [sic, 

semmingly the helicopter operators], in order to warn about the risks inherent to flying in 

adverse weather conditions, concerning the raising of the situational awareness level of its crew.

Work with the aircraft operator in order to reinforce the use of appropriate techniques for the 

conservation of the wreckage of damaged aircraft, with the purpose of preserving them so that 

they can be analysed…

Our Observations
While happily, all on board were recovered unharmed, the lack of commitment to even 

recovering the CVR and FDR is highly disappointing.

The contributory factors identified and safety 

recommendations imply the investigators suspect a fast approach and a sudden pitch up to 

reduce speed as the helideck came into view in reduced visibility.



National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report

 
 

Location: Italy, TX Accident 
Number: DCA16FA199

Date & Time: 07/06/2016, 1148 CDT Registration: N525TA

Aircraft: BELL 525 Aircraft Damage: Destroyed

Defining Event: Aircraft structural failure Injuries: 2 Fatal

Flight Conducted 
Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test

Analysis 

 
The experimental research and development helicopter was undergoing developmental 
flight tests before type certification. On the day of the accident, the helicopter test crew 
was performing a series of one-engine-inoperative (OEI) tests at increasing airspeeds 
with a heavy, forward center-of-gravity configuration. (For the OEI tests, the pilots used 
OEI special training mode software to reduce the power of both engines to a level that 
simulated the loss of one engine.) The crew initiated the final planned OEI test at a 
speed of 185 knots. After the crew engaged OEI special training mode, rotor rotation 
speed (Nr) decayed from 100% to about 91%, and the crew began lowering the collective 
to stop Nr decay and increase Nr to 103% (the target Nr for recovery). About 5.5 seconds 
into the test, the crew stopped lowering the collective, and Nr only recovered to about 
92%. About 6 to 7 seconds into the test, the helicopter began vibrating at a frequency of 
6 hertz (Hz). The vibration was evident in both rotor systems, the airframe, the pilot 
seats, and the control inputs; the vertical vibration amplitude at the pilot seat peaked 
about 3 G. (G is a unit of measurement of acceleration; 1 G is equivalent to the 
acceleration caused by the earth's gravity [about 32.2 ft/sec2].) Nr remained between 
about 90% and 92% until about 12 to 13 seconds into the test, then began fluctuating 
consistent with collective control inputs; subsequent collective control input increases 
led to further decay in Nr. Nr decayed to about 80% as the collective was raised, and the 
main rotor blades began to flap out of plane. About 21 seconds into the test, the main 
rotor blades flapped low enough to impact the tail boom, severing it and causing the in-
flight breakup of the helicopter. 



The main rotor, tail rotor, flight controls, powerplants, and rotor drive systems 
exhibited no evidence of preexisting malfunction before the vibrations began. The 
structural wreckage did not exhibit evidence that the oscillations themselves resulted in 
a structural failure leading to the in-flight breakup. Examination of the wreckage 
revealed no indications that the helicopter had been improperly maintained.

Helicopter Performance After Stop in Nr Recovery

During previous OEI tests, the crew lowered the collective input to near or below 50% to 
allow Nr to recover. As airspeed increased during each test, the crew took longer to 
recover Nr to 103%. (At 102 knots, recovery time was 3.4 seconds, and at 175 knots, 
recovery time was 13 seconds.) However, after initiating the final OEI test at 185 knots, 
the crew only lowered the collective to 58% and subsequently only recovered Nr to 92%. 
While at 92%, the main rotor scissors mode was excited. (The main rotor scissors mode 
occurs when the lead-lag motions of the blades act in such a way that adjacent blades 
move together and apart in a scissoring motion. See the factual report for more 
information about the scissors mode.) The main rotor scissors mode excitation resulted 
in the 6-Hz airframe vertical vibration, which was transmitted to the crew seats and 
created a biomechanical feedback loop through the pilot-held collective control. A 
second feedback system, driven by the attitude and heading reference system (AHRS) 
inputs to the main rotor swashplate, also continued to drive the scissors mode and its 
resultant 6-Hz airframe vibration. 

Biomechanical Feedback

Biomechanical feedback in the aircraft design industry refers to unintentional control 
inputs resulting from involuntary pilot limb motions caused by vehicle accelerations. 
The gain between the vertical acceleration and 6-Hz collective stick movement can be 
calculated by dividing stick movement by vertical acceleration. (If no biomechanical 
feedback existed, there would be no gain [0 inch per G].) During the accident, the 
collective stick moved, on average, 0.2 inch per every G of seat acceleration. The 
"nonzero" relationship between the control stick amplitude and the seat vibration 
illustrates that biomechanical feedback contributed to the helicopter's vibration. 
Further, a positive value of pilot gain occurred near 6 Hz, which indicates instability in 
the system (meaning that any input to the system will amplify as opposed to dampen). 
Thus, biomechanical feedback contributed to increases in vibration amplitude during 
this accident. 

Although the helicopter manufacturer's design process for biomechanical feedback 
included software filters in the cyclic control laws to reduce certain types of oscillatory 
cyclic control inputs by the pilot, no filter was designed for the collective. Thus, the 6-Hz 
oscillatory collective inputs by the pilot were not filtered. As a result, a control feedback 
loop began when the pilot-held collective stick commanded an oscillatory collective 
pitch input (about 6 Hz) into the main rotor, increasing the 6-Hz vibration, which in 
turn increased the magnitude of the oscillatory (6-Hz) collective pitch input. 

In addition, the gain between the pilot movement and the collective control stick 
movement in the vertical axis was never tested on a shake table before the accident. For 



the cyclic control, lateral vibration was introduced on a shake table. This test was 
conducted specifically for the helicopter model's side-stick cyclic since the manufacturer 
expected a different transfer function from that of a traditional cyclic. For the collective 
control, no such test was conducted despite this being the first helicopter with a side-
stick collective control. While it is possible that the decision to not shake test in the 
vertical axis to inform the pilot model could have been influenced by schedule pressure, 
interviews did not suggest that decisions would have been different given the lack of 
anticipation of scissors mode and resulting aerodynamic effect. 

Attitude and Heading Reference System 

The AHRS is designed to detect uncommanded accelerations (such as the helicopter's 
reaction to a gust of wind) and reduce their effects by automatically providing corrective 
inputs to the main rotor swashplate. The AHRS detected and responded to the 6-Hz 
airframe vertical vibration in a manner that sustained the main rotor scissors mode and 
its resultant 6-Hz vibration. Specifically, analysis of the telemetry data revealed that the 
AHRS responded to the 6-Hz vibration with inputs to the main rotor swashplate 
analogous to a "cyclic stir" (when the cyclic control stick is moved in a stirring motion). 
The helicopter manufacturer's assessment of the AHRS-induced cyclic stir swashplate 
motion was that it would exacerbate the main rotor scissors mode. The AHRS is 
intended to respond primarily to lower-frequency uncommanded accelerations. Because 
the helicopter manufacturer did not predict an excitement of the scissors mode in the 
accident test flight conditions, the filter design of the AHRS allowed it to respond to the 
6-Hz airframe vibration. Thus, the AHRS detected and attempted to attenuate the 6-Hz 
airframe vertical vibration, but its response instead exacerbated the main rotor scissors 
mode and its resultant 6-Hz vibration, closing the AHRS feedback loop.

Reasons for Crew Stop in Nr Recovery

Investigators explored possible reasons why the crewmembers stopped their recovery 
from the initial Nr droop, including a reaction to an abnormal condition on the 
helicopter, distraction from the recovery task, or a conservative response due to the high 
airspeed. Telemetry data does not indicate the existence of an abnormal condition when 
the crewmembers stopped their recovery. In addition, the chase helicopter 
crewmembers reported seeing no distractions or abnormalities outside of the helicopter 
(for example, birds). 

Therefore, investigators focused on the crew's increasingly conservative response as the 
airspeed increased during the tests. During the previous OEI tests, as airspeed 
increased, the crew recoveries took more time to reach 103% Nr and collective response 
became less pronounced. During postaccident interviews, helicopter manufacturer test 
pilots indicated that they interpreted this trend as the tendency of the crew to be more 
judicious while applying collective at successively higher airspeeds to avoid recovering 
too fast and overspeeding the rotor or damaging the transmission. Thus, the crew may 
have been more conservative during recovery at the helicopter's high speed during the 
final test. The chief test pilot also stated that if Nr had stabilized, the pilot would not 
have been in a rush and was possibly initiating a slow recovery. 



As an experimental research and development helicopter configured to carry two pilots 
and with no passenger seating, the accident helicopter was not required to be equipped 
with either a flight data recorder (FDR) or cockpit voice recorder (CVR) under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 91.609. (When certified as a 
transport-category rotorcraft under 14 CFR Part 29, the helicopter model will be 
equipped with both CVR and FDR recording capabilities.) A combination CVR and FDR 
(CVFDR) was installed in the flight test helicopter but was not operational at the time of 
the accident. Although investigators were able to examine and analyze telemetry data, a 
properly functioning CVFDR would have recorded any discussions between the accident 
pilots that could have offered more information about potential abnormal conditions, 
distractions, or reasons for their stop in recovery after initiation of the OEI test. 
Additionally, cockpit image recording capability would have recorded any pilot actions 
and interactions with the aircraft systems including avionics button presses, warning 
acknowledgements, and any other physical response to the aircraft. Cockpit audio and 
imagery could have provided insight into when the crewmembers first felt or detected 
the 6-Hz vibration, how they may have verbalized their assessment of an observed 
anomaly, and whether they attempted any specific corrective action because of the 
vibration. Thus, the lack of cockpit audio or image data precluded access to data needed 
to fully determine why the crew may have momentarily stopped the collective pitch 
reduction to recover Nr and any corrective actions the crew may have attempted as a 
result of the 6-Hz vibration. 

Regardless of why the crew stopped recovery of Nr at 92%, other helicopter test pilots 
suggested in postaccident interviews that continuous flight in the 92% to 93% Nr range 
was not abnormal for an OEI maneuver (in this model helicopter and another model in 
the helicopter manufacturer's test program). This is further supported by another model 
in the helicopter manufacturer's test program during which extended flight occurred in 
the low 90% Nr range. (The other helicopter model did not encounter any unusual 
behavior [rotor mode/vibration] during the test points with the extended recovery time, 
and the pilots did not receive negative feedback on the recovery time.) The lack of any 
negative feedback on extended flight in the low 90% Nr range may have reinforced that 
flight through that range was appropriate. On the pilot displays (specifically, the power 
situation indicator [PSI]) in the accident helicopter model, 90% to 100% Nr is depicted 
as a green range or arc. The decision to fly continuously in the 92% to 93% Nr range is 
consistent with typical pilot association of green arcs with flight regimes that are 
appropriate for continuous flight. The company's flight technology specialist stated that 
the colors (green arc) presented on the PSI were a precedent taken from the other 
helicopter model test program, which suggests that it was likely not reevaluated for 
appropriateness given the accident helicopter's operating limitations. In addition, flight 
testing was only conducted for continuous flight at 103% and 100% Nr with all engines 
operative; however, no testing of Nr continuously between 90% to 100% while in an OEI 
condition was conducted. Extended flight in the low 90% Nr range during previous 
testing of another helicopter model and the depiction of 90% to 100% Nr in a green arc 
on the PSI may have contributed to the pilots' decision to stop in the 92% range during 
the recovery from the OEI maneuver, which resulted in the onset and increase of the 6-
Hz vibration. 



Crew Response to Low Nr and Vibration

Interviews with the helicopter manufacturer test pilots and engineers suggest that there 
were two ways for the pilots to exit the low Nr and, correspondingly, the vibration 
condition: (1) lower/reduce the collective to increase Nr or (2) exit OEI training mode, 
which would increase power available from the engines. About 1.5 to 2 seconds passed 
between the stop at 58% collective and the onset of the vibration. Had the pilots 
recovered Nr to 100%, it is possible that the main rotor scissors mode would have 
subsided and the airframe vibrations would have dampened.

Lowering the Collective

One option for recovering from the low Nr and vibration condition was to lower the 
collective to increase Nr. The investigation could not determine if the pilots' fluctuating 
collective inputs were deliberate when the 6-Hz vibration was dominant. Because the 
crew needed to be aware of low Nr to respond appropriately, investigators considered 
the available visual, aural, and tactile cues regarding Nr in the vibration environment.

The visual cues available to the crew included the crew alerting system (CAS) text 
"ROTOR RPM LO," PSI numeric display, warning flag, warning push button 
annunciator (PBA), and the change of the PSI Nr display from a bar to an arc. The CAS 
text, warning flag, and warning PBA would have been flashing until acknowledged by 
the crew. Because the telemetry did not record crew button presses, it is not possible to 
know if the crew acknowledged these alerts. Studies indicate that visual acuity is 
negatively affected by vertical vibration, particularly in the 5- to 7-Hz frequency range 
(Lewis and Griffin 1980a; Lewis and Griffin 1980b). Results indicated that reading 
speed and accuracy degraded for amplitudes as low as 0.1 G (McLeod and Griffin 1989; 
Griffin and Hayward 1994). Further studies show that visual performance decreases 
with increasing vibration amplitude (Shoenberger 1972; Griffin 1975; Griffin 2012). 

The vertical vibration amplitude at the pilot seat rose above 1 G from 10 seconds into the 
test until the end of the test, with peaks as high as about 3 G. Given the sensitivity of the 
human body to vibration frequencies near 6 Hz and the extreme amplitude of the 
vibration environment, the displays were likely unreadable to the crew (although the 
colors of the warning text, flag, and PBA may have been discernable). In addition, the 
change of the Nr display on the PSI from bar to arc may have been recognizable; 
however, reading of the needle would likely not have been possible in the vibration 
environment. Thus, the crew was likely unable to read visual information that provided 
specific low Nr information, although they may have had a generalized cue that Nr was 
low.

Aural cues available to the crew regarding low Nr included the master warning 
annunciation and the sound of decreasing Nr. The master warning aural tone would 
have annunciated at 12.5 seconds and 16.8 seconds (continuing until acknowledged by 
the crew). However, this tone was associated with at least 21 other warning messages 
and was not unique to the "ROTOR RPM LO" message despite a technical standard that 
requires that low Nr have a unique tone associated with it. The master aural tone 
annunciating continuously was chosen for test flight because audio files had not yet 



been developed; the helicopter manufacturer pilots and test team had decided that some 
aural annunciation of low Nr would be enough to proceed with test flights but that the 
distinct tone for low Nr was not immediately needed for flight test. 

Aural cues can be used for redundancy if visual information is unavailable. The accident 
pilots were aware that a unique tone did not exist for low Nr; however, they likely were 
not able to retrieve unambiguous visual information to confirm the warning, outside of a 
change in shape of the rpm display. Had a unique aural warning tone been implemented 
in the helicopter, it could have provided a salient, unambiguous cue to the crewmembers 
that Nr was low. 

Regarding the sound of decreasing Nr, under normal conditions, pilots can hear the 
decrease in Nr and would likely be able to tell the difference between 100% and 92% Nr. 
However, according to a postaccident statement by the helicopter manufacturer lead 
test pilot, it is uncertain whether the pilots would have heard the low Nr given the 
vibration environment during the accident flight. 

The exceedance of engine limits, which can indirectly indicate low Nr, triggers tactile 
cues in the pilots' collective control. Increased friction on the collective would have been 
present 7 to 9 seconds into the test and after 11 seconds into the test; however, it is 
questionable whether the crew would have noticed this increase in friction given the 
extreme vibration environment. 

In summary, although visual and aural warning cues were available to the crew during 
the event, unambiguous cues for low Nr were most likely unavailable visually because of 
the vibration and audibly because of a design decision regarding the test environment. 
Without an unambiguous cue for low Nr, it was unlikely that the pilots had properly 
distinguishable awareness of the low Nr condition for them to appropriately respond. 

Exiting OEI Training Mode

According to the telemetry data, the crew did not exit OEI training mode; the engines 
continued producing power at a level consistent with OEI training mode remaining 
active until the in-flight breakup. The production version of OEI training mode 
software, originally created by the engine manufacturer, was modified by the helicopter 
manufacturer to eliminate a safeguard that automatically exited the OEI training mode 
when Nr fell below 90%. According to the helicopter manufacturer, automatic 
disengagement at 90% Nr is not low enough to allow development and demonstration of 
OEI recovery across the flight envelope during testing, and a lower Nr value for 
automatic disengagement was deemed unnecessary due to the highly controlled test 
environment. Thus, the crew would have had to manually exit OEI training mode. Had 
there been an automated safeguard to exit OEI training mode at a certain Nr threshold, 
it is possible that the return of full dual-engine power would have compensated for the 
higher power demanded by increasing collective stick inputs and returned Nr to normal 
levels. Investigators considered several reasons why the crew did not manually exit OEI 
training mode.



First, investigators considered if the crew attempted to exit OEI training mode but was 
unable to do so due to physical limitations of the hardware. However, postaccident 
shake tests suggest that the display and touch functionality of the Garmin Touch Control 
(GTC) panel, which controlled the OEI training mode, remained intact during the 
vibration profile. Thus, it is unlikely that physical limitations of the hardware itself 
prevented the crew from exiting OEI training mode. 

Second, investigators considered if the crew attempted to exit OEI training mode but 
was unable to do so due to manual hand tracking and vibration influences. There are 
three ways to manually exit OEI training mode: pressing the engine fail button on the 
GTC OEI training page (which would be displayed on the GTC during the test), exiting 
the OEI training page on the GTC (using the BACK button), or moving the COSIF 
(crank, off, start, idle, fly) switch to any other position than "Fly." Research suggests that 
performance degrades in the presence of vibration and is particularly poor in the 6-Hz 
range as limb motion can be greater than input amplitudes at that frequency (Moseley 
and Griffin 1986; Collins 1973; Griffin and Hayward 1994; McLeod and Griffin 1986; 
Crossland and Lloyd 1993; Holcombe and Holcombe 1997; Wertheim et. al. 1995). Limb 
motion is also more complex given the coupled dynamics of the human body where 
acceleration in a single axis could result in limb motion in all six axes (McLeod and 
Griffin 1986; Griffin 2012; Paddan and Griffin 1988). The extreme amplitudes of the 
vibration could have prevented the pilots from successfully moving their hands to a 
target location to use any of these three methods to exit OEI training mode. 

Finally, it is possible that the accident crew did not attempt to exit OEI training mode. 
Test pilot interviews suggest that, in an abnormal situation, stabilizing the aircraft 
would be the first priority; exiting OEI training mode may not have been considered to 
be an option by the accident crew. 

As noted earlier, the CVFDR was not operational, and possible discussions between the 
pilots, which may have provided information about why they did not exit OEI training 
mode, were not available to help determine why they did not exit OEI training mode. 

Postaccident Actions by the Helicopter Manufacturer

Since the accident, the helicopter manufacturer has 

 designed a software filter for the collective control law to dampen biomechanical 
feedback due to oscillatory control inputs as the frequency of control input 
increases; 

 adjusted the aero-servo-elastic model with a correlation factor to incorporate the 
aerodynamic effects observed during flight test and the accident test to preclude 
such occurrences seen in the accident flight's telemetry data; 

 performed shake tests with pilots using a side-stick collective to determine and 
incorporate the transfer function for human biomechanical feedback; 

 modified the AHRS software filters to further reduce the AHRS response to a 6-
Hz airframe vibration; 

 indicated that, for the accident helicopter model, cockpit audio is now being 
recorded by an onboard CVFDR, and communications to and from the ground 



monitoring station are recorded by the CVFDR and the telemetry system during 
all flights (cockpit video is also being recorded by the instrumentation system and 
archived at the ground station); 

 issued a company-wide business directive to ensure that cockpit audio is 
recorded during all telemetered flight test activities across all flight test sites; 

 plans to conduct flight testing in the 95% to 100% range of Nr in an OEI 
condition; 

 plans to implement, for the accident helicopter model, the unique low Nr aural 
tone in their test aircraft, and a software update that includes a larger font size for 
the Nr numeric display on the PSI;

 plans to implement a separate PBA specifically for low Nr and is incorporating 
more salient cues into the tactile cueing system; 

 plans to incorporate the automatic termination of OEI training mode should Nr 
fall below a certain limit; and

 incorporated a safety officer for the accident helicopter model test program who 
will have dedicated safety-related responsibilities. 

 

Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident 
to be:
 
A severe vibration of the helicopter that led to the crew's inability to maintain sufficient 
rotor rotation speed (Nr), leading to excessive main rotor blade flapping, subsequent 
main rotor blade contact with the tail boom, and the resultant in-flight breakup. 
Contributing to the severity and sustainment of the vibration, which was not predicted 
during development, were (1) the collective biomechanical feedback and (2) the attitude 
and heading reference system response, both of which occurred due to the lack of 
protections in the flight control laws against the sustainment and growth of adverse 
feedback loops when the 6-hertz airframe vibration initiated. Contributing to the crew's 
inability to maintain sufficient Nr in the severe vibration environment were (1) the lack 
of an automated safeguard in the modified one-engine-inoperative software used during 
flight testing to exit at a critical Nr threshold and (2) the lack of distinct and 
unambiguous cues for low Nr.

 
 



Findings
Aircraft Prop/rotor parameters - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)

Main rotor blade system - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Flight control system - Design (Factor)

Personnel issues Use of equip/system - Pilot (Factor)
Use of equip/system - Copilot (Factor)
Lack of action - Pilot (Factor)
Lack of action - Copilot (Factor)

Environmental issues Vibration - Effect on personnel (Cause)
Vibration - Effect on operation (Cause)
Vibration - Ability to respond/compensate (Cause)
Vibration - Awareness of condition (Factor)

Organizational issues Equip certification/testing - Manufacturer (Factor)
Interface design - Manufacturer (Factor)
Equipment design - Manufacturer (Factor)
Policy/procedure development - Manufacturer (Factor)

Factual Information

History of Flight
Maneuvering Inflight upset

Aircraft structural failure (Defining event)

 
On July 6, 2016, about 1148 central daylight time, an experimental research and 
development Bell 525 helicopter, N525TA, broke up in flight and impacted terrain near 
Italy, Texas. The two test pilots received fatal injuries, and the helicopter was destroyed. 
The helicopter, which was owned by Bell Helicopter Textron, Inc., was being operated 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 as a 
developmental flight test. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The flight originated from Arlington Municipal Airport, Arlington, Texas.

About 0630 on the morning of the accident, the two test pilots, flight test engineers, and 
a chase helicopter flight crew briefed the planned flight. The brief detailed that the 
accident helicopter, accompanied by a chase helicopter, would proceed to the Arlington 
Initial Experimental Test Area (about 30 miles south of Arlington Municipal Airport) to 
perform the in-flight portion of the tests. The purpose of the flight was to evaluate 
engine loads at maximum continuous power, two-to-one-engine simulated engine 
failures, longitudinal roll oscillations, and run-on landings in the heavy, forward center-
of-gravity configuration.

The test card for the two-to-one-engine simulated engine failure detailed that the pilots 



would simulate the loss of engine power from one engine while keeping both engines 
operating by using one-engine-inoperative (OEI) special training mode software, which 
reduced the power output of both engines to represent the maximum power that can be 
produced by one engine. When the OEI special training mode was engaged and a loss of 
power was simulated, the pilot would monitor rotor rotation speed (Nr) and 
intentionally delay his response by about 1 second before recovering from the maneuver 
by lowering the collective to reduce the power demanded by the rotor (and increase Nr). 
The lowest allowable Nr limit was identified as 86%; if Nr went below 86%, the test 
would be halted, and the crew would recover Nr to 103%, exit OEI special training 
mode, and return to steady level flight. A Bell structural engineer stated that flight below 
86% Nr would result in the helicopter returning to base. During test flights, flight test 
engineers monitor real-time telemetry data from the helicopter under the oversight of 
the flight test director, who was in direct radio communications with both the test 
helicopter pilots and the chase helicopter pilots.

About 0959, weather conditions were determined to be acceptable for the flight, and 
about 1038, the helicopter departed for the test area, followed by the chase helicopter. 
About 1048, the pilots established the helicopter's maximum level flight airspeed (Vh) at 
4,000 ft density altitude (DA) as 148 knots calibrated airspeed (KCAS). After performing 
steady-heading sideslips, the pilots performed a series of level turns and then began the 
two-to-one-engine simulated engine failures.

About 1108, the pilots set the OEI training mode shaft horsepower to a value 
predetermined by the flight engineers. The first three tests were performed in level flight 
at 102 KCAS, 131 KCAS, and 145 KCAS. The pilots then performed tests at 155 knots true 
airspeed (KTAS), 160 KTAS, 165 KTAS, and 175 KTAS, which required the helicopter to 
be in a shallow descent to achieve the required airspeed. These OEI tests had resulted in 
a rotor speed decay of 5 to 13% Nr. During these tests, to allow Nr to recover to 97% or 
greater, the crew lowered the collective input to near or below 50%. (100% is the full-up 
collective position, and 0% is the full-down collective position.) Data recorded on the 
helicopter's flight test recorder system, which was typically downloaded after each test 
flight and also transmitted via a telemetry stream to Bell's flight-test facility for real-
time analysis and recording, indicate the build-up tests and recovery time required (see 
table 1). (Record 45 was a void record, and record 49 was aborted because of two engine 
torque spikes typical of wind gust encounters.)

Table 1. Build-up tests and recovery time required.
 



During the build up to the final test, the flight test engineers received warning and alert 
notifications, most of which related to main rotor and tail rotor pitch link loads, pylon 
loads, and tail boom loads. These alerts and warnings were expected as the airspeed 
increased and the dynamic loads on the rotor system and airframe also increased. 
During most of the OEI transitions, the pilot responded by lowering the collective 
between 1 and 2 seconds after the simulated loss of engine power. However, with each 
increase in airspeed, the time the crew took to recover Nr to the target value of 103% 
was longer. Bell test pilots indicated that they interpreted this trend as the tendency of 
the crew to be more judicious while applying collective at successively higher airspeeds 
in order to avoid recovering too fast and overspeeding the rotor or damaging the 
transmission.

About 1148, the final test was performed at 185 KTAS, which was the helicopter's never-
to-exceed speed (Vne) at the time of the test flight; the set up and entry were the same as 
the previous tests. OEI was engaged, and Nr drooped to about 91% within 1.5 seconds. 
The Nr decay was stopped by the pilot's reduction of collective, and Nr began to recover 
and leveled out around 92%. The crew stopped lowering the collective at the 58% 
collective stick position. About 7 seconds after arresting the Nr decay (about 12 seconds 
into the test), the structural dynamics engineer noticed increased engine vibrations, at 
which point he called "knock-it-off." The test director radioed to the Bell 525 pilots to 
"knock-it-off," while other engineers in the telemetry room were receiving warnings and 
alerts and were reinforcing the "knock-it-off" call.

The crew of the chase helicopter, which was positioned about 100 ft above and on the 
right side of the Bell 525 about 3 to 4 rotor diameters away, heard the test director call 
"knock-it-off" about the same time they observed the 525's rotor blades flying high and 
the rotor looking wobbly and slow. The chase helicopter crew radioed, "Hey, you're 



flapping pretty good," but the 525 pilots did not respond. About 21 seconds into the test, 
the main rotor severed the tail boom, and the telemetry signal was lost. The chase 
helicopter crew observed the helicopter's tail and fuselage jack-knife and debris separate 
from the helicopter. The chase helicopter crew radioed to the test director, "We've had a 
major accident," and landed near the wreckage to attempt assistance.

 
 
 

Pilot Information
Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Age: 36, Male

Instructor; Commercial; 
Military

Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right

Other Aircraft Helicopter Restraint Used: 5-point
Rating(s): 

Instrument Helicopter Second Pilot Present: Yes
Rating(s):

Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter; Instrument Toxicology Performed: Yes
Helicopter

Medical Class 2 Without Last FAA Medical Exam: 04/11/2016
Certification: Waivers/Limitations

Occupational Pilot: Yes Last Flight Review or 11/06/2015
Equivalent:

Flight Time: 323 hours (Total, all aircraft), 78 hours (Total, this make and model), 245 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 37 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)

 
 

Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Age: 43, Male

Instructor; Commercial; 
Foreign; Military

Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single- Seat Occupied: Left
engine Land

Other Aircraft Helicopter Restraint Used: 5-point
Rating(s): 

Instrument Helicopter Second Pilot Present: Yes
Rating(s):

Instructor Rating(s): Instrument Helicopter Toxicology Performed: Yes

Medical Class 2 Without Last FAA Medical Exam: 06/01/2016
Certification: Waivers/Limitations

Occupational Pilot: Yes Last Flight Review or 11/06/2015
Equivalent:

Flight Time: 756 hours (Total, all aircraft), 62 hours (Total, this make and model), 531 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 16 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)

 



 
The pilot held a letter of authorization (LOA) from the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) dated December 2, 2015, authorizing him to act as pilot-in-command (PIC) of the 
Bell experimental helicopter designated model 525. He completed crew resource 
management (CRM) training on January 12, 2015. The pilot graduated from the United 
States Naval Test Pilot School (USNTPS) in 2010. He then worked on numerous flight 
test projects involving the Bell AH-1W (SuperCobra, a twin-engine attack helicopter) 
and UH-1Y (Venom/Super Huey, a twin-engine utility helicopter). On September 23, 
2013, he was hired by the Bell Helicopter flight test department as a pilot for the Bell 
525 program.

The copilot held an LOA from the FAA dated December 2, 2015, authorizing him to act 
as PIC of the Bell experimental helicopter designated model 525. He completed CRM 
training on January 12, 2015. The copilot completed US Navy flight training in 2000 
and graduated from the USNTPS in 2006. He then worked on numerous AH-1W and 
UH-1Y test programs. On August 2, 2010, he was hired by the Bell Helicopter flight test 
department as a pilot for the Bell 525 program.

 
 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: BELL Registration: N525TA

Model/Series: 525 Aircraft Category: Helicopter

Year of Manufacture:   Amateur Built: No

Airworthiness Experimental Serial Number: 62001
Certificate:

Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle Seats: 2

Date/Type of Last   Certified Max Gross 21419 lbs
Inspection: Wt.:

Time Since Last   Engines:  Turbo Shaft
Inspection:

Airframe Total Time:   Engine Manufacturer: General Electric

ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: CT7-2F2

Registered Owner: Bell Helicopter - Textron Rated Power:  

Operator: Bell Helicopter - Textron Operating Certificate of Authorization 
Certificate(s) Held: or Waiver (COA)

 
The accident helicopter was a conventional main rotor and tail rotor design (see figure 
1). On April 25, 2016, the helicopter received its latest experimental research and 
development airworthiness certificate from the FAA. The helicopter was a 
manufacturing prototype being developed for certification as a transport-category 
helicopter in compliance with 14 CFR Part 29. As part of the airworthiness certificate, 



the FAA issued an operating limitations document (also dated April 25, 2016) that 
specified the following: pilots operating the helicopter must hold a temporary LOA 
issued by an FAA flight standards operations inspector to act as PIC, the helicopter must 
be maintained by an FAA-approved inspection program, day visual flight rules flight 
operations are authorized, and all flights must be conducted within the Arlington Initial 
Experimental Test Area. The helicopter was estimated to weigh about 19,975 lbs at the 
time of the accident.
 

Figure 1. Accident helicopter (Bell 525, N525TA).

Source: Bell Helicopter

The Bell 525 helicopter had a five-bladed main rotor that provided helicopter lift and 
thrust and rotated in a counterclockwise direction when viewed from above. The main 
rotor was a fully articulated system that used elastomeric bearings to accommodate 
blade feathering, flapping, and lead-lag motions. Fluid-elastic dampers moderated lead-
lag motion of the blades. The five main rotor blades were identified by colored stickers, 
presented in order of advancing rotation (when seated in the pilot seat and observing 
the blades pass from right to left): blue, orange, red, green, and white. The Bell 525 also 
had a four-bladed, fully articulated, canted tail rotor that provided thrust to counteract 
main rotor torque effect, control helicopter yaw, and provide lift. The four tail rotor 
blades were identified by colored stickers, presented in order of advancing rotation: 
blue, orange, red, and green. The helicopter was equipped with two General Electric 
(GE) CT7-2F1 turboshaft engines, mounted aft of the main transmission, and one 
Honeywell RE100BR auxiliary power unit (APU), mounted between the two engines at 
the aft end of the engine deck. The helicopter was equipped with a triple-redundant fly-
by-wire flight control system with a triplex hydraulic system. Additionally, the 
helicopter was equipped with retractable tricycle landing gear.

The cockpit was configured for two pilots in a side-by-side seated position and a center 
console between them. Each pilot had a cyclic side-stick controller forward of the seat's 



right armrest, a collective side-stick controller immediately forward of the seat's left arm 
rest, and a set of pedals forward of their feet. The instrument panel consisted of four 
identical primary flight display (PFD)/multifunction display (MFD) panels. The center 
console had two Garmin Touch Control (GTC) panels, the landing gear handle, the 
Nav/Com panel, and the flight test switch panel, which included some controls for the 
OEI special training mode software. Directly above the GTCs were the engine control 
COSIF (crank, off, start, idle, fly) knobs. Each pilot had an additional pilot display unit 
that provided real-time flight test instrumentation parameters such as DA, boom 
airspeed, mast airspeed, engine torque, load factor, pitch/yaw/roll rates, slip angle, and 
main rotor and tail rotor flapping angles.

OEI Training Mode

OEI training mode is a specific GE software-driven capability that permits simulation of 
a single-engine failure without actually rolling back or shutting down an engine in flight. 
When the flight crew engages the OEI training mode, both engines reduce power to 
represent the power available from a single engine. Consistent with normal operations 
and depending on the flight conditions, if the power demanded by the rotor exceeds the 
power available, Nr will droop. If single-engine power is insufficient to sustain the 
forward speed, the pilot must reduce the power demand by lowering the collective 
control, applying aft cyclic (to reduce speed), or using a combination of both. Nr 
increases to 103% when the power required matches the single-engine power available.

To engage OEI training, the pilot or copilot navigates to the OEI training page on the 
GTC and selects the engine to fail on the touch screen. Once selected, a green bar 
appears on the failed engine button to signal that OEI training mode was engaged (see 
figure 2). When OEI training mode is engaged, the pilot's side (right-seat) PFD displays 
simulated OEI engine values, and the copilot's side (left-seat) PFD displays the actual 
all-engines-operative (AEO) data.
 



Figure 2. OEI training page on the GTC.

Source: Bell Helicopter

The OEI special training mode that Bell used for the accident flight test did not 
incorporate an automatic disengagement of OEI training mode for low Nr. Bell modified 
the production version of OEI training mode software, originally created by GE, to 
eliminate a safeguard that automatically exited the OEI training mode when Nr fell 
below 90%. According to Bell, automatic disengagement at 90% Nr was not low enough 
to allow development and demonstration of OEI recovery across the flight envelope 
during testing, and a lower Nr value for automatic disengagement was deemed 
unnecessary due to the highly controlled test environment. To manually exit OEI 
training mode, the pilot could (1) press the engine fail button on the GTC (the same 
button used to engage OEI training mode), (2) exit the OEI training page on the GTC 
(using the BACK button), or (3) move the COSIF switch to a position other than "Fly" 



and then return the switch to "Fly." The Bell 525 lead test pilot indicated in a 
postaccident interview that the options to exit OEI training mode were not discussed 
formally with all the test pilots but were specifically discussed with the accident test 
pilot. Bell 525 test pilots interviewed said that they almost always press the engine fail 
button on the GTC to exit OEI training mode; some Bell pilots were aware of the other 
methods to exit OEI training mode while other test pilots were not. Disengaging OEI 
training mode would make both engines available to provide full power to restore the 
reference Nr to 100% if the rotor was in a drooped state.

The production OEI training mode, which will be used in Bell 525 production 
helicopters, includes an automatic disengagement of OEI training if Nr decays below 
90% (pending validation via testing). In the production OEI training mode, automatic 
exit would occur in the following circumstances:

-Loss of an engine.
-Torques of the two engines are not within ~30 ft-lb of each other.
-There are any significant engine failures (any fault that would cause local channel 
degraded on any of the 4 channels). If the enable bit for training is set (bit 20) AND both 
engine request bits are set (bit 21 and 22). To engage training only one-engine request 
bit can be set.
-Power turbine speed (Np) is 5% below the reference value (having previously been 
within 1% of the reference while in training) or to a value below 90%.
-Np is above 106%.
-Real engine gas producer turbine speed is above 106%.
-Real engine measured gas temperature is above 1934.3° F/ 1056.8° C.
-Real single-engine torque is above 521 ft-lb (67.7%).
-Real engine oil temperature is above 148.89° C.
-Low oil pressure switch is tripped.

OEI training mode flight test risk analysis worksheets documented planned operational 
risk mitigation for OEI training. A worksheet approved on June 29, 2015, included a 
discussion of the risk of low Nr, and a worksheet approved on April 1, 2016, included a 
discussion about engine overtorquing.

Power Situation Indicator (PSI)

The PSI was located in the bottom left corner of the PFD for each pilot. The bars in the 
bottom right corner of the PSI represented Np for the number 1 engine, Nr, and Np for 
the number 2 engine, respectively. The arc in the center of the display depicted the 
percentage of engine value compared to its limit (see figure 3).
 



Figure 3. Example of PSI on the Bell 525.

Source: Bell Helicopter

Indications of Low Rotor Rpm in the Bell 525

Power Situation Indicator

The PSI displayed Nr as a vertical scale (center bar in lower right indicator) when Nr 
was above 90%, as shown in figure 3. If Nr dropped below 90%, the display changed to 
an analog needle that displayed a green arc for Nr between 100 and 90%, a yellow arc 
for Nr between 86 and 89% Nr, and a red arc below 86% Nr (see figure 4). 
(Overtorquing limits appear above 100%.)
 



Figure 4. PSI displaying Nr as an arc.

Source: Bell Helicopter

The CAS was located in the middle right side of the PFD and displayed color-coded 
messages for status, advisory, caution, and warning alerts (see figure 5). The Bell 525 
lead test pilot described warnings as items that need immediate attention and cautions 
as items that will need attention but not immediately. (Warnings were displayed as 
white text on red background, cautions were displayed as yellow text on black 
background, advisories were displayed as white text on black background, and status 
messages were displayed as green text on black background.) When warnings and 
caution alerts were triggered, the displayed messages would flash until either the cockpit 
master warning/caution push button annunciator (PBA) was pressed, the bezel button 
on the lower right corner of the PFD was pressed, or the triggered condition was inactive 
for more than 5 seconds. In addition, a caution/warning flag would appear in the lower 
right corner of the PFD, and a caution/warning light would illuminate on the PBA. For 
the accident helicopter, if Nr dropped below 90% (in AEO or OEI), a "ROTOR RPM LO" 
warning-level message appeared (see figure 6). Once the condition cleared, the message 
would immediately disappear.
 



Figure 5. Location of visual CAS information available to crew.

Source: Bell Helicopter (modified by the National Transportation Safety Board)
 



Figure 6. Example of PFD during "ROTOR RPM LO" warning.

Source: Bell Helicopter

An aural tone also annunciated with a CAS alert. The technical requirements 
specification indicated that the caution audio tone would be a "ping" decaying over 0.5 
second that sounded when each caution or warning message activated, the warning 
audio tone would be three "pings," and the low rotor rpm tone would be a unique 
continuous low/high/low warble to be played continuously as long as the condition 
existed or until muted.

In the accident helicopter, the aural tone annunciated for "ROTOR RPM LO" was a 
master warning tone that was not unique to low Nr and was associated with at least 21 
other warning messages. The Bell 525 lead test pilot indicated that, during the 
experimental flight test, many of the aural messages were still under development; the 
tones had been selected but not implemented. The test team determined that having 
some aural indication for low Nr was sufficient for development flight testing. He stated 
that the accident crew had flown OEI tests previously and had conducted autorotation 
testing with test conditions that would likely have triggered the low Nr warning. He also 
stated that the crew was likely exposed to the master warning for low Nr during flight 
testing and in the Relentless Advanced Systems Integration Laboratory (RASIL). (More 
information about the RASIL can be found in the Organizational and Management 
Information section.)

The chief pilot of the Bell test program stated that, without information from the PFD, 
he would rely on rotor aural cues to gauge rotor speed. The Bell 525 lead test pilot stated 



that, lacking any instrument indication, pilots could usually determine rotor speed (high 
or low) by the sound: specifically, they could hear an engine winding down or sense 
higher vibrations at higher airspeeds. The Bell 525 lead test pilot further indicated that, 
under normal conditions, pilots can hear the decrease in Nr and would be able to tell the 
difference between 100% and 92% Nr but given the vibration environment during the 
accident flight, it is uncertain whether the pilots would have heard the low Nr.

Summary of Low Nr Indications for the Accident Flight Crew

Table 2. Indications to the accident flight crew regarding low Nr during the event 
profile.

 

Maintenance

During the experimental ground and flight testing of the accident helicopter, 
discrepancies and anomalies were recorded, prioritized, and tracked. Aircraft systems 
interim procedures (ASIP) provided instructions for periodic or on-condition inspection 
and/or maintenance. Inspection tasks, including those required by ASIPs and 
experimental engineering orders, were logged into a database with comments, including 
inspection results. Recent maintenance performed on the accident helicopter before the 
accident flight included the following:

-A nondestructive inspection and tap test of all four tail rotor blades (no damage noted).
-A detailed visual inspection of the tail rotor hub (no damage noted). 
-A torque check of the pylon beam attaching hardware (no movement of the attaching 
hardware noted).
-A recurrent inspection of airframe longerons required by an ASIP (no anomalous 
findings reported).

 
 



Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility,   Distance from Accident  
Elevation: Site:

Observation Time:   Direction from Accident  
Site:

Lowest Cloud Condition:   Visibility  

Lowest Ceiling:   Visibility (RVR):  

Wind Speed/Gusts: / Turbulence Type / 
Forecast/Actual:

Wind Direction:   Turbulence Severity / 
Forecast/Actual:

Altimeter Setting:   Temperature/Dew Point:  

Precipitation and  
Obscuration:

Departure Point: Arlington, TX (GKY) Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR

Destination: Arlington, TX (GKY) Type of Clearance: Unknown

Departure Time: 1035 CDT Type of Airspace:  

 
Arlington Municipal Airport is located 31 miles north-northwest of the accident site. The 
Arlington automated surface observation system (elevation 628 ft mean sea level [msl]) 
recorded observation for 1145 was wind from 170° at 15 knots, 10 miles visibility, sky 
clear of clouds, temperature 32°C, dew point 23°C, and altimeter of 29.95 in Mercury 
(Hg).

Hillsboro Municipal Airport is located 15 miles south-southwest of the accident site. The 
Hillsboro automated weather observation system (elevation 686 ft msl) recorded 
observation for 1136 was wind from 190° at 16 knots with gusts to 22 knots, 10 miles 
visibility, scattered clouds at 3,000 ft, temperature 31°C, dew point 23°C, and altimeter 
at 29.98 in Hg.

 
 



Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 2 Fatal Aircraft Damage: Destroyed

Passenger N/A Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Injuries:

Ground Injuries: N/A Aircraft None
Explosion:

Total Injuries: 2 Fatal Latitude, 32.246111, -96.919722 (est)
Longitude:

 
The main wreckage field was 2,200 ft from the last transmitted GPS point, along the 
flightpath heading of 320°. The main wreckage site included an impact crater, remnants 
of the main fuselage, cockpit, main transmission and main rotor hub, two of the five 
main rotor blades (blue and green), the forward portion of the tail boom, and both 
engines. There was evidence of a postcrash fire at the main wreckage site. The wreckage 
debris path at the main wreckage site was about 200 ft in length and was oriented about 
315° magnetic.

The secondary wreckage site was about 1,300 ft southeast of the main wreckage site and 
comprised the aft portion of the tail boom, which contained the tail rotor drive system, 
intermediate gearbox, tail rotor gearbox (TRGB), and tail rotor. A debris field extended 
between the last data point and the main wreckage covering about 4,000 ft (north to 
south) by 1,700 ft (east to west). Three of the five main rotor blades (orange, white, and 
red) and various pieces of forward cowlings, cockpit frames, and cabin doors were found 
separate from the main and secondary wreckage sites in the debris field. Additionally, 
lightweight debris, such as insulation and main rotor blade skin pieces, was found 
scattered to the northeast of the debris path between the main and secondary wreckage 
sites, with the farthest piece being found about 1,520 ft away from the debris path 
between the main and secondary wreckage sites (see figure 7). 
 



Figure 7. The location of the main wreckage site, secondary wreckage site, and selected 
items from the wreckage debris field.

The main fuselage was highly fragmented and exhibited evidence of thermal damage. 
The cockpit wreckage did not sustain significant thermal damage. Fractured pieces of 
the cyclic and collective side sticks were observed within the cockpit wreckage. The 
lateral push-pull tubes were retained in the cockpit wreckage but exhibited fractures 
consistent with overload. Both engines remained installed on the engine deck and 
exhibited thermal distress from exposure to the postcrash fire. The forward portion of 
the tail boom exhibited an angled fracture line at its aft end consistent with main rotor 
blade contact. The tail boom attachment points to the main fuselage exhibited fractures 
near the upper left corner and lower right corner. The aft portion of the tail boom was 
found resting partially inverted, with the tail rotor head and one tail rotor blade wholly 
embedded into the ground and exhibited an angled cut line at its forward end consistent 
with main rotor blade contact (see figure 8).
 



Figure 8. Angled cut line at the forward end of the aft section of the tail boom.

Source: GE Aviation

The main rotor hub remained attached to the main rotor shaft. The inboard end of the 
blue main rotor blade exhibited evidence of thermal damage, and the root end of the 
blade airfoil remained attached to its respective grip assembly via three blade retention 
bolts. A 14-ft-long inboard section of the orange main rotor blade was found about 1,140 
ft southeast of the main wreckage site with its inboard end embedded in the ground and 
its outboard end embedded in tree branches; the remainder of the blade was found 
about 2,880 ft southeast of the main wreckage site. Yellowish-orange paint transfer 
marks (similar in color to the primer found on portions of the airframe) were observed 
on the leading-edge surfaces in the area where the blade fractured into two distinct 
pieces, and additional orange paint transfer marks were observed on the leading-edge 
surfaces. Gouge marks into the lower blade surface and damage to the blade afterbody 
were observed. The red main rotor blade was found embedded in a tree about 1,400 ft 
southeast of the main wreckage site; impact marks on the leading edge, a fracture on the 
spar, and a chordwise gouge on the lower surface of the blade were observed. An 
inboard section of the green main rotor blade was recovered adjacent to the main 
transmission at the main wreckage site, and a 9-ft-long outboard section of the blade 
was found in a tree canopy about 1,325 ft southeast of the main wreckage site. The white 
main rotor blade was found on the ground about 350 ft southeast of the main wreckage 
site; the upper and lower grips were both fractured, while the blade airfoil remained 
attached. The blade leading-edge abrasion strip exhibited impact marks that included 
orange and yellow paint transfer marks.

The tail rotor head remained attached to the TRGB and exhibited no evidence of cracks 
or fractures. The blue tail rotor blade leading edge was partially embedded into the 
ground; a small puncture was observed on the outboard surface. The orange tail rotor 



blade leading-edge tip was found embedded into the bottom-left edge of the tail cone; 
the orange tail rotor blade tip end afterbody exhibited a mid-chord fracture extending 
about 10 inches inboard. The red tail rotor blade trailing edge was partially embedded 
into the ground. The green tail rotor blade was wholly embedded into the ground; 
removal of the tail rotor revealed the blade airfoil had partially folded over immediately 
outboard of the grip attachment. Three of the four tail rotor dampers remained intact 
and were able to be bench tested; the fourth tail rotor damper separated into two halves 
and could not be bench tested. Dynamic bench testing of the three tail rotor dampers 
did not reveal evidence of anomalous response behavior.

 
 

 
 
Flight Recorders

The accident helicopter was equipped to carry a pilot and copilot with no passengers and 
was not required to be equipped with either a flight data recorder (FDR) or cockpit voice 
recorder (CVR) under the provisions of 14 CFR 91.609. A combination CVR and FDR 
(CVFDR) was installed but was not operational at the time of the accident. (When 
certified as a transport-category rotorcraft under 14 CFR Part 29, the Bell 525 will be 
equipped with both CVR and FDR recording capabilities.) The accident helicopter was 
heavily instrumented with several aircraft- and ground-based recording systems, both 
production and flight-test based, including a streaming telemetry system, helicopter 
monitoring unit (HMU), avionics recorders, and PFD/MFD recording capability.

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) received the following components 
with flight data recording and storage capabilities: Simmonds Precision Products Vigor 
HMU (serial number [S/N] 0006); CVFDR (S/N 009-01029); 128 gigabyte (GB) solid-
state drive (SSD) from aircraft high-speed avionics bus (S/N TW-032GYJ-55085); 4 SD 
memory cards (S/N unknown); and Zodiac Aerospace remote storage module (RSM) 
128 GB (S/N 052405-112012). Regarding the HMU and 4 SD memory cards, all the data 
was available from other sources. Regarding the CVFDR, the data download file was 
determined to be blank; the FDR may not have been receiving data or been fully 
configured in the helicopter. Regarding the SSD, due to the extent of the damage, no 
data could be recovered. 

Zodiac Aerospace RSM 128 GB 

The Zodiac Aerospace RSM, the data storage medium of the flight test recorder system 
installed on N525TA, is a solid-state hard drive with 128 GB capacity and an integrated 
E-SATA download interface. The data recorded on this drive, which was typically 
downloaded after each test flight, was the primary data source for Bell's flight test 
analysis team and was sourced from the following sensors and aircraft systems:



 Flight test strain gauges in the fuselage, main rotor, tail rotor, engine, and engine 
mounts.

 Production accelerometers in the drive system, rotors, and engine/APU.
 Flight controls data bus including ARINC-429/1553/RS-232/RS-485.
 Hydraulic system temperatures, pressures, and flows.
 Production and flight test air data systems, including temperatures and 

pressures.
 Both engines, all engine control channels of temperatures, pressures, speeds, 

gearboxes, and shafts.
 Flight test temperature readings in the aircraft skin.
 Avionics and flight displays systems.

The data stream recorded by the RSM was also transmitted via a telemetry stream to a 
ground station at Bell's flight-test facility for real-time analysis and recording. 

The RSM, which was ejected from the helicopter during the crash sequence and was 
found apart from the main wreckage, was in good condition, with no apparent impact or 
thermal damage. Bell extracted the data under the NTSB's supervision. The RSM 
recording contained about 1 hour 26 minutes of data, including preflight and flight 
activities; the event flight was the only flight recorded on the drive. Once processed, the 
data was segregated into "prime" data (data taken during a test) and "non-prime" data 
(data taken at all other times). There were 41 periods of prime data in the recording, 
including the period up to and including the end of the recording. The RSM engine data 
showed that the engines were operating as commanded throughout the flight. (More 
information about test 51 can be found in the Tests and Research section.) 

 
Medical And Pathological Information

The Office of the Medical Examiner for the county of Dallas, Texas, performed an 
autopsy on the pilot and determined that the cause of death was thermal and blunt force 
injuries.

The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory performed toxicology testing on 
specimens from the pilot. The specimens were noted as being putrefied; tests for carbon 
monoxide and cyanide were not performed, ethanol was detected in muscle, no ethanol 
was detected in the brain, and none of the listed drugs in the toxicology report were 
detected in the liver specimen. 

The Office of the Medical Examiner for the county of Dallas, Texas, performed an 
autopsy on the copilot and determined that the cause of death was blunt force injuries.

The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory performed toxicology testing on 
specimens from the copilot. The specimens were noted as being putrefied; tests for 
carbon monoxide and cyanide were not performed, ethanol was detected in muscle, no 
ethanol was detected in the liver, propanol was detected in muscle, and none of the 
listed drugs in the toxicology report were detected in lung or liver specimens.



 
Tests And Research

The helicopter's flight telemetry system recorded flight data on the aircraft and 
streamed it to the test crew monitoring the flight from the ground. The lowest data 
collection rate was 31.25 hertz (Hz) and the highest was 4,000 Hz. Data was recorded 
continuously throughout the test and then divided into identifying records for each test 
point performed. When the pilot initiated a new test, the test timer started from zero. 
The helicopter was on test 51 (which ran for 21.18 seconds) when the accident occurred, 
indicating it was the 51st flight test point on the day of the accident.

For the Vne of 185 knots, a single engine is insufficient to maintain the flight condition; 
management of Nr is critical to recovering from the loss of an engine. Pilot response at 
high speed is to lower the collective to reduce torque on the rotor and/or to pull the 
longitudinal cyclic back to reduce the airspeed; both actions result in reducing the power 
required by the main rotor and allowing Nr to recover. Once rotor speed has recovered 
to the target value of 103% Nr, the test would be considered complete.

In two prior successful OEI tests at 175 knots airspeed (record 50) and 165 knots 
airspeed (record 48), Nr decayed from 100% within about 3.5 to 4 seconds, consistent 
with initiation of the OEI test. Collective was reduced to 51% for test 50 and 43% for test 
48. Nr stopped decreasing around 90% before recovering to 97% for test 50 and nearly 
100% for test 48. The time from Nr decay to initial Nr recovery for both tests was 
between 2 and 3 seconds (see figure 9). 



Figure 9. Plot comparing tests 48, 50, and 51.

For test 51, Nr began to decay about 3.5 seconds after test initiation, similar to the prior 
tests. Collective was reduced to 58%, and Nr stabilized near 92% but did not return to 
97% or higher as in the previous tests. After 6 seconds, a vibration near 6 Hz was seen in 
the collective and longitudinal cyclic inputs that was not present in the earlier tests. 
After 7 seconds, Nr stopped recovering. When collective was increased between 10 and 
13 seconds and again between 16 and 17.5 seconds, Nr slowed, and, by 18 seconds, it had 
decreased to below 80%. After 10 seconds, cyclic input activity increased, as did the roll 
response. The helicopter's roll and pitch responded to cyclic input throughout the 
accident flight.



The red main rotor blade was instrumented to record blade flapping; as Nr decreased 
after 16 seconds, the out-of-plane flapping motion increased. At 20.4 seconds, the string 
potentiometer that measured blade flapping motion stopped functioning due to 
excessive flapping. At 20.7 seconds, a large aft cyclic input reached peak value. Within 
two rotations of losing the flapping signal, one or more of the main rotor blades severed 
the tail boom from the aircraft, and all data recording and telemetry ended. 

As noted above, an oscillation occurred in the collective and cyclic control inputs during 
the accident test sometime after 6 seconds; the oscillation was not present during the 
previous test records and indicated a vibration in the structure and controls near 6 Hz. 
This vibration was not a single mode of vibration at exactly 6 Hz throughout the flight; 
the frequency of the vibration changed slightly through the test as rotor speed changed 
and various airframe and rotor modes were excited. This 6-Hz vibration was distinctive, 
grew in amplitude, and affected the entire helicopter and the flight crew.

After 7 seconds, the vibration was well defined, and the amplitude began to grow. At 10 
seconds, the amplitude grew before decaying again after 12 seconds. (This growth was 
described as a "blossom" in the vibration.) The appearance of the 6-Hz oscillation 
corresponded with an Nr of about 92%. As Nr stayed near 92%, the 6-Hz vibration grew 
in amplitude from around 7 seconds until 11 seconds. At 11 seconds, Nr slowed below 
90%, and the 6-Hz amplitude decreased. At 13.5 seconds, Nr began to increase from 
86%, and as Nr again approached 92%, the 6-Hz amplitude increased. The amplitude of 
the vertical acceleration was near ± 2.5 G at 6 Hz around 11 seconds and again after 16 
seconds. (G is a unit of measurement of acceleration; 1 G is equivalent to the 
acceleration caused by the earth's gravity [about 32.2 ft/sec2].) For comparison, earlier 
test records showed variations in vertical acceleration no greater than ± 0.3 G. The 6-Hz 
vibration appeared in the control inputs, especially the collective, starting before 7 
seconds.

The investigation focused on the source of the 6-Hz vibration. The lead-lag (in-plane) 
motion of a rotating rotor system can produce frequencies in the fixed (nonrotating) 
system (the frequency at which the rotor system conveys motion into the fixed system). 
The investigation focused on two significant in-plane rotor modes: the cyclic regressing 
mode and the scissors mode. (A cyclic mode occurs when rotor blades lead and lag in 
such a way that the hub of the rotor begins to orbit about its axis of rotation. The mode 
is regressing if the time it takes the hub to make one full cycle is slower than one full 
rotation of the blades around the hub. For the scissors mode, the lead-lag motions of the 
blades act in such a way that adjacent blades move together and apart in a scissoring 
motion. In forward flight, the scissors mode produces a fore-aft motion of the main 
rotor mast due to aerodynamic forces.) The fixed-system frequency of the main rotor 
cyclic regressing mode is 2.6 Hz at 100% Nr and drops to 2.4 Hz at 92% Nr. The fixed-
system frequency of the main rotor scissors mode is 6.8 Hz at 100% Nr and drops to 6.2 
Hz at 92% Nr. The fixed-system frequency of the tail rotor cyclic regressing mode is 6.6 
Hz at 100% Nr and 5.4 Hz at 92% Nr.

During the accident test, the main rotor scissors mode was excited, unexpectedly, at a 
lower frequency in the fixed system due to the lower Nr. Initially, as Nr was between 



100% and 93%, the tail rotor primarily exhibited cyclic regressing in-plane motion, and 
the pilot-seat vertical vibration frequency followed that frequency. The amplitude of this 
response was less than 0.2 Gs and consistent with prior tests. At the start of the accident 
test, the main rotor primarily exhibited cyclic regressing in-plane motion, which was 
expected. At 92%, the tail rotor in-plane cyclic regressing mode and the first vertical 
bending mode of the helicopter coalesced near 5.4 Hz. (The first vertical bending mode 
is the lowest frequency mode at which the aircraft fuselage oscillates about its lateral 
axis [both nose and tail flex up, then both nose and tail flex down relative to the center 
portion of the fuselage].) As Nr decreased toward 92%, the primary main rotor in-plane 
motion shifted from cyclic regressing to scissors. Around 92%, the main rotor scissors 
in-plane motion was near 6 Hz, and, by 6.5 seconds, the pilot-seat vertical acceleration 
responded at the main rotor scissors mode frequency, indicating that the fuselage of the 
aircraft was responding to the scissors mode. The main rotor's shift to the scissors mode 
produced a frequency around 6 Hz that began dominating the vibratory signature of the 
tail rotor and the fuselage and, by 7 seconds, had affected the controls.

From 5 to 11 seconds, Nr stayed between 90% and 93%, and the amplitude of the pilot-
seat vertical acceleration increased markedly from less than ± 0.1 G to greater than ± 1 
G. After 12 seconds, a collective control increase resulted in a further reduction in Nr, 
which coincided with a reduction in the pilot-seat vibration about the 14-second mark. 
As the test continued, the amplitude of the vibration grew again in all channels where it 
was present.

Two sources were determined to have increased the amplitude of the helicopter's 6-Hz 
frequency response:

1. Biomechanical feedback into the collective control
2. Cyclic stir in the swashplate driven by the attitude and heading reference system 

(AHRS)

Determining the separate contributions of the biomechanical feedback and the AHRS to 
the increase in amplitude was not possible with the flight data. The evidence for 
biomechanical feedback is seen in the trace of pilot collective control after 6.5 seconds, 
which shows the pilot's control stick moving at the 6-Hz frequency. The pilot's collective 
control oscillations result in further amplification of the main rotor scissors mode, 
further amplifying the vertical seat vibration and increasing the collective stick 
oscillation. Since the collective was being physically cycled at 6 Hz, the control laws 
would send a corresponding (6-Hz) command to the tail rotor as antitorque 
compensation. The biomechanical feedback loop appears to attenuate after 10 seconds 
(and again at 16 seconds as seen by reductions in the pilot-seat vertical vibration and 
collective control oscillation at those times).

During the accident flight, excitation of the airframe's first bending modes (lateral and 
vertical) induced the AHRS to respond with inputs intended to stabilize the aircraft. The 
AHRS was intended to work with the control laws as though the fuselage was a rigid 
body responding to wind gusts or similar low-frequency inputs and was not intended for 
handling a 6-Hz vibration. Although the AHRS included filters on the signal outputs, the 
filters did not specifically target the 6-Hz stirring commands to the swashplate. The 



stirring actions of the AHRS system at this (~6 Hz) frequency were considered to be a 
driver of the scissors mode amplification of the main rotor.

The main rotor scissors mode had been encountered at 100% Nr (and produced a 6.7-Hz 
vibration) in two previous tests at lower airspeed but in high load-factor banked turns, 
where the rotor blades are highly loaded. Specifically, in the previous tests, when Nr was 
100%, the scissors mode was at 6.8 Hz as expected. The tests were at a lower airspeed 
(145 to 152 knots) but included high blade loading due to increased load factor in a 
banked turn. In both tests, the vibration quickly damped out as the blade loading was 
reduced. Previous experience demonstrated that the scissors mode was well damped at 
100% Nr. The high forward speed of the accident test produced a similar highly loaded 
aerodynamic environment for the rotor blades. One aspect of the main rotor's 
aerodynamic environment can be described by examining the aircraft's advance ratio 
(true airspeed/blade tip speed) in relation to the blade loading. High blade loading and 
high advance ratios produce a more complex aerodynamic environment. In all tests, the 
scissors mode response was only encountered on the outer edge of the 
blade-loading/advance ratio environment and indicate that a complex aerodynamic 
environment was needed to excite this response. 

While the scissors mode was quickly damped out in the earlier tests, it grew in 
amplitude during the accident test record until the whole aircraft was vibrating at that 
frequency. The lower frequency of the scissors mode during the accident test due to the 
reduced Nr allowed biomechanical feedback into the controls, and the response of the 
AHRS system through the control laws increased the amplitude of the scissors mode 
response. The manufacturer will focus on mitigating the biomechanical feedback and 
the AHRS-induced swashplate stirring via control law filtering to prevent the 
amplification of the scissors mode response. 

The vibration loads experienced during the accident test were outside the parameters 
for certification testing for the Garmin PFD and GTC displays. Because of the criticality 
of the PFD and GTC for flight information, a postaccident test was conducted to observe 
the performance of these displays when exposed to unusually high vibration loads. The 
displays were mounted onto a shake table, and a vibration profile similar to the accident 
was applied to the hardware. The GTC and PFD functioned normally throughout the 
entire test, and no faults were recorded. Displays presented information continuously 
with no distortion or screen blanking, and touch functionality on the GTC and bezel 
button functionality on the PFD functioned properly. 

 
Organizational And Management Information

The Bell 525 program consisted of the conceptual design phase, preliminary design 
review, critical design review, flight readiness review (FRR), developmental flight 
testing, and certification flight testing. Investigators interviewed Bell design and test 
engineers who described the pace of the Bell 525 program at the time of the accident as 
fast but not unreasonably so. Personnel described specific pressure felt during the time 
of the first flight test in Amarillo, Texas, in mid-2015. When personnel were supporting 



the first flight, they commonly worked 7 days per week and logged between 60 and 70 
hours of work per week. Many described morale to be low during the first flight. Once 
the flight test program moved back to Arlington, Texas, in September 2015, the pace 
slowed, and many reported improved morale. Original certification for the Bell 525 was 
scheduled for mid-2016, but the program faced various setbacks during initial design. 
Most engineers interviewed stated that they had not received undue pressure from 
management to complete tasks. No monetary incentives (outside of overtime pay) were 
provided to employees, and employees were not concerned about negative consequences 
when raising concerns. Employees described Bell's safety culture as "good." At the time 
of the accident, design and test engineers reported working about 10 hours of overtime 
per week on average.

The chief engineer for the Bell 525 program was responsible for all 525 testing, 
certification activity, and structures (drive, rotor, and airframe). Six discipline areas 
reported to the chief engineer: airframe engineering, systems engineering and 
certification, rotors engineering and component test, drive systems, flight technology, 
and flight test/experimental test and evaluation. The 525 program flight test integrated 
product team (IPT) consisted of 12 flight test engineers and 3 instrumentation 
engineers. Six of the 12 flight test pilots in Bell's experimental test and evaluation 
department were assigned to support the 525 program. The chief engineer worked 
closely with the air vehicle IPT; the air vehicle lead was responsible for flight control 
system and software, control laws, avionics, electrical system, propulsion, hydraulic 
system, fuel system, and environmental controls. 

According to a Bell avionics engineer, before the FRR, the avionics group developed a 
spreadsheet of all the CAS functions and whether they were designated as critical or not 
critical for flight safety; they tested the safety-of-flight functions using scripts or a CAS 
manual test. The results for each function were "passed," "passed with exception," 
"failed," or "safe." A "failed" state indicated that the alert did not annunciate or 
annunciate in time. 

According to the Bell 525 lead test pilot, if no pilot action was required, then the alert 
would be an advisory or would only be available on the maintenance page. If pilot action 
was required, they referred to the following CAS philosophy: for anything requiring pilot 
action immediately, it was a warning; if it required action, but not immediately, it would 
be a caution; or, if action was required much later, it would be advisory information. The 
Bell 525 lead test pilot described the difference between caution and advisory as a gray 
area. "Safety critical" referred to messages for which if nothing was done, it would 
"break the helicopter, or cause the helicopter not to be flown right, or it would exceed a 
limit." All the warnings counted as safety critical, as did some cautions. He stated that 
the decision for what was critical came from the cockpit working group, which worked 
with other systems groups, pilots, a safety representative, and the individual who 
conducted design safety analysis, and all the decisions were documented. The cockpit 
working group created the list of safety-critical items. The list was then vetted and sent 
to the avionics group for implementation.



According to Bell Helicopter, test pilot duties included planning and conducting 
experimental flight tests in helicopters and tiltrotor aircraft; conducting other flight test 
operations; maintaining flight currency and traveling in support of Bell Helicopter flight 
operations; completing flight analysis and flight evaluations of aircraft, test planning, 
and flight test reports; planning and executing engineering and experimental test flights 
of new aircraft and/or systems; evaluating and reporting on data gathered during test 
flights; demonstrating safe and efficient test planning and execution; interfacing with 
the project team to ensure successful accomplishment of the test program; and making 
recommendations regarding operational effectiveness of systems, aircraft handling 
qualities, and design improvements. 

In December 2015, the flight test group had put in place a personal risk assessment tool 
that each pilot could complete before flying. Pilots were encouraged to fill out the risk 
assessment every day; it was not mandatory. The accident pilots did not have a risk 
assessment on file for the day of the accident.

The majority of pilot training consisted of time in the RASIL engineering simulator, 
which is an accurate engineering representation of the cockpit, including control feel, 
and visual in-flight representation projected on a screen that wrapped around the 
cockpit. Next to the RASIL cockpit was a separate "Rig Room" containing actual flight 
hardware (hydraulic servos) rigged to apply flight loads into engineering 
representations of related hardware. When a control was moved in the RASIL cockpit, 
hardware would respond to the command in the Rig Room. Pilots assigned to the 525 
program would routinely operate the RASIL while developing flight procedures, 
validating software changes, and reviewing fight test plans. 

Although there were no written logs showing when a pilot or flight crew worked in the 
RASIL, the Bell chief test pilot believed the accident flight crew had reviewed the test 
card for the mishap flight in the RASIL, and the RASIL engineers stated that the 
accident flight crew routinely worked in the RASIL. Typical training flow would involve 
two RASIL sessions for each test flight. If the pilots had been in the RASIL within 2 
weeks of a test flight, they were considered current.

Additionally, both the pilot and copilot had accumulated many ground testing hours 
validating the OEI training mode in the helicopter.

Two pilots from the flight test group were scheduled as the chase aircrew flying a Bell 
429 helicopter. The duties of the chase helicopter included monitoring the test area for 
other aircraft, monitoring the flight for safety issues, and observing and monitoring the 
test helicopter as it executed the test card. 

The chase helicopter was in radio communications with the test helicopter and the test 
director. After a few circuits of the traffic pattern, the chase helicopter positioned itself 
behind the test helicopter, and they departed to the test area as a flight of two. Once in 
the test area, at the higher test airspeeds, the chase helicopter would fall farther behind 
the test helicopter because of its airspeed limitations but would rejoin the test helicopter 
as it slowed and recovered from the maneuver. The chase helicopter crew reported 
seeing no distractions or abnormalities outside of the accident helicopter.



 
Additional Information

Development of Biomechanical Filters on Collective

Biomechanical feedback in the aircraft design industry refers to unintentional control 
inputs resulting from involuntary pilot limb motions caused by vehicle accelerations. 
Biomechanical feedback is usually addressed using control friction and control input 
filtering. The accident helicopter did not have a filter on the collective control to address 
biomechanical feedback. Bell engineers stated that past experience had never shown a 
need for filtering the collective control. Filters did exist in the cyclic control to address 
pitch and roll rates in addition to biomechanical feedback.

Bell used a control diagram used for aero-servo-elastic analysis on the Bell 525. Before 
the accident, the model did not use correlation factors (modeling adjustments based on 
flight test data), model the main rotor in-plane scissors mode oscillations, or 
incorporate collective pilot biomechanical feedback in the vertical axis. The pilot model 
provided gain values in each axis in terms of "inches of stick per g of acceleration." In 
the cyclic control, the pilot model was developed using experimental data where pilots 
were shaken laterally on a shake table. This shake-table analysis was done for a side-
stick cyclic configuration and a traditional-stick cyclic configuration. Shake-table 
analysis was never performed on the collective control (traditional stick or side stick) 
using vertical acceleration. Engineers said that they had never seen negative stability 
during flight test or in flight when using a pass-through filter for the collective. The 
control laws engineer for the Bell 525 described that their goal was to manage lag at the 
1- to 2-Hz frequency for pilot control. A filter at the higher frequencies could still 
introduce lag at the lower frequencies. Filters would not be added unless deemed 
necessary for the high-frequency stability while tuned in order to not decrease margins 
at low frequencies.

When Bell developed feedback filters, control law engineers designed for "no adverse 
effects" on handling qualities. They usually only discussed critical items. The control 
engineer interviewed did not recall that the vertical axis was deemed critical from a 
biomechanical feedback standpoint. For the vertical axis, filters were only added if 
needed, based on flight testing. The control laws engineer said that had they built a pilot 
model for the collective side stick with a shaker mock up, they could have developed a 
more accurate transfer function, but they may not have known to add an aerodynamic 
factor to it for main rotor regressive scissors mode. Even with an aerodynamic model, 
they would not have been able to validate it without the accident data. He suggested 
that, for flight testing, they could have tested the lower Nr at low-speed testing and 
expanded the envelope. This was not something done in the past because previous 
helicopters could not control Nr as precisely as the 525 since the 525 has fly-by-wire and 
full authority digital engine control (FADEC) and because it was not required, as this is 
not a part of the steady operating flight envelope and analysis capabilities did not exist 
to predict this type of event.



Regarding validating aero-servo-elastic models, Bell had data for steady-state 
conditions, and the models were 80 to 90% accurate for those dynamics; however, the 
highly dynamic flight regimes were more difficult to model. They typically modeled 
those by using steady-state values and adding a correlation/correction vector that was 
derived from flight test data.

In the design phase of the Bell 525, the rotor dynamics group evaluated how the 
helicopter would perform at different Nr. They expected steady-state, power-off, and 
transient conditions and limitations. The output of this analysis provided a range of 
rpms that fed the limitations document used to design the helicopter. The limitations 
that were generated from the analysis were typically considered draft until they could be 
verified in flight test.

The Nr operating range spanned from the minimum Nr required for lift and the 
maximum Nr that would overspeed the powerplant. During low airspeed flight, the 
maximum Nr was defined to be 103% in order to have more energy available in the rotor 
in the event of a single-engine failure. During high airspeed flight, the maximum Nr was 
100%, and the Nr upper limit would transition to this value when flying above a 
specified airspeed (for example, 55 knots).

Flight testing was conducted at set points for continuous flight at 103% Nr and 100% Nr, 
as these are the designed set points for continuous operation within the certified flight 
envelope. During normal operation, the helicopter's FADEC prevented Nr from 
drooping below these two set points with all engines operating (as long as power 
required was not more than the AEO power available). Continuous flight below the Nr 
set point could only be reached with an OEI or all-engines-inoperative (AEI) condition. 
The AEI case tested continuous flight down to 90% Nr. No testing of continuous rpms 
below 100% was conducted in any OEI condition as the maneuvers were expected to be 
transient in nature.

The OEI maneuver resulted in reduced Nr flight within the green arc on the Nr display. 
Bell design team members had different understandings of whether it was expected for 
pilots to fly at lower Nr in the normal operating range (also known as the green arc on 
the Nr display):

 A performance engineer specified that he expected the normal operating regime 
for rpm to be where you could fly within these limits continuously.

 A control laws engineer considered flying at 185 knots at 90% Nr to be outside of 
the normal flight envelope. Tolerance would be above or below 5% of normal Nr 
range. 

 The design team did not expect to fly outside of this range. Their idea was that for 
certain maneuvers, it was okay to droop when there were other priorities to test. 
Their expectation was not to fly at 93% Nr continuously when everything was 
healthy.

 The flight technology specialist at the time of the accident stated that the Nr 
green arc could mean different things to different people and was often discussed 
within the team. He considered 90 to 100% Nr to be transient for an AEO 



condition. The colors presented in the PSI were a precedent from the Bell 429 
program.

There were also varying understandings of the definition of "transient." One 
performance engineer considered a 5-second "sustained rpm" not to be transient while 
other engineers considered 30 seconds to be considered steady state. The flight 
technology team lead said that the definition of transient was different for different 
people.

Test pilots suggested in postaccident interviews that there could be multiple reasons 
why a pilot would fly at 92 to 93% when recovering from an OEI maneuver. The chase 
test pilot stated that flying at 92 and 93% Nr was not necessarily abnormal in an OEI 
condition. Further, Bell's chief test pilot provided reasons for extended flight in that rpm 
regime during this maneuver:

 If Nr had stabilized, the pilot may not have been in a rush and could have been 
initiating a slow recovery that resulted in extended time at 92% Nr.

 If the pilot was maneuvering the collective and felt something abnormal, the pilot 
instinct would be to stop moving the collective in case the abnormality originated 
from manipulating the collective. This could result in flight at a lower rpm.

Bell provided examples of three test points in the Bell 429 developmental test program 
in which pilots remained in the 88 to 96% Nr range for about 20 seconds during the OEI 
maneuver (between 129 and 135 knots). According to Bell, because the Bell 429 did not 
encounter any unusual behavior (rotor mode/vibration) during the test points with the 
extended recovery time, the pilots did not receive negative feedback on the recovery 
time. 

Human Performance Research and References

Studies indicate that visual acuity is negatively affected by vertical vibration, particularly 
in the 5- to 7-Hz frequency range (Lewis and Griffin 1980a; Lewis and Griffin 1980b). 
Results indicated that reading speed and accuracy degraded for amplitudes as low as 0.1 
G (McLeod and Griffin 1989; Griffin and Hayward 1994). Further studies show that 
visual performance decreases with increasing vibration amplitude (Shoenberger 1972; 
Griffin 1975; Griffin 2012). 

Research suggests that performance degrades in the presence of vibration and is 
particularly poor in the 6-Hz range as limb motion can be greater than input amplitudes 
at that frequency (Moseley and Griffin 1986; Collins 1973; Griffin and Hayward 1994; 
McLeod and Griffin 1986; Crossland and Lloyd 1993; Holcombe and Holcombe 1997; 
Wertheim et. al. 1995). Limb motion is also more complex given the coupled dynamics 
of the human body where acceleration in a single axis could result in limb motion in all 
six axes (McLeod and Griffin 1986; Griffin 2012; Paddan and Griffin 1988).

Collins, A. M. 1973. "Decrements in tracking and visual performance during vibration." 
Human Factors 15 (4): 379-393.



Crossland, P., and A. R. J. M. Lloyd. 1993. "Experiments to quantify the effects of ship 
motions on crew task performance – Phase I, motion induced interruptions and motion 
induced fatigue." Technical Report DRA/AWMH/TR/93025. Farnborough, UK: 
Defence Research Agency.

Griffin, M. J. 1975. "Levels of whole-body vibration affecting human vision." Aviation, 
Space, and Environmental Medicine 46 (8): 1033-1040.

Griffin M. J. and R. A. Hayward. 1994. "Effects of horizontal whole-body vibration on 
reading." Applied Ergonomics 199 25 (3): 165-169.

Griffin, M. J. 2012. Handbook of Human Vibration. Academic Press.

Holcombe, S. and F. D. Holcombe. 1997. "Motion effects on cognitive performance." 
Experiments at the Naval Biodynamics Laboratory, 1993-1994. CRDKNSW-HD-1423-
02 Carderock Division, Naval Surface Warfare Center.

Lewis, C. H. and M. J. Griffin. 1980a. "Predicting the effects of vibration frequency and 
axis, and seating conditions on the reading of numerical displays." Ergonomics 23 (5): 
485-501.

Lewis, C. H. and M. J. Griffin. 1980b. "Predicting the effects of vertical vibration 
frequency, combinations of frequencies and viewing distance on the reading of numeric 
displays." Journal of Sound and Vibration 70 (3): 355-377.

McLeod, R. W. and M. J. Griffin. 1989. "Review of the effects of translational whole-
body vibration on continuous manual control performance." Journal of Sound and 
Vibration 133 (1): 55-115.

McLeod, R. W. and M. J. Griffin. 1986. A Design Guide of Visual Displays and Manual 
Tasks in Vibration Environments. Part II: Manual Tasks. ISVR Technical Report no. 
134.

Moseley, M. J. and M. J. Griffin. 1986. A Design Guide for Visual Displays and Manual 
Tasks in Vibration Environments. Part I: Visual Displays. ISVR Technical Report no. 
133

Paddan, G. S. and M. J. Griffin. 1988. "The transmission of translational seat vibration 
to the head—II. Horizontal seat vibration." Journal of Biomechanics 21 (3): 199-206.

Shoenberger, R. W. 1972. "Human response to whole-body vibration." Perceptual and 
Motor Skills 34: 127-160.

Wertheim, A. H., R. Heus, and J. Kistemaker. 1995. "Human energy expenditure, task 
performance and sea sickness during simulated ship movements." Report TNO-TM 
1995-C29. TNO Human Factors Research Institute, Soesterberg, The Netherlands.

 
 



 
 



Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge John W Lovell Adopted 01/16/2018
(IIC): Date:

Additional Participating David Gridley; GE Aviation; Lynn, MA
Persons: William Randall; Bell Helicopter; Arlington, TX

Eric West; Federal Aviation Administration; Washington DC, DC

Publish Date: 01/16/2018

Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.

Investigation Docket:  http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=  93553

 
 



Bell 525 Relentless Prototype N525TA Fatal Flight Test Accident
NTSB Final Report Issued 16 Jan 2018 – see below in red for a detailed 
summary and links
On 6 July 2016, Bell Helicopter lost the first prototype Bell 525 Relentless super-

medium helicopter in a flight test accident in Texas.  Both test pilots on-board were 

killed.

B525 FTV1 N525TA Accident Site (Credit: NTSB)

N525TA, Flight Test Vehicle (FTV) 1 was undertaking flight tests, accompanied by a 

Bell 429 chase helicopter.  Bell issued the following statement:

On July 6, 2016, a Bell 525 was involved in an accident while conducting developmental 

flight test operations south of our Xworx facility in Arlington, Texas. Unfortunately, the 

accident resulted in a loss of two crew members. This is a devastating day for Bell 

Helicopter. We are deeply saddened by the loss of our teammates and have reached out to  



their families to offer our support. Bell Helicopter representatives are onsite to assess the 

situation and provide any assistance to local, state, and federal authorities. At this time 

we ask for your understanding as we work through all of the details. We will continue to 

provide updates as more information becomes available.

TV news footage shows most of the wreckage in one location, where a post crash fire 

occurred.  Initial reports suggested the helicopter may have hit a power line but 

these appear to have been discounted.

However, the rear part of the tail boom and at least one main rotor blade appears to 

have fallen some distance away (some press reports suggest around 500m).

It has been reported that:

Flightradar24 records show the helicopter departing Arlington at 10:39 LT (15:39 UTC). It 

proceeded to the south were it flew pattern at altitudes between 2000 and 3000 feet. Last 

data point is at 1975 feet, at a speed of 199 kts*at 11:47 hours.

*Groundspeed.  Unconfirmed reports suggest a 20 kts headwind.

One of the test pilots has been identified as former US Marine Jason Grogan.

UPDATE 14 July 2016: The other has been identified asanother ex-USMC test pilot, Erik 

Boyce.



UPDATE 19 July 2016: It is reported by Jim McKenna on Aviation Today that:

The NTSB team is led by Investigator-in-Charge [IIC]  John Lovell and includes [Chihoon] 

‘Chich’ Shin, who worked for the U.S. Navy as a helicopter transmissions systems engineer 

before joining the safety board in 2012, and Van McKinney, a helicopter specialist for the 

board. Their work is being supported by investigators from the FAA, Bell and General 

Electric  (which makes the 525’s two CT7-2F1 engines).
Investigators are assessing the data in the telemetry from the 525 for information about 
the accident flight and previous flight tests of the aircraft. The NTSB retrieved a flight test  
recorder from the wreckage and sent to its Washington recorder lab for readout. The 
safety board described the recorder as being in good condition. But the NTSB has declined 
to say whether it has retrieved any data from that recorder.
Investigators also have interviewed the chase pilots…



UPDATE 22 July 2016: Bell 525 flight tests remain suspended but parent 
company Textron‘s CEO Scott Donnelly says Textron “remains committed to the Bell 
525 programme and we’ll work to ensure the aircraft will be a safe, reliable and high-
performance helicopter”.
UPDATE 25 July 2016: In a further report Jim McKenna of Aviation Today quotes the 
NTSB IIC as saying the aircraft was on a test of One Engine Inoperative (OEI) handling 
approaching Vne (Velocity Never Exceed), when Main Rotor Speed dropped 
“significantly”, main rotor blades “move out of plane” and apparently striking both 
nose and tail boom.
UPDATE 4 August 2016: The NTSB issue a very brief preliminary report:
On July 6, 2016, about 1148 central daylight time, an experimental Bell 525 helicopter, 
N525TA, broke up inflight and impacted terrain near Italy, Texas. The two pilots onboard 
were fatally injured and the helicopter was destroyed. The flight originated from 
Arlington, Texas, as a developmental flight test and was conducted under the provisions 
of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident.
AINonline report a TV new helicopter pilot who flew over the accident site shortly 
after the accident saying he saw:
…dozens of pieces of main rotor blade scattered quite some distance from the main crash 
site. We saw one entire main rotor blade that had been mangled, but you could see the 
attaching hardware, and in other places we found two- and three-foot sections of main 
rotor blades. That [rotor blade] debris field was over a quarter mile [behind] the impact 
site[on both ides of the flightpath].
UPDATE 1 November 2016: Bell  has started final assembly of the first four production 
525s.  Larry Thimmesch, vice-president of 525 sales and business 
development says “There is a tremendous amount of activity on the programme to 
get ready for [a resumption of test flying]“, though did not suggest when that might 
be.  Thimmesch also refrained from speculating on any revisions to the certification 
date, “having previously hinted that this may push into 2018″.
UPDATE 4 November 2016: Bell 525 Will Certify with Four Test Aircraft
UPDATE 26 January 2017: It is reported that a flight test resumption is close. 
CEO Scott Donnelly said:
We have a team working very hard to try to get that aircraft back into the flight-test 
program here in the early part of this year.   I think we’re getting close.
UPDATE 6 March 2017: Bell Helicopter is preparing the next Relentless flight test 
helicopter (aircraft 003) for its first flight and resumption of the 525 flight test 
program.
Last December, Bell applied for an extension to the 525 type certificate program because 
the initial application expired at the end of 2016. “That extension just took us through the 
end of 2018,” he said, “so somewhere in that timeframe is our objective to certify the 
aircraft, and we’ll come out with more information on that when we have that full flight 
test plan.”



Bell decided not to build another test aircraft after the accident, so four will be used to 
finish the flight test program.

Aircraft 003 is Bell’s third development 525, and in early February this helicopter was on 

its way to undergo pylon pull and control system stiffness or proof testing. The latter tests  

are done to calibrate aircraft systems to flight test instrumentation, he explained, “so 

when we see instrumentation through our telemetry lab we know exactly what’s 

happening on the aircraft.” The pull testing involves connecting devices to the blade 

attach fittings on the main rotor hub, and these also validate actuation against test 

instruments. Similar tests are underway on the tailrotor system.

Alongside physical testing of the 525s in preparation for return to flight, Bell engineers 

have been running ongoing tests in the Relentless Advanced Systems Integration Lab 

(RASIL) at the Bell XworX facility in Arlington, Texas.

Bell holds “around 80” letters of intent for the 525…

UPDATE 9 March 2017: 525 Probe Points to Vibration, Frequency Response in Fatal 

Crash

Three people briefed on the investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board 

have told R&WI data analysis of a recovered flight-test recorder, telemetry from the 

accident aircraft and simulations conducted by Bell for the safety board indicate the onset  

of the vibration and the subsequent response by the No. 1 Relentless prototype.

The three individuals said that Bell had not seen the vibration frequency resonance 

condition on any previous 525 flight.

Analysis of the aircraft’s cockpit voice recorder was not possible because the device was 

not powered during the July 6, 2016, test flight. One official said FAA guidance permits 

a CVR to be unpowered during a test flight.

In regard to its 525 investigation, the NTSB told R&WI Feb. 22 that “we hope to complete 

it this summer.”



UPDATE 5 June 2017: Bell looks to resume 525 flights as crash anniversary nears

Speaking on a pre-Paris air show media call, Bell chief executive Mitch Snyder said:

“We are preparing for flight and expect to be in the air in the near term,” he says, 

although declines to offer a specific timeline. Ground runs are also yet to take place, he 

admits.

Snyder says its “current plan” is to obtain US Federal Aviation Administration in late 2018, 

leading to first delivery early the following year.

UPDATE 7 July 2017: Flight testing resumes 366 days after the accident: Bell 525 

Relentless resumes flight test program
NTSB Final Report
UPDATE 16 January 2018: The NTSB report is released. The NTSB say:

Between May 15, 2015, and the date of the accident, July 6, 2016, 184 flight test events had  

been completed. Within the previous 60 days prior to the accident, 32 test events were 

completed, involving approximately 47 flights, totalling 43.6 flight hours. Within the 

previous 30 days, 16 test events were completed, involving approximately 30 flights, 

totalling 26.1 flight hours.

The Accident Flight (Test 184)
The purpose of Test 184 was to do:

1. Heavy forward center of gravity (CG) GE (General Electric) engine loads and 
vibrations at 100% maximum continuous power evaluation.

2. Heavy forward CG longitudinal roll spot-check
3. 2-to-1 Simulated Engine Failures
4. Run-on landings up to 60 knots

Two hazards had been identified for the next flight:



The NTSB say:

At 1036 the helicopter departed for the test area followed by the chase helicopter. All the 

maneuvers leading up the accident maneuver were performed around 4,000 feet density 

altitude (DA), approximately 1,800 feet above ground level (agl).

Once in the test area the crew determined the helicopter’s maximum level flight airspeed 

(Vh) to be 148 KCAS . The crew then performed steady heading side slips at 0.7Vh followed 

by level turns at 0.9Vh, up to 60° angle of bank.

The flight crew then prepared for the two-engine to one-engine tests where One-engine 

Inoperative Training Mode (OEI) software simulates the loss of power from one-engine by 

reducing the power output of both engines to a preset value based on flight conditions 

that was representative of the power one-engine would provide. The OEI power value was 

determined by the flight test engineers and relayed to the pilots. Once OEI training mode 

is engaged and a loss of power is simulated the pilot monitors rotor speed (Nr) and 

intentionally delays his response by about 1 second before recovering from the maneuver 

by lowering the collective (reducing power demanded by the rotor).



One critical parameter monitored for this test is the amount of rotor rotational speed 

decay that occurs between the sudden loss of engine power and the pilot’s control inputs 

to recover. The first 3 data points were performed in level flight at 120 KCAS, 131 KCAS, 

and 145 KCAS, all of which resulted in rotor RPM decay of 3-7%. The remaining test points 

required the helicopter to be an a shallow descent in order to achieve the required 

airspeed and at the target density altitude of 4,000 feet. The following data points were 

performed 155 KCAS, 159 KCAS, 158 KCAS, 165 KCAS, and 175 KCAS, all which resulted in a 

rotor decay of 5-10%.

About 1148, the final test [test point 51] was performed at 185 KTAS, which was the 

helicopter’s never-to-exceed speed (Vne) at the time of the test flight; the set up and entry  

were the same as the previous tests. OEI was engaged, and Nr drooped to about 91% 

within 1.5 seconds. The Nr decay was stopped by the pilot’s reduction of collective, and Nr 

began to recover and leveled out around 92%. The crew stopped lowering the collective at 

the 58% collective stick position. About 7 seconds after arresting the Nr decay (about 12 

seconds into the test), the structural dynamics engineer noticed increased engine 

vibrations, at which point he called “knock-it-off.” The test director radioed to the Bell 525 

pilots to “knock-it-off,” while other engineers in the telemetry room were receiving 

warnings and alerts and were reinforcing the “knock-it-off” call.



The crew of the chase helicopter, which was positioned about 100 ft above and on the 

right side of the Bell 525 about 3 to 4 rotor diameters away, heard the test director call 

“knock-it-off” about the same time they observed the 525′s rotor blades flying high and 

the rotor looking wobbly and slow. The chase helicopter [B429] crew radioed, “Hey, you’re 

flapping pretty good,” but the 525 pilots did not respond. About 21 seconds into the test, 

the main rotor severed the tail boom, and the telemetry signal was lost. The chase 

helicopter crew observed the helicopter’s tail and fuselage jack-knife and debris separate 



from the helicopter. The chase helicopter crew radioed to the test director, “We’ve had a 

major accident,” and landed near the wreckage to attempt assistance.

Crew
The NTSB final report only lists the crews civil flying experience, excluding their 

military experience (which has confused some readers).  Information in the public 

docket states the pilot had 2,898.9 total flight hours (2,744.6 rotary) and the co-pilot 

3,957.5 total flight hours (2,589.4 rotary).

Cockpit of Bell 525 FTV2 N525BK (Credit: NTSB)

OEI Training Mode, Instrumentation and Warning
The OEI special training mode that Bell used for the accident flight test did not 

incorporate an automatic disengagement of OEI training mode for low Nr. Bell modified 

the production version of OEI training mode software, originally created by GE, to 

eliminate a safeguard that automatically exited the OEI training mode when Nr fell below  

90%. According to Bell, automatic disengagement at 90% Nr was not low enough to allow 



development and demonstration of OEI recovery across the flight envelope during testing,  

and a lower Nr value for automatic disengagement was deemed unnecessary due to the 

highly controlled test environment.

To manually exit OEI training mode, the pilot could (1) press the engine fail button on the 

GTC (the same button used to engage OEI training mode), (2) exit the OEI training page on  

the GTC (using the BACK button), or (3) move the COSIF switch to a position other than 

“Fly” and then return the switch to “Fly.”

The Bell 525 lead test pilot indicated in a postaccident interview that the options to exit 

OEI training mode were not discussed formally with all the test pilots but were specifically  

discussed with the accident test pilot. Disengaging OEI training mode would make both 

engines available to provide full power to restore the reference Nr to 100% if the rotor 

was in a drooped state.

In the accident helicopter, the aural tone annunciated for “ROTOR RPM LO” was a master 

warning tone that was not unique to low Nr and was associated with at least 21 other 

warning messages. The Bell 525 lead test pilot indicated that, during the experimental 

flight test, many of the aural messages were still under development; the tones had been 

selected but not implemented.

The test team determined that having some aural indication for low Nr was sufficient for 

development flight testing. He stated that the accident crew had flown OEI tests 

previously and had conducted autorotation testing with test conditions that would likely 

have triggered the low Nr warning. He also stated that the crew was likely exposed to the 

master warning for low Nr during flight testing and in the Relentless Advanced Systems 

Integration Laboratory (RASIL).

The NTSB also note that:



The PSI displayed Nr as a vertical scale (center bar in lower right indicator) when Nr was 

above 90%:

If Nr dropped below 90%, the display changed to an analog needle that displayed a green 

arc for Nr between 100 and 90%, a yellow arc for Nr between 86 and 89% Nr, and a red arc 

below 86% Nr:

The visual cues available to the crew included the crew alerting system (CAS) text “ROTOR 

RPM LO,” PSI numeric display, warning flag, warning push button annunciator (PBA), and 

the change of the PSI Nr display from a bar to an arc. [PFD example below]



The CAS text, warning flag, and warning PBA would have been flashing until 

acknowledged by the crew. Because the telemetry did not record crew button presses, it is  

not possible to know if the crew acknowledged these alerts.

In addition, the change of the Nr display on the PSI [Power Situation Indicator] from bar 

to arc may have been recognizable; however, reading of the needle would likely not have 

been possible in the vibration environment.

Thus, the crew was likely unable to read visual information that provided specific low Nr 

information, although they may have had a generalized cue that Nr was low.

Studies indicate that visual acuity is negatively affected by vertical vibration, particularly 

in the 5- to 7-Hz frequency range (Lewis and Griffin 1980a; Lewis and Griffin 1980b). 

Results indicated that reading speed and accuracy degraded for amplitudes as low as 0.1 

G (McLeod and Griffin 1989; Griffin and Hayward 1994). Further studies show that visual 

performance decreases with increasing vibration amplitude (Shoenberger 1972; Griffin 

1975; Griffin 2012). {Full references are at the foot of the final report]

Analysis



While at that high airspeed test point, at a heavy gross weight (approximately 9t) and 

with a forward centre of gravity (CG), a sustained low rotor RPM had allowed high 

vibrations to develop. This led to adverse control inputs that reduced the rotor RPM 

to a critical level causing high levels of main rotor blade flapping.  A near full aft 

cyclic control input led the main rotor severing the tail boom.

Analysis showed components interacted in closed-loop manner: A main rotor scissor 

vibration mode transmitted vibrations into the airframe via the main rotor mast. In 

this mode, the lead-lag movement of the blades acts in such a way that adjacent 

blades move together and apart like scissors.

Scissor Mode (Credit: Bell Helicopter via NTSB)

In forward flight this produces a fore-aft motion of the main rotor mast.  The main 

rotor scissors mode had been encountered in two previous tests at around 6.7Hz. 

During the accident flight this was transmitted at, or close to, 6Hz through the 

airframe, including to the pilot seat and forward cabin. These vibrations were passed 

to the control sticks through what is termed “an unintentional biomechanical 

response”. The NTSB explain that:



Biomechanical feedback…refers to unintentional control inputs resulting from 

involuntary pilot limb motions caused by vehicle accelerations. Biomechanical  feedback is  

usually addressed using control friction and control input filtering.

The accident helicopter did not have a filter on the collective control to address 

biomechanical feedback. Bell engineers stated that past experience had never shown a 

need for filtering the collective control. Filters did exist in the cyclic control to address 

pitch and roll rates in addition to biomechanical feedback.

The vertical vibration amplitude at the pilot seat rose above 1 G from 10 seconds into the 

test until the end of the test, with peaks as high as about 3 G.

The vibration was also sensed by the Attitude Heading Reference System (AHRS), and 

a matching 6 Hz signal was passed to the flight control system. The combined 6 Hz 

biomechanical and AHRS inputs served as “unanticipated excitation amplifiers of the 

main rotor scissors mode”.

Debris of B525 N525TA (Credit: NTSB)

Organisation, Safety Management System (SMS) and Safety Culture



The NTSB explain that:

The chief engineer for the Bell 525 program was responsible for all 525 testing, 

certification activity, and structures (drive, rotor, and airframe). Six discipline areas 

reported to the chief engineer: airframe engineering, systems engineering and 

certification, rotors engineering and component test, drive systems, flight technology, 

and flight test/experimental test and evaluation.

The 525 program flight test integrated product team (IPT) consisted of 12 flight test 

engineers and 3 instrumentation engineers. Six of the 12 flight test pilots in Bell’s 

experimental test and evaluation department were assigned to support the 525 program.

The chief engineer worked closely with the air vehicle IPT; the air vehicle lead was 

responsible for flight control system and software, control laws, avionics, electrical 

system, propulsion, hydraulic system, fuel system, and environmental controls.

The flight test monitoring was conducted through a dedicated telemetry room (TM) 

located at Bell Plant 6, Arlington, Texas. This room received the telemetry data from the 

helicopter and distributed that data in real time to nine flight test engineer stations…as 

follows: Test Director, Rotor Dynamics, Control Laws (CLAWs), IADS manager, Structural 

Dynamics, Handling Qualities, Data Operations, and the Telemetry Room Operator.



 

The Test Director is the only flight test engineer that communicates with the helicopter 

via voice radio communications.

The chase helicopter was in radio communications with the test helicopter and the Test 

Director.

All flight test engineers can communicate with each other through a voice loop system 

internal to the telemetry room. The Test Director’s duties are to supervise and direct the 

conduct of the test being performed.

Bell say they were “in the process of developing a Safety Management System as part 

of the FAA Design and Manufacturing Safety Management System (D&M SMS) Pilot 

Project” at the time of the accident.  They say:

 The tools of an SMS undergoing implementation at the time of the accident were the Just 

Culture System, the Confidential Reporting System and the Flight Risk Assessment Tool 

(FRAT). The Just Culture Process is not germane to this accident and the Confidential 



Reporting Tool was not implemented at the time… At the time of the accident Bell was in 

the final stages of implementing a FRAT…

The NTSB say:

In December 2015, the flight test group had put in place a personal risk assessment tool 

that each pilot could complete before flying. Pilots were encouraged to fill out the risk 

assessment every day; it was not mandatory. The accident pilots did not have a risk 

assessment on file for the day of the accident.

The NTSB had made recommendations on flight test SMS after the 

crash of Gulfstream  GVI (G650)  N652GD at Roswell, New Mexico, on 2 April 2011.  In 

the Gulfstream case:

The NTSB determines that the probable cause of this accident was an aerodynamic stall 

and subsequent uncommanded roll during an OEI takeoff flight test, which were the result  

of (1) Gulfstream’s failure to properly develop and validate takeoff speeds for the flight 

tests and recognize and correct the V2 error during previous G650 flight tests, (2) the G650  

flight test team’s persistent and increasingly aggressive attempts to achieve V2 speeds 

that were erroneously low, and (3) Gulfstream’s inadequate investigation of previous G650  

uncommanded roll events, which indicated that the company’s estimated stall AOA while 

the airplane was in ground effect was too high.

Contributing to the accident was Gulfstream’s failure to effectively manage the G650 

flight test program by pursuing an aggressive program schedule without ensuring that 

the roles and responsibilities of team members had been appropriately defined and 

implemented, engineering processes had received sufficient technical planning and 

oversight, potential hazards had been fully identified, and appropriate risk controls had 

been implemented and were functioning as intended.



According to NTSB interviews:

…Bell design and test engineers described the pace of the Bell 525 program at the time of 

the accident as “fast but not unreasonably.” Personnel described specific pressure felt 

during the time of the first flight test in Amarillo, TX in mid-2015. When personnel 

supported were supporting first flight, they commonly worked 7 days per week and logged  

between 60-70 hours of work per week. Many described morale to be low during the first 

flight.

Once the flight test program moved back to Arlington, TX in September 2015, the pace 

slowed and many reported improved morale. At the time of the accident, design and test 

engineers reported working about 10 hours overtime per week on average. Original 

certification for the Bell 525 was scheduled for mid-2016, but the program had faced 

various setbacks during initial design.

Most engineers interviewed stated that they had not received undue pressure from 

management to complete tasks. No monetary incentives (outside of overtime pay) was 

provided to employees, and employees were not concerned about negative consequences 

when raising concerns. Employees described Bell’s safety culture as “good.” In particular 

when the CEO (at the time of first flight) took his position approximately 4-5 years prior, 

he stressed safety during meetings and specifically transformed the shop floor.

Suggested improvements to Bell’s safety culture made by employees included:
 Focusing on what was best for the pilots and helicopter during flight test as 

opposed to focusing on what will get to certification the fastest
 Some employees being able to more comfortably speak up with management
 Having a single point of contact for the project
 Having a known process for bringing concerns forward
 Addressing that life cycles for helicopters were long and that the knowledge 

captured in best practices may not apply when the helicopter was so different 
from previous helicopters.



Angled cut line at the forward end of the aft section of the tail boom of Bell 525 FTV1 N525TA (Credit: GE 
Aviation via NTSB)

NTSB Probable Cause
The NTSB determined the probable cause was determined to be:

A severe vibration of the helicopter that led to the crew’s inability to maintain sufficient 

rotor rotation speed (Nr), leading to excessive main rotor blade flapping, subsequent 

main rotor blade contact with the tail boom, and the resultant in-flight breakup.

Contributing to the severity and sustainment of the vibration, which was not predicted 

during development, were (1) the collective biomechanical feedback and (2) the attitude 

and heading reference system response, both of which occurred due to the lack of 

protections in the flight control laws against the sustainment and growth of adverse 

feedback loops when the 6-hertz airframe vibration initiated.

Contributing to the crew’s inability to maintain sufficient Nr in the severe vibration 

environment were (1) the lack of an automated safeguard in the modified one-engine-

inoperative software used during flight testing to exit at a critical Nr threshold and (2) the  

lack of distinct and unambiguous cues for low Nr.

NTSB Safety Recommendations
Two safety recommendations were raised:



 To the Flight Test Safety Committee: Develop and issue guidance for the use of 
recording devices for parametric data, cockpit audio, and cockpit images 
during experimental flight test activities. (A-18-1)

 To Bell Helicopter Textron: Provide information about the lessons learned from 
the July 6, 2016, accident specific to the benefits of recording devices for 
parametric data, cockpit audio, and cockpit images during experimental flight 
test activities to interested manufacturers, flight test industry groups, and 
other appropriate parties. (A-18-2)

Safety Actions by Bell
Since the accident Bell has:

 designed a software filter for the collective control law to dampen 
biomechanical feedback due to oscillatory control inputs as the frequency of 
control input increases;

 adjusted the aero-servo-elastic model with a correlation factor to incorporate 
the aerodynamic effects observed during flight test and the accident test to 
preclude such occurrences seen in the accident flight’s telemetry data;

 performed shake tests with pilots using a side-stick collective to determine 
and incorporate the transfer function for human biomechanical feedback;

 modified the AHRS software filters to further reduce the AHRS response to a 6-
Hz airframe vibration;

 indicated that, for the accident helicopter model, cockpit audio is now being 
recorded by an onboard CVFDR, and communications to and from the ground 
monitoring station are recorded by the CVFDR and the telemetry system 
during all flights (cockpit video is also being recorded by the instrumentation 
system and archived at the ground station);

 issued a company-wide business directive to ensure that cockpit audio is 
recorded during all telemetered flight test activities across all flight test sites;

 plans to conduct flight testing in the 95% to 100% range of Nr in an OEI 
condition;

 plans to implement, for the accident helicopter model, the unique low Nr aural 
tone in their test aircraft, and a software update that includes a larger font 
size for the Nr numeric display on the PSI;

 plans to implement a separate PBA specifically for low Nr and is incorporating 
more salient cues into the tactile cueing system;



 plans to incorporate the automatic termination of OEI training mode should 
Nr fall below a certain limit; and

 incorporated a safety officer for the accident helicopter model test program 
who will have dedicated safety-related responsibilities.

Key Public Docker Reports
The public docket contains 48 attachments of over 270 pages.  Amongst the most 

useful documents are:
 Operations
 Aircraft performance (including vibration)
 Human performance
 Airworthiness (mainly concerns the wreckage analysis)
 Bell party submission

A small number of minor additions may be made to this summary in the next few 

days.

Other Background on the B525 Program
FTV1s first flight took place at Amarillo, Texas on 1 July 2015.



At the time of the accident three prototypes had flown.

We have previously discussed the Fly by wire (FBW) system on the B525.

UPDATE 1 March 2018: Bristow signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) at 

Heli-Expo 2018 with the rebranded Bell to explore the 525’s possible use in the search 

and rescue (SAR) role.
Prior Main Rotor Flying Test Bed Accident
This is not the first accident to hit the 525 programme.  On 7 August 2012 

Bell 214ST N409SB, modified as a flying test bed for the B525 five bladed main rotor, was 

lost in Ellis County, Texas.  Both crew members survived.

In that case the US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) determined that the 

probable cause was:



Maintenance personnel’s failure to properly torque the retaining nut and install the cotter pin 

that secured the helicopter’s [original 2 bladed B214ST] tail rotor counterweight bellcrank.

Contributing to the accident was the lack of detailed maintenance records that documented 

previous maintenance actions.



Fatal US HAA Accident: One Engine was Failing but Serviceable Engine 
Shutdown (Air Methods / Duke Life Flight, Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / 
EC145 N146DU, North Carolina)
On 8 September 2017 Air Methods Corp (AMC) helicopter air ambulance (HAA) Airbus 

Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU, operated for  Duke   Life Flight (DLF), crashed in 

a field close to an Amazon wind farm at Belvidere near Hertford, North Carolina.

The helicopter was making a daytime 130 nm inter-hospital transfer from Sentara 

 Albemarle   Medical Center, Elizabeth City, NC for the  Duke University   North 

Heliport in Durham, NC.  The 4 occupants (pilot, two medical personnel and patient) were 

killed.

The S National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) concluded this was a type of human 

factors related accident that has been termed a Propulsion System Malfunction + 

Inappropriate Crew Response (PSM+ICR) accident.

Wreckage of Air Methods / Duke Life Flight, Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU near Hertford, NC 
(Credit: NTSB)

The Accident
The NTSB explain in their safety investigation report (issued in late January 2021), that 

during the flight:



…the No. 2 [Safran Helicopter Engines   Arrie l 1E2 turboshaft] engine experienced a bearing 

seizure; the engine continued to run.   It is likely that the pilot then errantly shutdown the No. 1 

engine and continued to fly for a brief period utilizing the No. 2 engine.

Several witnesses reported smoke trailing behind the helicopter.

It is likely that the No. 2 engine subsequently lost all power.

The helicopter  then impacted a shallow turf drainage pathway between fields of tall grass on a 

farm, and a postcrash fire ensued, which consumed most of the helicopter structure.

The lack of any ground scars leading toward or away from the main wreckage indicated that the  

helicopter was in a near-vertical descent before impacting the ground. One rotor blade was 

found intact  [and] consistent with little or no rotation of the main rotor system.

Wreckage of Air Methods / Duke Life Flight, Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU near Hertford, NC (Credit:  
NTSB)

The NTSB Safety Investigation
The helicopter’s Vehicle and Engine Multifunction Display (VEMD) was found in the 

wreckage, but no usable data were recovered because of the thermal damage to the non-



volatile memory chip. The Honeywell MK XXI Helicopter Terrain Awareness System (HTAWS) 

was also destroyed in the fire.

The helicopter was equipped with a North Flight Data Systems  OuterLink Voice and Video 

Recorder…   The device’s memory card was not damaged, but no usable data could be retrieved,  

including recordings of  the accident flight.

The manufacturer of the device indicated that its internal replaceable battery might have 

expired, which would have prevented new data from being properly stored on the memory card.

NTSB don’t examine the maintenance or ay flight data monitoring (FDM) conducted by AMC 

on the system.  The aircraft was not fitted with nor required to carry a crashworthy 

recorder.  NTSB note that:

The helicopter was equipped with a Honeywell Sky Connect Tracker II system that transmitted 

data to the DLF communications center and the [AMC Operational Control Center] OCC [in 

Greenwood Village, Colorado].

At the time of the accident, AMC had the Sky Connect Tracker II system configured for data 

transmissions emitting from the helicopter every 120 seconds.   [This was not] a sufficient 

frequency to determine the helicopter’s track, speed, and descent profile before impact.    [I]t is 

possible that the pilot was attempting an emergency OEI landing when the loss of power in the 

No. 2 engine occurred.

[T]he helicopter might have been at an altitude that was too low and/or an airspeed that was 

too slow to allow for a successful autorotative landing when the loss of power in  the No. 2 

engine occurred.

A reconstruction of witness statements using the innovative Immersive Witness Interview 

application from IWI indicated that “that the forward speed almost completely consumed 

before the vertical descent started” and “the final, almost vertical descent, started at about 



500 ft AGL.  This means initiation of an autorotation would have been possible at this 

point.”
The NTSB Safety Investigation: The Engines
Consistent with a deliberate shutdown of the No. 1 engine:

Examination of the wreckage at the accident site revealed that the No. 1 engine twist-grip 

throttle control in the cockpit was found in the OFF position.

No technical issue was identified with the No. 1 engine that would have necessitated it to 

be shut down.  It was noted that excess shrink tubing material was found obstructing the 

ports in the No. 1 engine 3-way deck fitting (part of the aircraft oil drain system).

Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 3-Way Drain Fitting Highlighted (Credit: Airbus via NTSB)

Shrink tubing is allowed to be used on the deck fitting nipples before the drain tubes are 

attached.

Since the accident Airbus has introduced a requirement for ultrasonic cleaning of the 3-way 

union every 400 flying hours.

Examination of the No. 2 engine determined the gas generator shaft rear bearing was 

seized and damaged.  Such a failure would result in smoke from the rear of the engine 



(although due to the damaged sustained post-impact, NTSB were unable to conclusively 

determine if an engine bay fire had occurred prior to impact).  A bearing deterioration 

would also be consistent with progressive deflection of the gas generator spool and 

‘grooves’ observed to have been cut in labyrinth seals by the gas generator.

Safran Helicopter Engines (formerly Turbomeca) Arriel 1E2 Turboshaft Engine: Gas generator Rear Bearing 
Highlighted (Credit: Safran HE via NTSB)

Arriel 1E2 Rear Bearings from Air Methods / Duke Life Flight Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU (Credit: 
Safran HE via NTSB)



Coking was eliminated as a potential cause (though it had been suggested in a November 

2017 FAA SAIB).

The NTSB also say that:

The No. 2 engine’s oil return strainer/chip detector was partially obstructed with crystalline 

carbon-like and metallic debris, and debris was found downstream of the strainer in the oil 

pump inlet  [downstream of]  the rear bearing housing.   The No. 2 engine 3-way deck fitting was 

unobstructed; however, it had been exposed to significant heat that could have decomposed the 

elastomeric tubing and any excess shrink tubing material, if it had been present…

Engine spectrometric oil analysis program (SOAP) data from the 9 months preceding the 

accident detected contaminant levels in the No. 2 engine oil that were “considerably 

higher” than in the No. 1 engine albeit within limits.

SOAP Data for Safran Arriel 1E2 Engines of Air Methods

 
/ Duke Life Flight, Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU (Credit: NTSB)



NTSB opine that trend monitoring might have detected bearing wear earlier, although they 

do note AMC did not record oil quantity added which would prevent accurate SOAP 

trending.  Since the accident Air Methods have changes their SOAP procedures and now 

one engineer reviews all reports.

Safran, in an extensive 130-page report, identified three potential contributory factors to 

the bearing failure: engine mishandling during engine removal / maintenance 305 hours 

earlier, oil contamination and oil quality.  However, ultimately the NTSB concluded that:

The root cause of the No. 2 engine’s bearing failure could not be determined due to the damage 

it sustained while continuing to operate before impact, and due to impact and subsequent post-

crash fire damage.

The NTSB Safety Investigation: Pilot Response to Engine Failure
The lack of recorded flight data hampered the NTSB’s ability to precisely determine the 

sequence of events and the indications to the pilot.

It is likely that metallic debris from the No. 2 gas generator rear bearing 

would have resulted in an ENG CHIP message on the helicopter’s  Caution and   Advisory 

Display (CAD) (marked as the ‘Warning Unit’ below).



Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 Instrument Panel (Credit: Airbus via NTSB)

The helicopter’s flight manual  (FLM) listed two procedures for engine chip detection: either 

shut down the affected engine or slowly reduce power to idle on the affected engine and 

monitor the engine parameters. The second option was intended to allow the pilot to potentially 

use the affected engine during landing.

A rear bearing deterioration would result in an increasing turbine outlet temperature (TOT) 

as the wear on blades and seals reduced turbine performance forcing the engine to run 

hotter.

This likely triggered an engine parameter discrepancy (ENG PA DIS) caution message that would 

have appeared in both the left (engine 1) and right (engine 2) columns on the CAD, indicating 

that a discrepancy was detected in one of the parameters between engine Nos. 1 and 2. The CAD  

message would not have indicated which parameter had a discrepancy; however, the affected 

parameter’s numeric value (TOT in this case) would change from white to yellow on the First 

Limit Indicator (FLI), described below.



The FLM procedure for the ENG PA DIS message was, “do not try and match needles, avoid using 

maximum power, compare the numeric values on the FLI to verify the affected parameter, and 

land as soon as practicable.” The FLM procedures did not request the pilot to shut down 

the engine.

Additional caution messages may have also appeared on the CAD. If a difference in 

torque between the two engines was detected at greater than 15%, a VAR NR caution message 

would appear in the center “MISC” column of the CAD, advising the pilot to manually match 

the engines’ torque values. If a difference in N1 between the two engines of greater that 10% 

was detected, the ENG SPLIT caution message would appear in both engine columns of the 

CAD. The FLM procedure for an ENG SPLIT caution message was to adjust the collective lever 

to one-engine inoperative (OEI) limits or below, turn off bleed air consumers, and analyze 

engine conditions.

The NTSB explain that the VMED is…

…an electronic display in the center of the helicopter’s instrument panel and is the pilot’s 

primary reference  for engine power management. The central focus on the VEMD is 

the FLI displaying an analogue indication (tachometer-like) of the limiting parameter associated  

with the helicopter engine primary limitations.



Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 First Level Indicator (FLI) Display (Credit: Airbus via NTSB)

The VEMD’s FLI presents a needle dial gauge (needle “I” is for the No. 1 engine, and needle “II” is 

for  the No. 2 engine) and digital numeric values for engine torque (TRQ), turbine outlet 

temperature (TOT), and gas generator rotational speed (N1) for each engine.



The FLI display concept is widely regarded as an extremely effective way to present the 

various limitations to flight crew in a concise and easily monitorable way.  As the name 

suggests the display shows the limit the helicopter is closest to first on the basis that if the 

aircraft is controlled within that limit all others will be respected.

This Airbus graphic provided to NTSB shows the expected FLI display before the No. 2 

engine failure became evident:

However, in this type of engine failure…

…the FLI needle for the No. 2 engine would have changed from indicating TRQ, to indicating TOT  

due to a sudden rise in TOT in the No. 2 engine. Such a switch would have been unusual, 

because the needles normally reflect TOT during engine start only. The change in the position of 

the No. 2 FLI needle would have resulted in a large split between both needles.



The No. 1 engine, functioning normally, would have continued to display TRQ.

In normal cruise flight, with the FLI needles both representing TRQ, a large split during 

cruise flight would indicate a difference in TRQ between the engines; thus, the pilot may 

have erroneously thought that the split was showing that the No. 1 engine was producing much 

less TRQ than the No. 2 engine, which might have contributed to his decision to shut down the 

No. 1 engine.

The NTSB note that the FLI highlights that the needle was now displaying TOT.  Engine gas 

generator speeds are also displayed, with main rotor speed, on the triple tachometer 

located just above the FLI.

Once the No. 1 engine was shut down:



The NTSB Investigation: The Pilot and AMC Training
The pilot was 51, had 4562 hours total experience, 1027 on type, and had been 

employed by AMC since August 2009.

He was the lead pilot and the safety officer at AMC’s [Johnston Regional Airport]  JNX base and 

an AMC maintenance test pilot in the BK117C2 helicopter.

He was also current and qualified on the twin-engine Airbus EC135 helicopter [with a similar 

cockpit display system], in which he had accrued 1,100 hours of total flight experience.

Before his employment with AMC, the pilot flew twin-engine Sikorsky UH-60 helicopters for 

the US Army, accruing about 2,300 flight hours, and the EC135 helicopter for another helicopter 

air ambulance provider.

The pilot’s coworkers and managers provided positive feedback about his performance. He 

was described as professional, well prepared, thorough, and team oriented, and he exhibited 

good pilot skills

The pilot had been type trained by Air Methods.  NTSB note that the circumstances of the 

failure encountered was not practised in their training programme.

AMC training records indicated that the pilot had completed all required training with no 

deficiencies.



However:

Recurrent training typically included autorotations, which were practiced to a power recovery at 

a 3-ft hover, but no autorotations were specifically documented in the pilot’s recurrent training 

records.

At the time of the accident, AMC did not have a BK117C2 simulator training program, which 

would allow for practice autorotations to touchdown.

The absence of simulator training also prevented practical training with a wide range of 

emergencies.  Disappointingly, NTSB investigation do not examine pilot training and its 

effecviveness further.
NTSB Probable Cause
A failure of the rear bearing in the No. 2 engine, which (1) created multiple and likely unexpected  

and confusing cockpit indications, resulting in the pilot’s improper diagnosis and subsequent 

erroneous shutdown of the No. 1 engine, and (2) the resulting degraded the performance of the 

No. 2 engine, until  it ultimately lost power. The complete loss of engine power likely occurred at 

an altitude and/or airspeed that was too low for the pilot to execute a successful emergency 

autorotative landing.



Wreckage of Air Methods / Duke Life Flight, Airbus Helicopters BK117C2 / EC145 N146DU near Hertford, NC 
(Credit: NTSB)

UPDATE 1 February 2021: Pilot in Duke Life Flight crash shut down the wrong engine, 

NTSB says
Propulsion System Malfunction – Inappropriate Crew Response (PSM+ICR)
A 1998 AIA/AECMA study, focused on fixed wing aircraft, coined the term Propulsion 

System Malfunction + Inappropriate Crew Response (PSM+ICR).

One of the most famous was the January 1989 British Midland Boeing 737-400 G-

OBME accident at Kegworth: British Midland Boeing 737-400 G-OBME Fatal Accident, 

Kegworth 8 January 1989.

The phenomenon predated both that study and Kegworth.  In 2019, we wrote Wrong 

Engine Shutdown Crash: But You Won’t Guess Which! on a January 1969, BUA BAC One-

Eleven accident to G-ASJJ in Milan.



On 4 February 2015 TransAsia Airways (TNA) ATR 72-600 B-22816, Flight GE235, crashed in 

Taipei with the loss of 43 lives.   About 36 seconds after takeoff the No 2 engine auto-

feathered and about 46 seconds later the No 1 engine no.1 was shut down (final report).

PSM+ICR remains topical: On 21 January 2021 the USAF release an AIB report on 

a fatal E-11A (Bombardier Global Express) accident in Afghanistan on 27 January 2020 after 

a Fan Blade Off event when a rapid diagnosis resulted in the serviceable engine being shut 

down.

UPDATE 1 February 2021: A similar past US helicopter air ambulance accident was Metro 

Aviation Agusta A109A Mk II N1QF near Ann Arbor, Michigan on 1 Decenber 1994, with 3 

fatalities.  The NTSB reported that:

Prior to the morning of the accident N1QF was designated as the standby helicopter; however, 

the primary helicopter was scheduled for maintenance on the day of the accident, therefore 

essential equipment had to be moved from the primary craft to N1QF.   Before the transfer could 

be accomplished, N1QF was required to prepare for dispatch on the accident flight.   What was 

later described by a witness as a “hasty dispatch,” necessitated a hurried departure to 

accomplish the transfer of equipment, complete a preflight,and other items necessary for a 

medical evacuation flight.

The flight departed at 1003 to fly from the airport to the near by hospital.  It crashed less 

than 4 minutes later.

Eyewitnesses observed the accident helicopter during the final few seconds of the flight.   Two 

witnesses stated that the helicopter was trailing smoke from the area of the engines.   One 

witness indicted that the helicopter was maneuvering just prior to the impact and that during 

the final descent which he described as “dropped like a stone,” it appeared the rotor blades were  

“not turning hardly at all.”   Witnesses reported that the helicopter was nearly silent just prior to 

ground impact and that there was no engine noise at all after impact.



The NTSB probable cause was:

The pilot’s failure  to obtain/maintain a successful autorotation.   Factors were: a loss of engine 

power of one engine for undetermined reasons, and the pilot’s shutdown of the wrong engine.



irbus Helicopters BK117C1 Impacts Sea, Scud Running off PNG (Tribal 
Aurora Helicopters, P2-TAH)
On 13 September 2019 Airbus Helicopters BK117C1 P2-TAH (formerly UK HEMS G-RESC), 

operated by Tribal Aurora Helicopters (TAH), was making an over sea VFR positioning flight 

from Buka to Tokua in Papua New Guinea (PNG), when it impacted the sea approximately 

2.7 nm SE of Silur.  The pilot was killed, but the passenger, a company engineer, was 

rescued.

Wreckage Recovered from Airbus BK117C1 P2-TAH of Tribal Aurora Helicopters After Water Impact Off PNG 
(Credit: PNG AIC)

The Accident Flight
The PNG Accident Investigation Commission (AIC) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued on 31 December 2020) that the 49-year-old pilot had c11,500 hours of flying 

experience, 300 on type. The pilot did not have a current IFR rating.

Early in the flight the helicopter deviated slightly from its intended track descended from 

2,540 ft to 1,333 ft. to avoid entering adverse weather.  The investigators determined that 



about 30 minutes later, at about 01:03 UTC (11:03 Local Time), the helicopter entered IMC.  

At that point the passenger recalled…

…the pilot revising the destination on the GPS  from Tokua to a position which he believed was 

the nearest land, around the South East coastal area of New Ireland. The helicopter 

subsequently entered an area of heavy rainfall with thunderstorms.

Route of Airbus BK117C1 P2-TAH of Tribal Aurora Helicopters (Credit: PNG AIC)

The last recorded data point at 01:15 showed the helicopter at an altitude of 217 ft and 

groundspeed of 62 kt, less than a mile from the Southern coast of New Ireland.

Based on the passenger statement, the AIC determined that after the last recorded data point 

and as the helicopter continued tracking towards the revised position, it descended and slowed 

down to less than 5 kt prior to impacting the water.

Flight Following, Survival and Search and Rescue (SAR)
According to the passenger, they had worn their life jackets before the flight commenced. He 

reported that when the aircraft impacted water, he got knocked unconscious. When he regained 



consciousness, he noticed that the helicopter was underwater and air bubbles were escaping 

through the forward windshield frame. He looked to the right and saw that the pilot was 

missing.

The passenger reported that he removed his seatbelt and followed air bubbles through the 

forward windshield frame and swam to the surface and inflated his lifejacket. After surfacing, 

the passenger recalled sighting the pilot at a distance and tried calling out to him but because it 

was windy and the waves were almost 5 m high, he lost sight of the pilot again. That was the last  

time he saw the pilot

There was no [Artex C406-2 HM] Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) signal transmitted after 

the impact.

The SAR Uncertainty Phase was declared by Air Traffic Control 3 minutes after the ETA at 

01:28 UTC, this was rapidly raised to the Alert Phase and then the Distress Phase at 01:55 

UTC.

The Operator stated that they had not been monitoring the helicopter on Spidertracks  [sattelite 

tracking] during the accident flight, however they were alerted by the pilot of P2-MUM 

[a Bell 430 of   Manolos Aviation] at 02:03 that ATC was trying to contact P2-TAH and there was 

no response.   The Operator immediately commenced their Emergency Response Plan…by 

discussing what was showing on Spidertracks at that time. The last mark showed the aircraft 

just off the shore of New Ireland, less than 1 minute from the land. Therefore, the Operator 

assumed the aircraft had probably landed due to weather and with only 30 second shutdown on  

the engines, that the aircraft had been powered off before another transmission could be sent 

from Spidertracks. This last known position of P2-TAH was passed to the pilot of P2-MUM, who 

relayed it to ATC.

At 03:24 UTC, Tokua Tower informed the Rescue Coordination Center (RCC) that Manolos 

Aviation was arranging search helicopter, P2-NTI [a Bo105] , to conduct track line search…



SAE Timeline Airbus BK117C1 P2-TAH of Tribal Aurora Helicopters Water Impact (Credit: PNG AIC)

At 04:27 UTC, the pilot of P2-NTI reported that he had located the wreckage and rescued the 

passenger who had egressed the helicopter and swam to shore. Later that day, the body of the 

pilot was found and recovered from the sea by locals.

A life jacket was found strapped to the pilot’s body, but not inflated.   The pilot’s life jacket was 

tested the day after the accident, and it inflated normally.

BK117C1 P2-TAH Pilot’s Life Jacket Test (Credit: PNG AIC)

The PNG State pathologist…reported that the pilot sustained blunt force trauma to the head at 

the time the aircraft impacted water, and subsequently drowned due to aspiration of seawater.



The main wreckage of the helicopter was not recovered. The left vertical fin below was found 

floating in the area near the last known coordinates. The damage observed on the components 

indicate that it ruptured upon impact with the water.

AIC Analysis
Although the passenger stated that he observed weather starting to deteriorate as the 

flight was progressing, the satellite weather images for the day of the accident showed that 

the adverse weather conditions were already existent before the commencement of the 

flight.

Satellite Weather Image Current at Time of Airbus BK117C1 P2-TAH Accident (Credit: PNG AIC)

P2-MUM departed Buka about 20 minutes after P2-TAH on the same route to Tokua but at 

5,600 ft.  Its pilot reported that he…



…flew over dark clouds maintaining vertical separation along the South coast of New Ireland. 

However, P2-TAH’s pilot decided to conduct the flight at a lower altitude, in which weather 

conditions did not allow him to maintain visual references throughout the entire route.

The pilot of P2-TAH descended to 200 ft “probably in an attempt to go below the cloud base 

to maintain or recover visual references” and asked the passenger “to monitor the 

altimeter and to alert the pilot if the reading dropped below 200 ft”.   This tactic, known 

as scud running, was “ineffective as the helicopter progressively encountered adverse 

weather conditions during flight”.

The investigation determined that the pilot was not currently rated IFR, and the helicopter was 

not equipped for performing IFR operations, so when the pilot entered IMC, the workload would 

have become overwhelming to a point in which he was unable to effectively manage, monitor 

and control the flight parameters, tasking the passenger to monitor altitude. Under these 

circumstances, the pilot’s situational awareness was compromised, and he was unable to 

identify when the helicopter descended towards the surface to a point in which the impact was 

imminent.

When the pilot of a helicopter does not have any fixed visual reference, the pilot tends to become  

disoriented with determining the actual position of the aircraft. This may be considered 

especially during operations over water where there is no stationary reference point.

The investigation determined that while the pilot was operating at a low altitude, he may have 

been disoriented due to the lack of visual references and the constant wave motion.

The TAH Operations Manual required that pilots complete an Area/Familiarisation 

Check with an approved pilot.  The investigation found that this pilot had not completed 

such a check.
AIC Conclusions



During a VFR flight, the pilot of P2-TAH initially encountered adverse weather conditions and 

attempted to divert to avoid them. However, as the flight progressed, the pilot encountered 

further deteriorating weather conditions, to a point in which he was unable to maintain visual 

references.

The pilot descended to 200 ft probably in attempt to go below the cloud base. As the pilot was 

manoeuvring to regain visual references, he was unable to maintain effective control of the 

flight parameters of the helicopter, and impacted into the surface.

AIC Safety Recommendations
 AIC 20-R 25/19-1003: Tribal Aurora Helicopters should implement procedures to 

effectively monitor its Aircraft Tracking System “Spidertracks” during their flight 
operations.

 AIC 20-R 26/19-1003: Tribal Aurora Helicopters review and amend its Flight 
Operations Manual to ensure it is completely aligned with the relevant provisions of 
the PNG Civil Aviation Rules including, but not limited to, CAR Part 91 and CAR Part 
136 as applicable.

 AIC 20-R 27/19-1003: Civil Aviation Safety Authority of PNG (CASA PNG) consider the 
findings and safety issues identified in the Final Report AIC 19-1003, disseminating 
the relevant information to the aviation community, and especially to helicopter 
operators, through Safety Promotion activities.



SAR Seat Slip Smash (RCAF CH149 Leonardo Cormorant LOC-I)
The Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) is investigating a Loss of Control – Inflight (LOC-I) 

accident that occurred to Search and Rescue (SAR) Leonardo CH149 

Cormorant (AW101) CH149903 at Gander, NL on 10 March 2022.

RCASR SAR CH149 Leonardo Cormorant (AW101) CH149903 at Gander 10 March 2022 (Credit: RCAF Flight 
Safety)

The SAR helicopter, callsign Outcast 903, of 103 Search and Rescue Squadron, 9 

Wing was completing an onshore rear crew focused training flight, the first of two 

planned for the day at c15:42 Local Time.  There were six crew members on board: two 

pilots, two Flight Engineers and two Search and Rescue Technicians.

At the end of the first training mission, the crew conducted hover work in the vicinity of 

the intersection of Runway 31 and Runway 21.

During the final clockwise hover turn sequence, the pilot flying’s seat unexpectedly 

descended to its lowest position.



The aircraft flight vector immediately reversed from a clockwise rotation to an 

accelerated counter clockwise left yaw about the aircraft mast. As the aircraft continued 

to yaw left, the attitude of the aircraft became unstable resulting in an increasing right 

bank attitude. The aircraft rotated through approximately 400° and as the right rolling 

moment intensified, the right outboard wheel, the horizontal stabilizer assembly located 

on the right side of the tail section, and main rotor blades impacted the runway.

Two of the crew received serious injuries, three minor injuries and one egressed 

uninjured.

The aircraft was significantly damaged on impact with the ground (although AW101s, 

aka Merlins, have been successfully rebuilt after major accidents [in one case an 

accident in Afghanistan, followed by being dropped by a US helicopter during the 

recovery and being dragged into a compound by armoured vehicle!]).

The RCAF report their safety investigation is focusing on “materiel and human 

factors“.  We will update this article as they release more information.

This accident is a good reminder to pay attention to the maintenance, adjustment 

and operation of pilot’s seats.



RCASR SAR CH149 Leonardo Cormorant (AW101) CH149903 at Gander 10 March 2022 (Credit: RCAF Flight Safety)



Hawaiian Air Tour EC130T2 Hard Landing after Power Loss – Part 1 (Blue 
Hawaiian N11VQ Kauai)
On 17 January 2016 Airbus Helicopters EC130T2 N11VQ, operated by Blue Hawaiian 

Helicopters (an Air Methods subsidiary), crashed near Hanalei, Kauai, Hawaii during a Part 

135 air tour flight. The pilot and six passengers were all seriously injured.

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

In this, the first of two articles, we look on why the helicopter crashed.

Part 2 looks at the survivability issues.  It is estimated that the initial impact was 24g in the 

vertical axis, 9g in the horizontal axis, and 4g in the lateral axis. The helicopter bounced and 

then impacted at 19g vertically, 7g horizontally, and 1 g laterally.
The Accident Flight
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued 25 August 2020):

The pilot reported that, about 25 minutes after departure for the sightseeing flight, the 

helicopter was about 1/4-mile offshore NW of the Honopu Sea Arch   between 1,300 ft and 1,400 

ft mean sea level (msl) when he heard the low rotor rpm aural warning horn.

NTSB comment that:



The first indication of an inflight loss of power was an uncommanded right yaw that occurred at 

14:31:31. The first limit indicator  (FLI) on the instrument console started to drop rapidly, 

followed by the GENE (generator) annunciator light illumination.

The EC130T2 is powered by a Safran Arriel 2D turboshaft engine with a dual 

channel FADEC. The pilot entered an autorotation, initiated a 20° right turn turned toward 

shore and made a distress call.

Five seconds later, the ENG P (engine oil pressure) annunciator light illuminated, followed by the 

FUEL P (fuel pressure) light and the helicopter returned to a nearly-level flight attitude. About 10 

seconds later, the helicopter was passing through 600 ft at 85 knots. Rotor rpm had increased to  

430.

After about 11 seconds, the coastline became discernable and revealed a rocky, unsuitable 

landing area. The helicopter’s altitude was about 350 ft and the rotor speed was 364 rpm. At 

14:32:08, the helicopter had entered a 45° right bank, altitude was 275 ft, airspeed was zero, 

and the helicopter was maneuvering toward a sandy beach area.

About 3 seconds later, the LIMIT (servo limit) light illuminated, the helicopter entered a near-

level pitch attitude, airspeed was near zero, and rotor speed was around 200 rpm.



Final Portion of Flight – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

Initial ground impact was at 14:32:13 and the rotorcraft was at rest at 14:32:15.



Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Accident Site Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

[The pilot] applied the rotor brake to slow the rotor and noted that the engine was not running.



Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

The passengers began to exit the helicopter and he pulled the engine fuel cutoff.

Six of the seven helicopter occupants were diagnosed on the day of the accident 

with  thoracolumbar compression fractures. The seventh was diagnosed several weeks later. With  

the exception of the occupant of seat No. 1 (who became paraplegic), the occupants remained 

neurologically intact.

NTSB Safety Investigation



Examination of the engine revealed that the main fuel injection pipe between the fuel valve 

assembly and the injection union was cracked and broken at the injection union B-

nut connection.

B-Nut As Found – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

Fracture of Pipe Evident when B-Nut Backed Off Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)



A close view of the fracture surface on the tube portion revealed  fractographic ratchet marks 

and crack arrest marks consistent with reverse bending fatigue fracture initiation at two 

diametrically opposite positions on the outside surface of the tube.

Pipe – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)



Fracture Surface – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)



SEM Image of Fracture – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

[This] allowed pressurized fuel to escape, reducing fuel flow and pressure to the injection 

manifold below that which was required to sustain combustion, and resulted in the loss of 

engine power.

Safran Helicopter Engines provided fuel pipe reliablity information stating that the type of fuel 

pipe installed on this engine had been installed on 4,500 Arriel 2 engines and had accumulated 

14.2 million flight hours. No instances of a similar type of failure had been documented for the 

entire history of this fuel pipe design.

Subsequent engine test runs revealed that the starter-generator imparted a vibration into the 

engine that excited the fuel pipe to vibrate in resonance and ultimately fracture due to reverse 

bending fatigue at the flared end.



Starter Generator – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

The vibration imparted into the engine by the starter-generator remained below the global 

vibration limit for the entire engine, but was sufficient to excite the fuel pipe.

Examination of the starter-generator revealed that the front bearing outer race and support 

exhibited signatures consistent with fretting and pronounced wear. This observed wear of the 

front bearing support allowed the armature to oscillate and impart a vibration into the engine 

frame. Further, the investigation was unable to determine when the vibration began and if the 

fatigue crack had already started at the time of the last inspection. Without a requirement to 

look at the front bearing and the shaft play, the operator would have no way to identify the 

vibration issue.

NTSB explain that:

The Airbus Helicopters maintenance manual for the EC130 T2 specifies the required inspections 

and maintenance for the installed starter-generator…at 600 and 1,200 flight hour intervals. The 

600-hour inspection involved examination of the starter’s general condition, electrical 

connections, and measuring brush wear… The 1,200-hour inspection specified replacement of 



the brushes if the brushes are measured in the yellow range using the measuring tool. If any of 

the brushes were measured in the red range then the starter-generator was to be repaired.

However:

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters maintains their EC130′s utilizing a FAA approved aircraft inspection 

program (AAIP).

…under the Blue Hawaiian Helicopters AAIP the starter-generator was inspected every 150 flight 

hours. The starter-generator is removed from the engine and checked for its general condition, 

terminal lug covers, and security clamp.

Airbus comment that:

It is Airbus’s position that greater maintenance operation than requested could introduce an 

unintended source of error and other consequences in maintenance…

However, the NTSB also go on to explain that the FAA approved AAIP also omitted starter-

generator brush replacement if found in the yellow range, which could result in operating 

for longer with higher levels of vibration.  It was also   noted that:

…the removal of the starter-generator was not recorded anywhere in the N11VQ starter-

generator documentation as it should be for such equipment with a log card.

NTSB report that:

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters and other Air Methods operations that flew EC130T2 helicopters had 

removed 25 starter-generators for routine maintenance [in the preceeding 6 months], three of 

which were identified as having lateral play of the splined armature shaft. As specific 

measurement of the play was not required before the accident, the extent of the reported play 

could not be determined.

Air Methods issued a Fleet Campaign Directive to the check fuel pipe B-nut torques and 

inspect for leakage. This did not identify any problems.



Airbus Helicopters issued 3 service bulletins on March 12, 2018, for the AS350, AS550, and EC130  

model helicopters (SB N° AS350-24.00.32, SB N° AS550-24.00.11, SBN° EC130-24.00.08). The 

service bulletin directs the inspection of the starter-generator (PN: 524-030 & 524-031) before 

either 450 flight hours of the starter-generator or within 150 hours if the starter-generator had 

more than 300 total flight hours. The inspection involves measurement of armature radial play, 

and for an oil leak on the mechanical interface of the starter-generator and the engine and 

requests a return of information of the observation.

The results of the information gathered from these inspections regarding the concerned fleet 

resulted in the issuing of new service bulletins on December 24, 2018, (SB N° AS350- 05.00.95, SB  

N° AS550-05.00.71 and SB N° EC130-05-30) requesting a 300 hours periodic inspection of the 

starter-generator. These service bulletins have latterly been cancelled as this inspection is now 

incorporated in the Airbus Helicopters maintenance program.

Airbus has also issued  Information Notice   3144-I-80 on Inspection and maintenance of the 

starter-generators
NTSB Probable Cause
The fatigue failure of the engine fuel pipe as a result of vibration caused by a worn starter-

generator front bearing support, which excited the fuel pipe and caused it to oscillate at a 

resonant frequency, and a subsequent loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.

Our Observation
Here is a case where a continuing airworthiness management decision to do extra 

inspections beyond those recommended by the Type Certificate Holder may well have 

accelerated wear with unintended consequences.
Part 2: Survivability
UPDATE 18 October 2020: Hawaiian Air Tour EC130T2 Hard Landing after Power Loss (Part 

2 – Survivability)



Hawaiian Air Tour EC130T2 Hard Landing after Power Loss – 
Part 2: Survivability (Blue Hawaiian N11VQ Kauai)
On 17 January 2016 Airbus Helicopters EC130T2 N11VQ, operated by Blue Hawaiian 

Helicopters (an Air Methods subsidiary), crashed near Hanalei, Kauai, Hawaii during a Part 

135 air tour flight. The pilot and six passengers were all seriously injured.  In this, the 

second of two articles, we look at the survivability issues in more detail.

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

The Accident Flight
The US National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) explain in their safety investigation 

report (issued 25 August 2020):

The pilot reported that, about 25 minutes after departure for the sightseeing flight, the 

helicopter was about 1/4-mile offshore NW of the   Honopu Sea Arch   between 1,300 ft and 1,400 

ft mean sea level (msl) when he heard the low rotor rpm aural warning horn.   The first 

indication of an inflight loss of power was an uncommanded right yaw that occurred at 

14:31:31.



The pilot entered an autorotation, initiated a 20° right turn turned toward shore and made 

a distress call.

After about 11 seconds, the coastline became discernable and revealed a rocky, unsuitable 

landing area. At 14:32:08, the helicopter had entered a 45° right bank, altitude was 275 ft, 

airspeed was zero, and the helicopter was maneuvering toward a sandy beach area.   About 3 

seconds later, the LIMIT (servo limit) light illuminated, the helicopter entered a near-level pitch 

attitude, airspeed was near zero, and rotor speed was around 200 rpm.

Final Portion of Flight – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

Final Turn of Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 (Credit: Airbus Helicopters via NTSB)

Initial ground impact was at 14:32:13 and the rotorcraft was at rest at 14:32:15.

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Accident Site Kauai (Credit: NTSB)



All occupants were seriously injured.

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ Kauai (Credit: NTSB)

NTSB Probable Cause
Part 1 of our article looked at the cause of the power loss.  The NTSB Probable Cause was:

The fatigue failure of the engine fuel pipe as a result of vibration caused by a worn starter-

generator front bearing support, which excited the fuel pipe and caused it to oscillate at a 

resonant frequency, and a subsequent loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.

However, the NTSB go on to note that:



Contributing to the severity of passenger injuries was the improper positioning of the 

passengers’ seat belts.

They however do not give credit to the design of the EC130 which allowed all the occupants 

to at least survive a very high g impact.
NTSB Safety Investigation: Survivability
When the wreckage was examined:

The tail skid was bent up into bottom of the fenestron and the bottom of the fairing displayed a 

20-inch crack in the longitudinal direction. The tail boom was symmetrically buckled on the left 

and right sides at the intermediate structure attach point and had significant buckling at the 

bottom. The rear fenestron drive shaft support bracket displayed a slight buckle. The engine 

deck was slightly buckled aft of the rear engine support. Plastic deformation of the engine 

support in the aft direction was observed. The right transmission bay, transmission support rod, 

and lower rod end rivets had sheared along the support tube axis. The main gear box (MGB) 

right support rod was deflected 24 mm at the largest point (mid span). The right cargo bay had 

no noticeable buckling of the X-wall. The cockpit center console’s forward upper mount plate was  

buckled on the right side. The left MGB support rod rivet heads were sheared. The left cargo bay 

displayed buckling of the X-wall at the lower aft corner. The left firewall had buckled along the 

lower edge. There were two areas of slightly buckled skin indentations on the fuselage transition 

area. The helicopter sat with a 5° list to the right.

Of note is that:

The crashworthy fuel tank displayed no deformation or leaking of fuel.

The Zodiac Seats France (formerly Sicma Aero Seat and now part of Safran) seats 

were examined.



Zodiac T198 (Front) Seats (Credit: via NTSB)

The front ones were T198 seats and the rear seats were T284s.

Zodiac T284 (Rear) Seats (Credit: via NTSB)

These consist of a…



…composite bucket affixed to a structural frame composing both the seat legs and seatback 

supports. The seatback supports contained energy absorbing features in order to meet the 

requirements referred to in 14 CFR sections 27.785, 27.561, and 27.562.   The EC130T2 [FAA] 

certification basis was 14 CFR 27 amendment 27-1 through 27-32 effective June 11, 1996.

Zodiac Seat Structure (Credit: via NTSB)

Corrugated absorption devices and fuses were built into either side of seatback supports (total of  

two in each seat) to absorb energy in event of high vertical loading.



Zodiac Seat Vertical Energy Absorbers and Fuse (Credit: via NTSB)

The composite seat bucket was affixed to the seat frame on a set of tracks via two “bucket 

fixings” and plastic bushings (rollers).

When subjected to high vertical loads, these features allowed the bucket to move downwards 

while the absorption devices deformed (i.e. stretched) and absorbed vertical energy. The 

undeformed dimension of the absorption devices was 10.7cm.

Zodiac Seat Areas of Vertical Travel During an Impact (Credit: via NTSB)



Additionally, the seat foam and upholstery are considered part of the seat design and 

certification.

[T]he two models of seats…were certified to European TSO C127a for dynamic conditions of a 

30g downward test with the seat pitched upwards at 60°, and an 18.4g forward dynamic test 

both using a 170-pound anthropomorphic test device.

During the investigation:

The helicopter cabin was scanned using a 3D handheld laser [after the removal of the seats], and  

all the seats were laser scanned. Pitch & roll angles were similar for all the seats. No external 

impacts to any of the seats was observed. All seat equipment was installed correctly…

Cabin of Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 – Seat Cushions Have Been removed – Note Varied Seat Stokes  
(Credit: NTSB)

The following table documents the postaccident configuration of each seat.



The helicopter seat designated numbers are as follows; the pilot seat in the front left, seat Nos. 1 

and 2 were front center and right, respectively; seat Nos. 4, 5, 6, and 7 were the rear seats 

numbered right to left, sequentially (Note: Seat No. 3 is used in some configurations, but was not  

installed in the accident helicopter).

Seat Layout of Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 N11VQ (Credit: NTSB)

The stroke is the measured downward displacement of the seat as a result of vertical 

accelerations, and the fuses are metal links that release once a specified amount vertical force is 

experienced allowing the seat to stroke downwards.

Two major types of [seat] deformation were observed: downward deformation affecting the 

length of the absorption devices and forward deformation of the upper seat axis.



Observed Seat Deformations (Credit: via NTSB)

Six of the seven helicopter occupants were diagnosed on the day of the accident 

with thoracolumbar compression fractures. The seventh was diagnosed several weeks 

later.

With the exception of the occupant of seat No. 1 (who became paraplegic), the occupants 

remained neurologically intact. The occupants in seat Nos. 2 and 7 had fractures at multiple 

vertebral levels. The occupants in seat Nos. 1 and 2 both had sternal fractures.

While the Flight Manual requires that seatbelts are fastened before engine start, it does not 

elaborate on the proper use or positioning of the harnesses.  However, the 2004 FAA 

Medical Facts for Pilots, publication AM-400-90/2, Seat Belts and Shoulder Harnesses states:

The restraint should be adjusted as tightly as your comfort will permit to minimize potential 

injuries. The safety belt should be placed low on your hipbones so that belt loads will be taken by  

the strong skeleton of your body. If the safety belt is improperly positioned on your abdomen, it 

can cause internal injuries.

When it is tight about your hips, the safety belt should be positioned so that it makes about 55 

degrees with the center of the airplane. This allows it to resist the upward pull of the shoulder 

belts, reducing the risk of internal injury.”



Additionally:

Blue Hawaiian Helicopters provided a 6-minute instructional and safety video for the passengers  

to watch before flight. The seat belt instruction portion of the video simply states to pull the 

waist straps until snug and showed a passenger with the buckle positioned over her navel.

That would suggest the buckle was too high in the video example.  The NTSB also imply 

that there was no, or only limited, guidance on the separately adjusted shoulder harnesses 

(the UTRs or ‘upper torso restraints’).

The operator had an employee escort the passengers to the helicopter. They then would assist 

the passengers in entering the helicopter and fastening the four-point harness.

The NTSB do not indicate how well the ground handling personnel were trained to do this.

The helicopter was equipped with an internal camera system, the Datatoys AirKnight HD4s, 

primarily intended to produce souvenir videos for tour passengers.

Illustration of Internal Video Coverage in a Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 (Credit: NTSB)

The recovered video showed seating position and the visible harness buckle locations 

before take-off.

The pilot’s harness lap belt was positioned below his waist and low across his hips.



The harness buckle position on the passenger in seat No. 1 was positioned about mid 

abdomen.   The seat No. 2 passenger’s harness buckle was in the vicinity of his mid abdomen.

The seat No. 4 passenger’s left shoulder harness was visible, but all other harness features were 

obstructed. The seat No. 5 passenger’s harness buckle appeared to rest slightly below mid 

abdomen. View of the seat No. 6 passenger’s harness configuration was obstructed. The seat No.  

7 passenger’s harness buckle was above their mid abdomen.

About 2 minutes before the beginning of the accident sequence the video showed…

The pilot’s shoulder harness was in place. The pilot’s left hand was forward and resting on an 

undetermined cockpit object.

The seat No. 1 passenger was leaning forward, her right shoulder harness was secured over the 

right shoulder, her left shoulder harness was not seen over the left shoulder but moved in 

concert with the right shoulder harness at the Y strap. The shoulder harness was moving 

consistent with the passenger’s body movement, which was slightly leaned forward.   The seat 

No. 2 passenger was seated normally and wearing their shoulder harness.

The seat No. 4 passenger was seen with the left shoulder harness clearly visible; their right 

shoulder harness was obstructed. The seat No. 5 passenger was seated normally and seen 

wearing both shoulder harnesses. The seat No. 6 passenger was taking a photograph at head 

level and had his body oriented to the right in the helicopter. The view of his harness position 

was obstructed. The seat No. 7 passenger was seated normally and was looking out the left side 

of the helicopter; both shoulder harnesses were visible.

Immediately prior to the initial ground impact…

…passenger No. 1 had moved her left hand off her left knee and neither of her hands were 

visible in the field of view. Her feet appeared to be flat against the rotorcraft’s floor. The other 

passengers were not in the field of view of the camera, and therefore their body positions were 

not documented.



NTSB note that:

The on-site documentation and the flight data were consistent in showing that the helicopter 

experienced two landing events, an initial landing followed by a bounce and a second landing.

To analyze the ground impact…

Airbus Helicopters used GPS, helicopter flight data recorded by the on-board Vision 1000 Flight 

Data Monitoring hardware, post-accident helicopter structural measurements, on-scene photos, 

and landing terrain (sand) plasticity to estimate landing attitude and impact forces experienced 

by the helicopter during the accident.

According to the simulation the helicopter likely experienced two impacts. The helicopter initially 

struck the sand with a vertical velocity of 40 feet/second (12.2 meters/second) with a 10.2 degree  

right roll and 3.6 degree nose-up attitude.

Impact of Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 (Credit: Airbus Helicopters via NTSB)

Analysis of on-scene photographs indicated that the right skid deformed and dug into the sand 

approximately 50 cm. A Mecano simulation was created modeling these conditions.   The 

simulation indicated that the helicopter then likely rebounded and bounced approximately 21.3 

feet (6.5 meters) at a 16-degree angle.

Load factors at the center of gravity for the initial impact were determined to be 9g horizontal, 

4g lateral, and 24g vertical. The load factors of the second impact (after the bounce) were 

determined to be 7g horizontal, 1g lateral, and 19g vertical.



The NTSB say that:

Based on the low level of rotational acceleration of the center of gravity, all occupants 

experienced about the same level of impact forces.

Calculated Occupant Accelerations – Blue Hawaiian Helicopters Airbus EC130T2 (Credit: Airbus Helicopters via NTSB)

As noted in the NTSB Probable Cause:

Contributing to the severity of passenger injuries was the improper positioning of the 

passengers’ seat belts.

NTSB note that after the accident:

Airbus Helicopters issued a Safety Information Notice [No. 3444-S-25] in December 2019, 

reminding the operators of the correct use of seats and restraint systems to minimize the risk of 

injury.

This SIN states:
 Lap belts must be secured in a low position (at the pant button) and tight across the 

hips. Shoulder restraint systems, if available, must be snug and securely fastened in the 
correct position over the shoulder(s).



 Occupants must sit fully back in their seat (pelvis at the bottom of the seat pan and back 
against the seat backrest) with their feet on the floor as shown below. Twisting, leaning 
forward or to the side, and bending must be avoided.

Recommended Bracing Positions (Credit: Airbus Helicopters)

Footnote: Earlier in 2019, Aerossurance was shocked to discover a North American 

company irresponsibly marketing CGI passenger briefing videos with grossly inappropriate 

brace positions.  In that case the animation company incorrectly claimed compliance with 

industry guidelines and regulatory requirements and that they had been ‘endorsed’ by a 

number of international oil and gas companies.  It’s extremely important that operators 

choose providers of such videos carefully, don’t bow to pressure to pay extra to correct 

unsafe videos or for overelaborated videos that don’t convey key information effectively.  

The NTSB do not identify the source of Blue Hawaiian’s video.



Engine Failure on Helicopters
 Publicado em 4 de junho de 2017

KP Sanjeev Kumar

Test Pilot, ATP (Bell 412, AW139), kaypius.com

Recently, I launched a paper aeroplane from the edge of a cliff to the delight of my 
son. As we both watched it glide smoothly down to the valley below, my mind 
rewound back to the days when as test crew we cut the throttles on perfectly 
serviceable helicopters to study engine failure dynamics. Needless to say, I am 
much happier today launching paper planes down hillsides!

Helicopters are Different

Helicopters typically have a lot more moving parts than aeroplanes. Piston or 
turboshaft engines, gear trains, main rotor, tail rotor, lubrication pumps–all these 
rotating components are required to keep it in the air. Consequently, failure of any of 
these critical units can cause the helicopter to drop from the sky unless the pilot 
handles the situation skillfully. One of the foremost things taught to helicopter pilots 
is therefore the handling of a power loss situation brought about either due to an 
engine failure or situation requiring the engine to be deliberately shut down in flight.



Engine Failure Dynamics

Many things happen when you lose an engine on a helicopter. Much of the 
immediate actions required depends on the type of machine you were flying and the 
conditions at time of failure.

Consider these two scenarios while piloting a helicopter:

Case 1:  You are hovering a light, single-engine H125 AStar in hot & high conditions. 
The prevalent combination of weight (mass, actually), altitude and temperature 
(WAT) puts you on the fringes of the helicopter’s performance. Suddenly, you 
experience a sharp yaw, loss of height and observe your engine and rotor RPM 
winding down rapidly. Oops, you just lost your only engine!

Case 2:  You are cruising in a lightly-laden, twin-engine AW139, 2000 feet above 
mean sea level (MSL) on a ‘standard’ day. Power requirement is low and Power 
Index (torque in this case) is safely in the green zone. You are well clear of terrain 
and obstacles. Your instruments and CAS (Crew Alerting System) are looking nice & 
green. Suddenly, you experience a mild yaw, master warning lights up, ‘1 Eng Out’ 
illuminates and ‘bitching betty’ chimes in. Failed engine parameters wind down but 
the transient droop in Rotor RPM is hardly perceptible; so is the change in engine 
noise with the doors closed and air conditioner ON with fan speed 'high'. Oops, you 
just lost one of two engines!

The two situations described above indicates the range of conditions under which an 
engine may quit. The reaction time and criticality also vary accordingly.

With continuous improvement in aerospace technology and high reliability of aero 
engines, engine failure on helicopters has become extremely rare. However, as flight 
crew we always have to be aware and alert to this exigency. Knowledge of this 
condition and recognition of symptoms in time will prepare us for a safe transition to 
either one engine inoperative (OEI) flight in a twin-engine helicopter or autorotation 
in a single engine helicopter.

Let us start by examining a power loss condition on a single engine helicopter.

Single Engine Helicopters

When the engine quits on a single engine helicopter, the power required to drive the 
rotor must come from somewhere else. If you have recognised the symptoms in time 
and lowered collective, the descent airflow will change the blades’ angle of attack, 
thereby generating an autorotative area on the disc that provides the power required 
to keep the rotors going. If descent is not enabled in time, the helicopter will start 
feeding on its own rotor energy thus slowing down the rotor. But there is a finite 
delay plus height loss involved in any recovery action due to following reasons:



 Pilot reaction time to recognise the condition and start lowering collective (A)
 Time involved in lowering the collective lever (B)
 Transition time in settling into autorotative descent by which time rotor RPM 

will reach a minimum point (C)
 Time required to reverse the initial drop in rotor RPM to reach steady state 

autorotative RPM (D)

The Energy Exchange

The interesting part of this calculus is that power required comes from height lost as 
potential energy is exchanged for kinetic energy! Everything happens with loss of 
either rotor RPM or height. How low the rotor RPM droops would therefore be a 
function of all of the above factors. How soon the slowing down occurs depends on 
WAT conditions and inertia of the rotor system. Tip weights are thus often added to 
main rotor blades to improve rotor inertia.

‘A’ denotes the ‘lever delay time’ that is involved in any recovery action. There is a 
certain ‘A’ which will make the rotor RPM reach minimum permissible power-off 
value for that condition. This time delay is known as the ‘critical lever delay time’. If 
you hold on to the collective beyond this time, the rotor RPM will droop below 
minimum safe, coning angle will increase sharply, lift will be lost and recovery could 
well be rendered impossible below this ‘divergence RPM’. The blades have stalled 
on your helicopter one last time.

Lever Delay Time and the H-V Diagram

The critical lever delay time is not a constant and depends on the rotor RPM, 
condition of flight and power setting at the time of failure. OGE hover or vertical climb 
under ‘hot & high’ conditions with a low-inertia rotor system can produce very small 
delay times (less than a second in some cases). Test crew run these tests on 
prototype helicopters to define combinations of height and velocity which need to be 
avoided in order to ensure adequate recovery margin for safe recovery from engine 
failure. The results of several mathematical and aerodynamic calculations and flight 
tests define the H-V diagram, also known as the ‘Dead Man’s Curve’ for good 
reason.

Now consider a single-engine Cheetah (Lama) helicopter taking off from a table-top 
helipad at 23000 feet density altitude in the Siachen Glacier and you will know why I 
have the greatest respect for pilots who undertake these tasks.

Twin-engine Helicopters

The basic theory of engine failure doesn’t change. However, power sharing between 
the engines on a twin or multi-engine helicopter caters for OEI or partial power 
conditions by compensating with the live engine to the extent it can. Engine 
governing systems in modern twin-engine helicopters are designed such that engine 
power scheduling is intentionally set to a ‘higher than required’ power level and 
trimmed down so as to ensure failure protection to a higher power setting. In the 



event of OEI therefore, the live engine can increase power up to its OEI contingency 
rating (usually a 2.5-min rating).

Depending on the condition of flight, rotor RPM at point of failure may droop 
transiently or settle down at the lower limit of safe governed NF/NR defined for OEI 
flight. If the 'Low Rotor RPM' warning is triggered, it is indicative of a power deficit 
developing either because of WAT conditions or mishandling. Don't ignore this 
warning.

Target Torque

Some Rotorcraft Flight Manuals like that of the Bell 412EP specify a 'Target Torque' 
which is the OEI maximum contingency rating on the live engine (a 2.5-min rating on 
the Bell 412EP). This is ‘live engine torque’ and not ‘mast torque’. Knowing the 
'target torque' for the WAT conditions at take-off or landing helps the pilot understand 
how much 'delta' is available before you hit a power limit. Exercise caution when 
operating All Engines Operative (AEO) at mast torque close to single-engine ‘target 
torque’, especially at low heights. During AEO take-off or landing, if your mast torque 
is above this figure, only a positive reduction in collective will prevent excessive rotor 
droop or ‘over-torquing’ of the live engine (although, strictly speaking, torque is not 
an engine performance limit). This may come at a significant loss of height, 
particularly important while operating over hostile terrain or offshore.

Contingency Ratings

Companies and regulators usually frown upon pilots who bring back helicopters 
safely with one failed engine and another engine whose limits have been blown. This 
is sad but one should not hesitate to use the contingency rating when required. 
Knowledge of the ‘delta’ and smooth, conscious control manipulation may hold the 
key to a successful transition. The Indian ALH (Dhruv) helicopter with the Turbomeca 
TM333 2B2 engine, for instance, has a 30-second ‘Super Contingency Rating’ (SCR) 
that is available to the pilot but if selected and used, the engine will have to be 
removed from the helicopter and returned to the factory. Too bad but that shouldn't 
weigh you down when you need to use that power to save the helicopter and its 
occupants.

Double Trouble

In the rare event of a double engine failure (usually due to fuel starvation or 
mishandling) on a twin-engine helicopter, we are now faced with a situation that 
brooks no delay in recovery action. Terms like critical lever delay time, divergence 
RPM etc discussed in parlance of light singles should ring aloud in your mind. It’s 
time to use your autorotation skills again, this time with a much heavier bird!



H-V diagrams provided for twin-engine helicopters are applicable for an OEI 
condition and not total power loss (total power loss on a twin-engine helicopter is too 
risky to be tested without incurring damage). To borrow a line from the AW139 
RFM, the H-V diagram defines, in the event of a single engine failure during take-off,  
landing or other operation near the surface, a combination of airspeed and height 
above ground from which a safe single engine landing on a smooth, level and hard 
surface cannot be assured. Note the terms ‘smooth, level and hard surface’. Also 
remember that for the H-V diagram to be valid, you have to be within the WAT limits 
specified for your helicopter.

Increasing Rotor RPM for take-off and landing

Some twin engine helicopters incorporate a power turbine governor actuator switch 
to ‘beep’ up the free turbine (NF/N2) & (thus) rotor RPM to a value which is 2-4% 
more than the nominal governed RPM of 100% for take-off and landing. The Bell 
412EP incorporates a INCR-DECR beep switch which can trim the rotor RPM from 
97% to 101.5% while the AW139 and A109 helicopters have a two-way switch which 
can set the rotor RPM to either 100% or 102%. For all Cat A take-offs and landings, 
102% RPM is to be selected on the AW139. This possibly stems from Category A 
certification requirements that specify a certain reaction time before initiating 
recovery action (typically delay time is about 1-2 seconds) in the event of OEI.

Benefits of Increased Rotor RPM

In my analysis, this function is provided to maximise your chances for a safe landing 
or getaway in the event of an OEI and not to improve AEO performance. That said, 
higher rotor RPM for take-off and landing accrues the following benefits:

 Power is directly proportional to product of torque and rotor RPM. Thus higher 
rotor RPM means lower torque for the same power requirement with all 
engines operating. Or more power for the same torque, whichever way you 
like to see it.

 With a higher rotor RPM, the angle of attack and thus blade pitch for the same 
power is slightly less. At high angles of attack, this improves the lift-drag ratio 
of the blades.

 More RPM means more energy stored in the rotor – always a good thing if 
you lose power!

 In the event of losing an engine, the higher rotor RPM gives greater reaction 
time to pilots before lower limit of rotor RPM is encountered. Going from our 
theory for single engine helicopter, greater reaction time is always money in 
the wallet!



 The higher rotor RPM also reduces the height loss in transitioning to safe OEI 
flight –something significant while operating to offshore decks where this ‘drop 
down height’ versus height available is crucial for a safe flyaway.

 Higher rotor RPM translates to higher tail rotor energy through its gear ratio 
thereby enhancing tail rotor authority – a fringe benefit for the bad day!

What if you don’t?

So what can you expect if you set theory aside and decide to undertake a take-off 
without selecting Nr to 102/103/104% as applicable to your helicopter? One of the 
helicopters I have flown carries this caution in the RFM:

“With NR increase function set to OFF, at given gross weight, a 10 ft penalty is to be 
applied on height loss determined with fly-away performance chart with NR 104%. At  
a given height loss, a 200 kg penalty is to be applied on gross weight determined 
with fly-away performance chart with NR 104%”

Of course, this is applicable to a particular type and cannot be assumed across the 
board. However, during offshore take-offs and landings be aware that 10 feet could 
well mean the difference between a safe getaway and an arrival on water. Then if 
the water doesn’t get you, the lawyers surely will!

Stressed Out?

Some aviators bemoan the cumulative stresses on airframe and engines (and 
consequent reduction in component lives) by use of 102% switch or the Cat A take-
off procedure. However, I have not come across any data to support this 
apprehension and will be happy to review if somebody can table it. Having gone 
through the theory of engine failure and having been part of few engine failure flight 
tests, I am happy to use any functionality which helps me with rotor RPM, height and 
reaction time – all crucial factors when an engine fails!

Read, Discuss, Understand

Do visit the Rotorcraft Flight Manual relevant to the type you fly for details on 
engine failure and the elaborate graphs and procedures given therein for 
different take-off and landing profiles to get a thorough understanding of this 
condition. When the time comes, you don’t want to be up against a rotor that 
slows and time that flies!

*****************

©KP Sanjeev Kumar, 2017. All rights reserved.

Note: These are generic descriptions. Please refer to and abide by the Rotorcraft 
Flight Manuals applicable to the type you fly. Views expressed are personal and 
open to debate with a view to achieve better understanding of engine failure 
dynamics.



HELICOPTERS ACCIDENTS CANADA

Task-Competency and Wearing of Helmet Identified as Main Issues in Glassy 
Water Accident

On May 20, 2011, a tragic accident claimed the life of an experienced helicopter pilot 
engaged in the demanding world of water bucketing operations in support of forest fire 
suppression. The Bell 212 was in the vicinity of Slave Lake, Alta. During an approach 
to Lesser Slave Lake to pick up water in calm winds and glassy, mirror-like conditions, 
the helicopter crashed on its right side into the lake, and was severely damaged. While 
the pilot had accumulated thousands of hours of flying time, his actual experience in 
water bucketing operations was less extensive; this lead the Transportation Safety 
Board of Canada (TSB) to address, in its final report, the issue of task competency 
versus total flight time for pilots engaged in such operations. In addition, as the pilot 
had left his helmet in its carrying bag on the back seat, the wearing of the helicopter 
helmet is identified as a recurring theme. The following article is based on TSB Final 
Report A11W0070.

History of Flight

The helicopter departed from the Slave Lake Airport, proceeded to the Lesser Slave 
Lake shoreline near the Canyon Creek hamlet and began water bucketing operations. 
Water pickups were made near the south shore of the lake and drops were made on a 
fire approximately 0.8 NM south of the shoreline. On its twelfth pickup, while on short 
final, the helicopter abruptly descended forward, in a near-level attitude, to within 
several feet of the water surface. Subsequently, the helicopter climbed to approximately 
100 ft above the lake surface and then rolled rapidly to the right and descended 
vertically into the water.

Within approximately three to four minutes, municipal firefighters in the vicinity 
entered the water, removed the pilot from the wreckage and administered first aid until 



emergency medical personnel arrived. However, the pilot succumbed to head injuries as 
a result of the impact.

The helicopter was certified, equipped, and maintained in accordance with existing 
regulations and approved procedures. It had no known deficiencies, the weight and 
centre of gravity were within limits and there was sufficient fuel on board.

Water Pickup Location

The helicopter was configured to carry external loads on a hook mounted on the 
underside of the helicopter's belly. A 100-ft long line attached to the belly hook was 
being used with a 350 imperial gal. water bucket. The bucket was 23 ft long when 
suspended, for a total long line length of approximately 124 ft.

The belly hook can be released either electrically or manually. A button on the cyclic 
control stick is the primary release. To arm this electrical release, the pilot must select 
the hook release switch, which is guarded and located in the overhead console. The 
manual release is designed as a backup in an emergency, if the electric release fails. To 
activate the manual release, the pilot must take one foot off the anti-torque control 
pedals and use it to push the release pedal.

Bell 212 Flight Manual Supplement (BHT–212–FMS–3) directs pilots to arm the hook 
for takeoff, disarm it for in-flight operations (e.g., cruise), and arm it before final 
approach. Arming the hook prior to takeoff and final approach allows the pilot to 
quickly release the load should a problem arise during a critical phase of flight. 
Disarming the hook during cruise reduces the risk of an inadvertent release.

In many cases, dropped loads are the result of pilots accidently triggering the electrical 
release. As previously established in TSB occurrence A09P0249, many pilots choose to 
fly with the belly hook electrically disarmed to reduce the risk of an inadvertent load 
release. The electric release was found in the disarmed position on the occurrence 
aircraft.

Pilot Competencies for Helicopter Wildfire Operations

After the 2007 Helicopter Association of Canada (HAC) convention, a number of 
provincial agencies responsible for forest firefighting and the HAC agreed that pilot 
eligibility for roles in wildfire suppression should be based on a task-competency model 
rather than relying solely on flight hours. In 2010, the HAC, through its Air Taxi 
Committee subgroup, the Pilot Qualifications Working Group, developed a document 
entitled Pilot Competencies for Helicopter Wildfire Operations – Best Practices 
Training and Evaluation.

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development (ASRD) developed an operating handbook 
for pilots in 2010 and issued an amended version, the 2011 Pilots Handbook, the 
following year. The 2011 Pilots Handbook endorses the use of qualifications and 
training competencies identified in the HAC document Pilot Competencies for 
Helicopter Wildfire Operations. The operator did apply these standards for its pilot 
checks at the start of the 2011 season.



Helicopter Crash Location

An examination of the wreckage revealed that the collective was found in the full up 
position, and all collective connections to the engines were consistent with full power 
being requested. There was no indication of any system malfunction prior to the 
occurrence. Damage was consistent with the helicopter landing with a high downward 
velocity on its right side at impact.

The pilot seat had little structural damage. However, the left side lap belt attachment 
point had torn loose as a result of the impact. It was also determined that the pilot was 
not wearing the available shoulder harnesses at the time of impact. These harnesses are 
designed for use when the pilot is sitting upright in a normal flight position. It is 
common practice for pilots not to wear the shoulder straps while long-lining because it 
can hinder upper body movement to the bubble window.

Pilot

The pilot held a valid Airline Transport Pilot Licence–Helicopter, and had close to 
5 000 total flight hours on a variety of helicopter types, including 200 hr on the Bell 
212. In April 2011, the pilot passed the company Pilot Proficiency Check (PPC) on the 
Bell 212 after completing the operator’s training program, which included the HAC-
developed Pilot Competencies for Helicopter Wildfire Operations.

While the pilot had significant total flying experience on a variety of helicopter types, 
his Bell 212 time was relatively low, and he had not done any external load operations 
with any of his employers in the previous 5 years. Of the approximately 500 hr of 
external load operations he had accumulated up to 2005, only 20 hr had been recorded 
as long line work. The TSB further determined that on the Canadian Interagency Forest 
Fire Centre (CIFFC) Pilot Directory, the pilot had listed 500 hr slinging, 50 hr long 
lining and 50 hr water bucketing. The TSB was unable to reconcile the discrepancy.

Flight Helmets

The pilot, who was not wearing a flight helmet, received severe head injuries during the 
impact sequence. The pilot's flight helmet was found inside its bag at the rear of the 



helicopter cabin. The pilot was not required by the operator to wear a helmet, nor is 
there a regulation requiring helicopter pilots to wear head protection.

The second most frequently injured body region in survivable helicopter crashes is the 
head. According to United States military research, the risk of fatal head injuries can be 
as high as 6 times greater for helicopter occupants not wearing head protection. The 
effects of non-fatal head injuries range from momentary confusion and inability to 
concentrate to full loss of consciousness. Incapacitation can compromise a pilot's ability 
to escape quickly from a helicopter and assist passengers in an emergency evacuation or 
survival situation.

Transport Canada (TC) has long recognized the safety benefits of using head protection, 
including in its 1998 Safety of Air Taxi Operations Task Force (SATOPS) Final Report. 
TC committed to continue to promote to helicopter pilots the safety benefits of wearing 
helmets—especially in aerial work operations and flight training units—in its safety 
newsletters and other promotional materials. An example are the two excellent articles 
titled “Helicopter Safety Helmets—A Hard S(h)ell” and “Low Usage of Head 
Protection by Helicopter Pilots” published in  Issue 2/2010 of the  Aviation Safety 
Letter.

This helmet was retrieved from an AS350 accident in Atlantic
Region (TSB File A07A0007). The other pilot was not
wearing his helmet and suffered serious head injuries.

In addition, SATOPS recommended that helicopter operators, especially aerial work 
operators, encourage their pilots to wear helmets, that commercial helicopter pilots wear 
helmets and that flight training units encourage student helicopter pilots to wear 
helmets.

The TSB has documented a number of occurrences1 where the use of head protection 
likely would have reduced or prevented the injuries sustained by the pilot.
The high-profile crash of a Sikorsky S-92 in March 2009 (TSB Final Report 
A09A0016) demonstrated that despite the well-documented safety benefits and the 



challenging nature of helicopter flying, a majority of helicopter pilots continue to fly 
without head protection. Likewise, that investigation found that most Canadian 
helicopter operators still do not actively promote or require the use of head protection 
by company pilots.

In recognition of the benefits of head protection, the HAC Board of Directors passed a 
resolution on June 27, 2011, strongly recommending to its operator-members that they 
should promote the use of helmets for helicopter flight crew members under all 
operational circumstances which permit their use. HAC also pointed out, however, that 
certain pilot/aircraft type configurations may preclude safe helmet use.

Analysis

The TSB determined that the pilot was conducting water pickups at a considerable 
distance from shore over glassy water. The glassy water conditions that would have 
made depth perception difficult were compounded by the lack of visual references due 
to the distance from shore. The helicopter had not yet come into the hover when the 
water bucket inadvertently entered the water. This resulted in a violent pull rearward 
and to the left, causing it to descend and roll to the right. The pilot likely overestimated 
the helicopter's altitude while on final approach, due to glassy water conditions and a 
lack of visual references, which led to the water bucket inadvertently entering the water.

The helicopter then descended to within several ft of the water. The pilot's subsequent 
attempt to recover would have required both hands on the controls, precluding arming 
the belly hook's electrical release. When the helicopter climbed, it is likely that the 
combination of the long-line tension, helicopter movement, and high power setting 
caused the helicopter to roll to the right and descend quickly into the water.

Because the belly hook was electrically disarmed, the pilot's ability to jettison the water 
bucket was limited. It is possible that the pilot released the belly hook using the manual 
release located between the pedals using one of his feet or it may have been released on 
impact. Irrespective of how the hook was released, the helicopter impacted the water 
before the pilot was able to regain control.



The pilot was not wearing his helmet, which contributed to the severity of his head 
injuries. Helicopter pilots who fly without a helmet are at a greater risk of incapacitation 
due to head injuries incurred during ditching or a crash.

The pilot had the basic qualifications required for this type of work, however he had 
minimal recent experience in external load operations, and the TSB could not reconcile 
some discrepancies they identified in the pilot’s documented slinging and water-
bucketing experience.

In conclusion, despite the fact that he trained for and passed the company PPC—
including the upgraded task-competency standard developed by the HAC—the 
experienced pilot appears to have been caught by a combination of events: glassy water 
conditions; pick-up point further away from shore, reducing the visual reference field; 
limited recent operational experience for the task at hand; a potentially life-saving 
helmet resting on the back seat.

Wind Effects on Idling Rotorcraft

The following text is based on an accident prevention bulletin by the United States 
Forestry Service and is shared with the Aviation Safety Letter audience for its value in 
safety promotion. 

Discussion: On September 26, 2011, a Eurocopter AS-350BA sustained substantial 
damage after winds caused the aircraft to lift up and roll over on a ridgeline near 
Juneau, Alaska, despite the engine operating at idle rpm (NTSB # ANC11LA108). The 
aircraft had landed on the top edge of a steep slope where winds were forecast to be 
strong and erratic due to an arriving low pressure system over the area. The National 
Weather Service (NWS) forecasted the surface winds at 35 to 45 kt, however, NWS 
hourly observations from three different observation locations indicated maximum 
velocities ranging from 10 to 29 kt.

In an effort to better understand how this accident occurred, Eurocopter simulated the 
event with a similar aircraft of the same weight and rotor speed, and other 
environmental features including surrounding terrain (based on pictures supplied from 
the accident site), landing surface, and winds. The simulation revealed that the aircraft 



could be lifted off the ground with a wind speed of as little as 37 mph (32 kt) when the 
impact angle struck from below the rotor disc. As the relative wind angle moves upward 
toward a level plane with the rotors, the wind velocity required to lift the aircraft 
increases.

Research of accident reports from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
discovered a similar incident in December 2008 where a Kaman K-1200 helicopter was 
upset by wind gusts that fatally injured one ground crew member (NTSB # 
WPR09LA057). In this particular case, the pilot started the helicopter during light and 
variable quartering tailwinds of what he estimated to be 15 kt. The NTSB investigation 
determined the winds at the accident site most likely exceeded the maximum wind 
allowed with reference to the helicopter's prevailing wind envelope, which resulted in 
the helicopter lifting to the left and rolling over.

Key Points:

 In both instances, winds were forecast to be erratic and gusty, yet local observations 
were within the published aircraft limits.

 Both aircraft were operating at idle rotor rpm.
 In one situation, ground crew were in close proximity which ultimately resulted in a 

fatal blade strike.
 There had been no understanding by either crew of a similar event ever happening 

and they were not alert for this type of control loss.

Recommendations:

 Project Aviation Safety Plans (PASPs) should be shared amongst all aircrew (including 
the pilot) in order to ensure pertinent safety related information is communicated. 
This may require extra coordination when dealing with vendors (contracted 
personnel).

 Avoid ground personnel movement within the area of the rotor arc when starting, 
shutting down, or at ground idle.

 Flight crews are required to: 
o know wind limitations for start up and shut down for the make/model 

operated;
o plan for flight conditions based on current observations AND forecast weather;
o base operating rpm on peak wind conditions and plan for additional fuel 

requirements as necessary when loitering on the ground;
o be aware of the affects of wind blowing from below the rotor disc and plan the 

landing site selection accordingly; and
o account for rising terrain in the preflight planning process, as it can generate 

orographic turbulence and greatly accelerate wind velocity as the air travels 
over the top.

A look back at past occurrences…

This accident prevention bulletin prompted us to look for past occurrences of 
helicopters being lifted by a gust of wind in Canada. The following scenarios differ 
slightly from one another, but it is clear that helicopters running on the ground—
whether at flight idle or 100 percent rpm—are at risk from wind gusts. In some of the 
cases below, the pilot even leaves the aircraft with the engine running and rotors 



turning, which is rarely a good idea. Here are some examples provided to us by the 
Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB):

On September 4, 1978, the pilot of a Bell 206 landed in British Columbia, let his 
passengers deplane, and brought the throttle to idle. He then got out to inspect the 
terrain and a gust of wind caught the blades and overturned the aircraft. (TSB file 
A78W0098).

On August 20, 1981, a Bell 206 had landed on a rocky ridge in British Columbia to 
offload a firefighting crew. As the last passenger stepped down from the aircraft, a 
strong gust of wind rolled the helicopter to the right. The main rotor struck a tree and 
the helicopter slid, on its side, down the ridge to the bottom of a ravine. At the time, the 
winds were reported to be gusting to 60 mph. (TSB file A81P0085).

On September 2, 1982, the pilot of a Bell 206 landed into a light wind on a ridge in 
British Columbia which dropped sharply down several thousand feet to a valley. The 
main rotor disc extended over the face of the summit. As the stopover was short, the 
pilot did not shut down the engine, but throttled back to flight idle, applied the 
collective and cyclic frictions, and left his seat with one foot on the skid; while doing 
so, he did not retain full control of the cyclic. Suddenly, a strong gust of wind came up 
the ridge and the aircraft lurched into the air. The helicopter came to rest upright 30 ft 
away after the main rotor blades had hit the ground, severed the tip of the right skid, and 
shattered the right bubble windshield. (TSB file A82W0074).

On July 30, 2006, a student pilot in an amateur-built Rotorway Exec 162F was 
performing engine and dynamic system checks on private property in Alberta. The pilot 
applied enough collective to become light on the skids to determine torque pedal 
effectiveness. At that time, a strong gust of wind moved the helicopter laterally resulting 
in a dynamic rollover to the right. The pilot sustained minor scratches and cuts and the 
helicopter was substantially damaged.
(TSB file A06W0128).

The next (and last) account comes from a veteran helicopter pilot who witnessed a 
similar event, leading to the loss of a helicopter after it was left running unattended.

“In the mid-seventies, when I was working as a pilot in Northern Quebec, we lost a 
company Bell 206B on a landing pad because of this phenomenon. The pilot, “Joe”, was 
an experienced young lad who landed that day on a plywood pad on a small rise along 
the bank of a river. He landed on the pad facing a southerly direction, with the tail of the 
helicopter out over the river bank. It is possible that the rear of the skids may not have 
been in full contact with the pad, but that remains unknown to this day. As we all know, 
the B206 footprint is weight-biased directly below the mast, toward the rear of the 
skids. This can result in a nasty trap for the unwary if the rear of the skids are not in full 
contact with the supporting surface, and this may have been a contributing factor in this 
accident.

After landing, the passengers disembarked and the pilot realized that there was a 
package that needed to be offloaded from the cargo compartment which was located on 
the opposite side of the aircraft from the pilot’s position. The passengers had left, and 
Joe couldn’t get anyone’s attention. He was in a hurry to get going and retrieve other 



workers from the bush, but rather than making a radio call for assistance, he tightened 
the frictions and turned the hydraulics off. He left the throttle in the flight position to 
facilitate a rapid departure. He jumped out, intending to run around the aircraft to open 
the cargo compartment and simply drop the package on the helipad. The aircraft was 
now unoccupied, running at 100% rpm, and was exposed to a gusting westerly wind (10 
kt or so) along the river. 

Joe told us that, as he passed the nose of the helicopter, it suddenly rose up, pivoting 
about the rear skids. He tried to jump on the skid toes to gain control, but he ended up 
falling to the ground, and was struck by the nose of the aircraft as it went almost vertical 
and drifted backwards, airborne. He suffered a minor gash to the face. (It could have 
been a lot worse). The helicopter continued backwards, sinking and striking the tail. It 
subsequently crashed on the bank of the river, some distance below the plane of the 
helipad. It immediately caught fire and was totally destroyed.

In my opinion, the initiator was the change in the centre of gravity which shifted aft 
suddenly when the pilot left the aircraft. This may have been exacerbated by the 
unevenness of the pad, or the position of the helicopter on the pad. Joe was an 
experienced pilot, but he may not have placed the aircraft far enough forward on the pad 
to prevent a rotation about the rear contact point when he climbed out. The actual 
aircraft position on the pad could not be verified.

The final straw appears to have been the exposure of the helicopter on an elevated pad 
to a cross wind of some strength. The cumulative effect of these forces appears to have 
caused this accident. It can be argued that even without the wind factor, a 206 placed 
too far aft on the helipad might have flipped over anyway. However, Joe reported that 
the aircraft actually flew a short distance before the tail struck the river bank. The 
aircraft’s final position down the embankment seems to verify that; otherwise, the 
helicopter would have ended up immediately behind the pad.

In the end, regardless of the wind conditions, leaving any helicopter with rotors turning 
and no one at the controls invites disaster from various causes. In this case, the aircraft 
came to a fiery and dramatic end.”

Date modified:

2013-06-19



Korean Kamov Ka-32T Fire-Fighting Water Impact and Underwater Egress 
Fatal Accident (KFS HL9419)
On 1 December 2018, Korea Forest Service (KFS) Aviation 

Headquarters Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 impacted the Han River in Seoul, South 

Korea during an approach to uplift water for fire-fighting operations.  An 

aircrewman was killed but the two pilots escaped with minor injuries.

Wreckage of Korea Forest Service (KFS) Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Being Recovered after Water Impact (Credit: 
ARAIB)

The 80-page Korean Aviation and Railway Accident Investigation Board 

(ARAIB) safety investigation report was published on 28 December 2020 (in 

Korean only).
The Accident Flight
The 11 t helicopter, based at  Gimpo Airport on 15 minute stand-by, was 

equipped with a Simplex Model 326 Fire Attack 2972 liters external tank and 

dual snorkel system.  It was tasked to put out a fire on Mount Youngchuk in 

eastern Seoul.  The fire was reported at 10:42 and the helicopter was airborne 

at 10:55, arriving over the fire at 11:08.  The fire was at the edge of the outer 

Seoul P-73B prohibited airspace.  Tracer is authorized as a warning to 



unauthorized aircraft in P-73B whereas lethal force is authorized in P-73A.  This 

therefore also required liaison with the RoKAF Master Control and Reporting 

Center (MCRC).

The crew were unable to identify a small reservoir, suggested by their control 

room, near  Sahmyook University at 11.11. They then tried a site 

at Wangsukcheon at 11.15 but the water level was too low for the snorkels to 

work successfully.

Route of of Korea Forest Service (KFS) Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Being Prior to Han River Water Impact (Credit: 
ARAIB)



The commander decided to proceed to the Han River, near the  Gangdong 

Bridge.  Visibility was good (>10 km), the wind was from the south-east at 2-

3kts, and air temperature 7-8℃.

ARAIB explain that the KFS procedure for a water uplift is first to conduct a high- 

and low-level reconnaissance.  This was not done, nor was there a briefing prior 

to the approach.

The KFS approach procedure is to pass through 100 ft at 50 km/h (25 knots) and 

at a decent rate below 2 m/s (400 fpm), as shown in this video.

Korea Forest Service (KFS) Procedures for an Approach for Water Uplift (Credit: ARAIB)

The rate of descent during this approach was however 5.7 m/s (1120 fpm) at 

100ft and although the rate of descent slowed, impact was still at 3.2 m/s (630 

fpm).



KFS Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 FDR Data (Credit: ARAIB)



KFS Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Seen on Approach in Dash Cam Footage (Credit: via ARAIB)



KFS Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Water Impact Caught in Dash Cam Footage (Credit: via ARAIB)

The commander (5006 hours total time and 1182 on type) was Pilot Flying (PF) 

and the co-pilot (2223 hours total time and 1182 on type) was Pilot Monitoring 

(PM).  However, investigators say that both flight crew were concentrating on 

radio communications, so they failed to recognize the excessive descent rate 

and proximity to the river’s surface.  The radalt low height warning was set at 20 

m and triggered 6 seconds before impact.



KFS Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Radio Calls Prior to Water Impact (Credit: ARAIB)

Underwater Escape – Survivability Issues
The aircraft was not equipped with an Emergency Flotation System (EFS).  All the 

crew had completed Helicopter Underwater Escape Training (HUET).  They 

were issued Switlik life jackets and had a 3000 psi HEED3 Compressed Air 

Emergency Breathing System (CA-EBS).



KFS Switlik Life Jacket and HEED3 CA-EBS (Credit: ARAIB)

Both pilots were unable to activate their door release and both escaped 

through the right-hand bubble window that had been smashed by the right-

hand mirror that was twisted backwards on impact.  The c0-pilot initially 

struggled to release his harness, used his HEED bottle and escaped ‘towards the 

light’.

The investigators confirmed that scheduled maintenance jettison tests had 

been conducted previously and successfully passed within the activation force 

requirements.  The ARAIB postulate that after the water impact the crew may 

have been confused at how the emergency door mechanism worked.  The 



KA-32T does not seem to be equipped with push out windows, as is the norm 

for offshore helicopters to aid underwater escape.

KFS Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Pilots Egressed Through the Damaged Right-hand Bubble Window after Water Impact 
(Credit: ARAIB)

The Seoul Fire Department were notified within 1 minute of the accident. The 

helicopter came to rest at a 45º angle, nose down in 5.8 m deep water.

The commander, who escaped with neither life jacket nor HEED bottle swam to 

shore and was rescued by firefighters.  He initially claimed he had removed 

them to help swim, but they were later found on his office desk…

The co-pilot inflated his life jacket and remained with the wreckage and was 

rescued by a police boat.



Wreckage of Korea Forest Service (KFS) Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 In The Han River (Credit: Gangdong Fire Station)

The aircrewman failed to escape, though his HEEDS3 bottle was found in the 

wreckage with a pressure of 400 psi, implying it had been used.  There was no 

sign of a door handle being activated.  His unconscious body was recovered by 

fire service divers about 40 minutes after the accident.  They noted that 

underwater visibility was <1.5 m.



Wreckage of Korea Forest Service (KFS) Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 Being Recovered after Water Impact (Credit: 
ARAIB)

ARAIB Conclusions
During the descent approach, the flight crew concentrated on the radio calls, so they  

failed to recognize excessive descent speed and proximity to the surface.

They determined that the following were contributing factors:



1. Water uplift procedures such as location selection of water sources, high-

altitude and low-altitude reconnaissance and stabilized flight were not 

implemented.

2. During the approach, the assignment of duties was not clearly implemented, 

with both flight crew focused on radio communication.

3. Failure to monitor information provided by the aircraft, such as low altitude 

warning and radio altimeter.

4. The crew’s emergency exit door opening method and escape training 

response capability were insufficient.

Wreckage of Korea Forest Service (KFS) Kamov Ka-32T HL9419 After Salvage (Credit: ARAIB)



In the 1700’s, David Hume observed that, “He is happy whom circumstances suit his 
temper; but he is more excellent who suits his temper to any circumstance.” A century 
and a half later, Dale Carnegie admonished, “When dealing with people, remember you 
are not dealing with creatures of logic, but creatures of emotion.” These precepts, ever 
present in aviation, can be constructive when examining human interactions that occur 
during aviation incidents. 

While aviation, in general, aspires to excellence, many aviation decisions and actions 
involve interaction between at least two persons. During an interaction, individual 
nuance, emotion, and uniqueness are frequently at play. Egos are present and often 
evident. Authority or control issues, seniority, job knowledge, or turf wars may also be 
involved. At times, key personalities work together with extraordinary success, and on 
other occasions, teamwork is less effective. 

Conventional wisdom suggests that personal nuance, emotion, or uniqueness in an 
aviation interaction is axiomatic to the safety and efficiency of the operation itself. 
Importance of these interactions is thus captured in the continual process of improving 
Crew Resource Management (CRM) and flight safety. 

This month CALLBACK shares narratives that reveal personal interaction and nuance in 
each incident. Interactions range from positive to negative, major to minor, and serious 
to amusing, but in each situation is a lesson to garner. 

Practice Makes Almost Perfect
An airline Captain and a jump seating pilot described CRM that exhibited judgment, discretion, and 
temperance. The problem that they experienced tested their situational awareness with 
distractions, workload, and time pressure. 

From the Captain’s report:

■ During a fairly typical tight visual approach,… we noticed that flaps were indicating 25 instead 
of the selected 40 during the landing checklist at about 1,300 feet AGL. We initiated a go-
around, which was mostly normal other than flaps staying at 25 even when put to 15. We had an 
exceptional jump seater who was previously in the training department and an invaluable 
member of the crew. 

As we handled the aviating and communicating, he handed me a QRH turned to the Trailing Edge 
Flaps Disagree Checklist, which we confirmed and began. I handed aircraft control to my First 
Officer (FO) along with the radios. We had about 7.5 on the fuel, so we decided quickly that we 
were going to our alternate.… I ran the checklist and programmed up the runway and 
communicated with Dispatch through ACARS, notifying them of our decision and need for landing 
data. 

We [got priority handling] out of an abundance of caution. The [cabin] crew and…passengers 
were notified of our new destination.… The FO did an exceptional job of staying between the flaps 
25 overspeed and the gear warning horn [speed], and also landed the plane. 

Always having an alternate is helpful, as a baseline of required fuel is available when an issue 
like this arises. Our bingo fuel was for a clean configuration and we were [stuck with] flaps 25, 
but it was valuable information. 



From the Jump Seater’s report:

■ The Captain (CA) was the Pilot Flying (PF) and was flying a visual approach.… As the CA was 
on a right base visual to the runway and selecting landings flaps, the trailing edge flaps remained 
at position 25 and not the commanded 40 flaps for landing. The CA executed a missed approach 
and elected to divert.… The CA handed the jet over to the FO, who became the PF. The CA 
completed the Trailing Edge Flap Disagree Checklist and contacted Dispatch. The FO made the 
landing. We taxied to the gate and debriefed. 

We started this event with 6.3 Fuel on Board (FOB) and landed…with 4.3. The crew did an 
outstanding job on this abnormal event. As a former [check pilot], the CA and I had a…good 
rapport. I noticed the flaps stuck at 25 while on right base. It was not until the CA and FO were 
conducting the landing checklist that they noticed the flaps stuck at 25. I elected not to interject 
early as the speed was good, weather was CAVU and the crew were maneuvering with radio 
calls. When the CA executed the missed approach and asked for flaps 15 and they did not move, 
I advised the FO to leave the flap handle where he had placed it. I could tell the crew was getting 
a bit overloaded and was happy when the CA turned the autopilot on and handed the jet over to 
the FO. I told the crew they had a trailing edge flap disagree and opened the QRH to the proper 
checklist. I advised the FO to watch the speed and try not to overspeed the flaps and also to 
leave the power up a little to silence the gear horn. 

The CA and FO worked very well together during this event. I interjected myself when needed, 
and the CA used me as a resource and for advice. I didn’t know that the FO is a fairly new pilot, 
and [were I the Captain], I would have landed the jet. We debriefed this event and I advised the 
CA not to keep reviewing the QRH…to make sure all items were completed or not missed while 
on approach below 1,000 feet AGL.… The crew did an outstanding job on this abnormal event. 



Night Offshore Training AS365N3 Accident in India (VT-PWF, 2015)
The Indian Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (IAAIB) has issued their report into the 

fatal loss of Airbus Helicopters AS365N3 VT-PWF, operated by Pawan Hans, while 

conducting night training in the ONGC Bombay High oil field on 4 November 2015.

Wreckage of Airbus Helicopters AS365N3 VT-PWF of Pawan Hans (Credit: IAAIB)

The Accident Flight: 319 seconds to Disaster
The helicopter took off with just the two crew aboard from the WIS Offshore 

Installation at 19:10 local time, heading for the Ron Tappmeyer drilling rig, 

alongside the EE Offshore Installation, 82 nm East of Mumbai.  The pilot 

flying needed to regain his night currency to be on night medevac stand-by, 

having last flown offshore at night 11 months earlier on 30 November 2014.



The IAAIB states:
1. The pilot on controls was flying during dark phase of moon at night after 

break of nearly a year.
2. 56 secs after takeoff…the autopilot was engaged in ALT and HDG modes. 

In these modes, the pilot adjust power by the movement of collective stick.  
The helicopter was in cruise for about 3 minutes. The cruise altitude was 
between 550ft and 650ft AMSL with Auto-Pilot engaged. About 98 secs 
prior to the crash, the autopilot (upper modes ALT and HDG) was 
disengaged.

3. The helicopter made a tail wind approach with speed of approximately 79 
kts for Ron Tappmeyer which is to the south extremity of the South field 
with no other rigs nearby to provide ambient lighting which caused an 
abrupt loss of visual reference.

4. …the pilot slightly moved the cyclic stick backward and the collective stick 
downward. Consequently, the pitch increased and the power decreased. 
This maneuver looks like a standard approach procedure to decrease the 
speed. Thereafter, the pilot moved the cyclic stick slightly to the left and 
began a left turn.

5. The left turn was 50 seconds long with slight variations in roll attitude. The  
lateral acceleration remains between -0.03 and +0.09. The corrections did 
not lead to a roll attitude less than 12° to left.

6. After the Autopilot disconnection, the pilot was “hands on” and the 
attitude of the helicopter was consistent with the inputs on the flight 
commands.

7. No specific pilot inputs were recorded, except actions on the collective 
pitch in the last second of the recording.

8. The pilot flying has probably entered conditions ideal for black hole 
phenomenon because of loss of horizon wherein he was not aware about 
the direction he was proceeding to i.e. up or down / turning right or left. 
[Note we have discussed this phenomena before: HEMS Black Hole 
Accident: “Organisational, Regulatory and Oversight 
Deficiencies” and Deadly Combination of Misloading and a Somatogravic 
Illusion: Alaskan Otter]

9. The instructor cautioned, (though delayed), the pilot flying twice.



10. No audio warnings were recorded…except the “Decision Height” warning 
which triggered 4 seconds before the end of the recording and is 
consistent with the height of the helicopter at that moment (200 ft).

Both crew died after the helicopter impacted the sea at 116 knots.  The flight 

lasted just 5 minutes 19 seconds.  the Emergency Flotation System was not 

armed.
Operational Issues
The IAAIB observed:

There is no SOP [Standard Operating Procedure] for carrying out night offshore 

training. There are some references in the SOP issued for Night Ambulance 

Operation [medevacs].

Medevac is defined in the contract signed between ONGC and PHL, and PHL is 

providing the helicopter for medevac purposes but, it is not one of the explicit 

requirements of the contract.

We discuss some of the issues contracting for medevac in our article: 

The Tender Trap.  Also:

There is no document indicating procedure of taking weather (offshore) and 

transmitting the same to flight crew. The flight crew operating in offshore is not 

provided with accurate information on the visibility, cloud ceiling and cloud base.

There was also no mechanism to review comments made by instructors in 

training records.
Crew Resource Management (CRM)
The IAAIB states:

Having decided to go around, the flying pilot needed to get on to instruments and if 

he was disoriented, should call out so that the non-flying pilot can take over. This 

aspect is also emphasized in special points in the Medevac SOP.



The CVR readout brings out a lack of adherence to standardized checks and 

procedures and communication protocol between the crew.  

While the pilot on controls decided to go around, both pilots, perhaps, continued to 

fly VFR. Pilot monitoring displayed lack of situational awareness by not taking over 

controls. The crew thereby failed to engage in the important process of CRM.

There is a shortage of pilots and situation …aggravated due [to a] higher attrition 

rate of flight crew.

Safety Management Systems (SMS)
The operator’s SMS Manual has not been revised since it was issued the 

previous year nor had the required annual review been conducted.  The IAAIB 

say the DGCA accepted SMS Manual did…

…not contain “How to do” [instructions door] the various functions mentioned 

therein. The Manual just remains a document without performance of any function 

at working level.

This suggests a manual we would call ‘shelf ware ‘.

Despite previous accident investigations recommending the formation of a 

“strong safety department” it was observed that…

…the operator has not established the safety department in true letter and spirit [of 

the recommendations]. Even actions taken on recommendations have withered 

away with passage of time due [to] complacency and non-supervision.   It is still 

continuing on ad-hoc basis and full-fledged department is yet to be established.

Various organisational changes had occurred but no Risk Assessment was 

found by IAAIB for any of those changes.



  No safety circulars or bulletins had been issued in the previous 2 years and 

safety training required by the SMS Manual for all employees had not been 

completed.  The operator’s SMS defined 18 key performance indicators but data 

was not being collated or shared.

ONGC’s SMS also lacks aviation specifics:

There is no documented safety system or procedure with ONGC to ensure Safety 

Assurance particularly for helidecks audits, certification and periodic inspections.

Although Pawan Hans had reported helideck problems to OGNC “no closed loop 

system exists to make these good in a timely effective manner”.

These short comings are disappointing as a 2012 accident involved ONGC 

tasking a new operator with a new 17D helicopter type to operate to 14D 

helidecks.  A non-fatal tail rotor strike promptly followed.
AAIB’s Analysis
The IAAIB comment:

As discussed earlier, disorientation or black hole approach Illusion can happen 

during a final approach at dark night over water beyond which the horizon is not 

visible. These conditions may produce the visual illusion of a high-approach 

perspective.

The position of Ron Tappmeyer was to the south extremity of the South field with no 

other rigs nearby to provide ambient lighting. As per the AIS and FDR the tail wind 

approach was made with speed of approximately 79 kts. This high speed approach 

would have caused an abrupt loss of visual reference.



The pilot on controls was flying during night after break of nearly a year. The fact 

that it was a dark phase of moon made this even more challenging. Some amount 

of dusk flying on instruments would have prepared the pilot flying for undertaking 

the night flying profile/ maneuvers.

As soon as he got airborne and set course for Ron Tappmeyer, the pilot flying has 

probably entered conditions ideal for black hole phenomenon because of loss of 

horizon as is corroborated by CVR replay. Under such conditions he was not aware 

about the direction he was proceeding to i.e. up or down / turning right or left.

The pilot flying probably continued to fly visually instead of getting on to 

instruments. Therefore, on initiating the go around after realizing that he was high 

he entered into spatial disorientation extremely quickly.

The instructor was not disoriented and was aware that the helicopter was low. He 

had cautioned, (though delayed), the pilot flying twice. He however did not realize 

that the pilot flying was in total state of spatial disorientation and was unable to 

react to his caution. Nor did he take over controls.

Safety Recommendations
For Offshore Flying

1. The Helidecks from where night currency training are to be carried out 
may be identified by ONGC in association with the Helicopter operators 
and these helidecks should be provided with minimum landing aids for 
night offshore operations. DGCA may develop procedures for landing 
and takeoff utilizing these aids.

2. As far as practicable night flying to/from the floating vessels should not 
be carried out.

3. The existing SOP on offshore departure and arrival for Bombay High 
should be immediately reviewed.



4. DGCA may review the requirements regarding flight rules for offshore 
night operations and corresponding training and recency requirement.

5. ONGC should develop system and procedure for carrying out periodic 
audit of the helidecks from safety point of view. This audit should be 
linked to continued certification of the helidecks for operational 
purposes.

6. In addition to the automated means of ascertaining the meteorological 
information, a manual means of verifying and updating the visual 
elements of observation, i.e. cloud amount and height of base, visibility 
and present weather, may be developed. The latest weather report from 
each installation should be made available to the helicopter operator one 
hour before take-off.

General: Pawan Hans
1. Documentation is a weak area…. All the Manuals, procedures, processes 

be reviewed and amended to have cohesion of content. System of 
periodic review should be put in place and strictly followed.

2. PHL should immediately undertake the implementation of safety 
management system across the whole organisation by completion of 
training, reviewing the manual by including the procedures for the 
actions to be carried…, appointing key safety personnel…

3. Remedial measures should be put in place to reduce pilot attrition.
4. Crew should be indoctrinated in CRM, SOPs, good aviation practices, 

communication and assertiveness.
Our Comments
The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (IOGP) Aviation 

Management Guidelines contains Guidance on Night Operations (published in 

August 2013 and written in 2009 and 2010 by a working group lead by 

Aerossurance’s founder, Andy Evans).  The Night Ops Working Group:

…conducted an investigation of all known civil offshore helicopter accidents at night 

which occurred between 1999 and 2007. Among other things, it was determined 

that the  likelihood of an accident is approximately six times higher at night 



than during the day. Two of the core accident components were Controlled Flight 

Into Terrain/Water (CFIT/W) and Loss of Control.

Uniquely for the IOGP AMG, this interim guidance Appendix uses a bow-tie 

 format  to clearly and concisely show threats and controls:

Night Operations Bow-Tie (Credit: IOGP via BFU)

The Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) Basic Aviation Risk Standard for Offshore 

Helicopter Operations (BARSOHO), launched in May 2015, which 

Aerossurance helped develop, contains a full set of contractible controls for 

night offshore operations and medevac.  This aligns with 

the HeliOffshore Safety Performance Model.

HeliOffshore have also produced new offshore approach path management 

guidelines specifically developed to improve the safety of offshore helicopter 

operations.  HeliOffshore say:

The document provides significant new insights into five key elements that can make  

a meaningful difference in ensuring safe stabilized approaches in the offshore 

environment.



Steve O’Collard (CHC test pilot) and Mark Prior (former Bristow test pilot of M 

Prior Consulting) oversaw completion of the guidance.  Tim Rolfe, of Bristow 

Group, co-leader of HeliOffshore Operational Effectiveness explains the 

initiative is about:

…providing crews with repeatable operating practices designed to manage 

flightpath control effectively and maintain awareness of the helicopter’s state 

[which] offers strong mitigation against any potential loss of control.

Other offshore night accidents to study include:
  AAIB Report 7/2008:  AS365N G-BLUN “when preparing to land on the 

North Morecambe platform, in the dark, the helicopter flew past the 
platform and struck the surface of the sea”.

  GCAA Final Report: B212  A6-ALV struck drilling rig leg when drifted back 
on night take off.

  CIAIAC Report A-002/2010: AW139 EC-KYR, crashed in a controlled flight 
into water at teh end of a SAR exercise.

  AAIB Report 1/2011, EC225 G-REDU “the flight crew made a visual 
approach to the platform during which the helicopter descended and 
impacted the surface of the sea”.



Special points during Night Flying

In addition to the standard Night Flying Procedures the following points
are to be kept in mind while carrying out night ambulance sortie:

a) Before landing on a Rig/Floater, a dummy circuit must be carried out.
b) During approach, pilot should not hesitate to go around, should he feel
that speed/ROD in high.
c) Co-pilot must call out bank during turns and speed and ROD during
approach for proceeding to pick up a casualty.
d) The Minimum aid, i.e. NDB must be available on the destination.
e) Any time during night flying if Captain feels disoriented. He should call
it out and co-pilot to take over and bring the helicopter to the nearest
landing place.

Black Hole Illusion.
A Black-Hole Approach Illusion can happen during a final approach at
night (no stars or moonlight) over water beyond which the horizon is not
visible. When peripheral visual cues are not available to orient oneself relative
to the earth, one may have the illusion of being upright and may perceive the
surface to be tilted and upsloping. However, with the horizon visible one can
easily orient correctly using one’s central vision. A particularly hazardous black-
hole illusion involves approaching under conditions with no lights before the 
landing surface and with city lights or rising terrain beyond. Those conditions 
may produce the visual illusion of a high approach perspective. If one believes 
this illusion, he may respond by lowering the approach slope. One of the most 
difficult things to do under instrument conditions is to maintain a constant turn 
rate. One has to stop the disbelief and disregard what the brain is telling and 
focus on the instrument panel as what you see and feel is in conflict.

Spatial Disorientation
Spatial orientation is defined as our natural ability to maintain our body
orientation and/or posture in relation to the surrounding environment (physical



space in three dimensions) at rest and during motion. Spatial disorientation
or spatial unawareness is the inability of a person to correctly determine
his/her body position in space. The three dimensional environment of flight is
unfamiliar to the human body, creating sensory conflicts and illusions that
causes spatial disorientation. Statistic shows that 5 to 10% of all general
aviation accidents can be attributed to spatial disorientation, 90% of which are
fatal.
Vicious spiral is a dangerous spiral dive entered into accidentally by a
pilot who is in instrument flight when flying in instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC). Such spirals are most common during night time or poor 
weather conditions where no horizon exists to provide visual correction for
misleading inner-ear cues. This type of spiral consists of both physiological
and physical components. Mechanical failure is often a result but generally
not a causal factor, as it is the pilot’s sense of equilibrium which leads to the
spiral dive.
Another type of illusion is repeating pattern illusion. This occurs when
an aircraft is moving at very low altitude over a surface that has a regular
repeating pattern, for example ripples on water. The pilot's eyes can
misinterpret the altitude if each eye lines up different parts of the pattern
rather than both eyes lining up on the same part. This leads to a large error in
altitude perception, and any descent can result in impact with the surface.
This illusion is of particular danger to helicopter pilots operating at a few
meters altitude over calm water.

The vicious spiral is more common than the spin and it is associated
with the return to the level flight following an intentional or unintentional
prolonged bank turn. A pilot who enters the banking turn to the left will initially
have a sensation of turn in the same direction. If the left turn continues for
more than 20 seconds or more, the pilot will experience the sensation that the
helicopter is turning and banking in the opposite direction (to the right). If the
pilot believes the illusion of right turn (which can be very compelling), he will
re-enter the original left turn in an attempt to counter act the sensation of a
right turn. Unfortunately, while this is happening the helicopter is still turning 
to
the left and losing altitude. Pulling the control stick and applying the power
while turning will make the left turn tighter. If the pilot fails to recognize this
illusion and does not level the horizon the helicopter will continue turning left
and losing altitude until it impacts the ground/sea.

Probable Cause
The helicopter impacted into the sea at high velocity, as



** The pilot on controls, who had a long break in night offshore flying, got into 
complete spatial disorientation, as a result of black hole phenomenon, while 
approaching a helideck at high speed in tail winds on a dark night, and

** The PIC did not take over controls when the helicopter descended below 
critical height



Viewpoint:  Lessons Of 
The Calabasas Crash Mark Baier  December 06, 2021

In January 2020, a helicopter carrying basketball legend Kobe Bryant 
and eight others flew into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) 
during a VFR flight, leading to its crash into terrain near Calabasas, 
California, and the death of all souls onboard. Among the NTSB’s 
probable cause findings, announced in February 2021, the board cited 
an “inadequate review and oversight of [the operator’s] safety 
management processes” as a contributing factor. 

Now, 10 months later, the industry has had time to review the NTSB 
report and reflect on what it means for operators today. There are five 
key findings that apply, whether you are a helicopter charter operator or 
a private fixed-wing operator. For each of these there are real actions 
you can take to help prevent an accident like this from happening to you.

Finding 1

Had the preflight risk assessment been updated to account for changing 
weather conditions, the flight “would have required the pilot to seek input 
from the director of operations and to provide an alternative plan,” the 
NTSB said.

  Lesson 1: Risk is dynamic, not static.    Remember to 
continuously evaluate risk. 

Risk is ever-changing and not a one-time number. Evaluating risk ahead 
of time allows you to have more time to develop mitigations but 
remember this is really just an estimate. The risks faced during your 
actual operation may change as your flight approaches.

Finding 2

The NTSB noted that the flight continued in a way that was “inconsistent 
with [the pilot’s] adverse-weather-avoidance training” and that training 
using simulation devices and scenario-based training could have helped 
to improve the pilot’s ability to assess and respond to the weather.



  Lesson 2: Train for high-risk situations.    Consider both 
 likelihood and severity when ranking risks from low to high.   

For a visual meteorological conditions (VMC) helicopter operator, 
inadvertent IMC is very high-risk. Since high-risk situations are generally 
rare in occurrence, it becomes easy to let the preparation for these 
incidences slide. Use a set of procedures, such as a severity and 
likelihood matrix, to determine low, medium and high risks for your 
department.

Finding 3

The NTSB noted that the pilot-in-command’s decision to continue the 
flight may have been “influenced by his self-induced pressure to fulfill the 
client’s travel needs, his lack of an alternative plan, and his plan 
continuation bias, which strengthened as the flight neared the 
destination.”

  Lesson 3: Avoid judgment calls.    Create clear procedures so 
you and your crews don’t feel alone when having to make 
tough decisions.

Everyone wants to do their job well and deliver for their customers, but 
this can lead to clouded judgment. Documented procedures that create 
avenues for collaboration when faced with difficult decisions reinforce 
the idea that pilots have the ultimate authority on when and how a flight 
should be conducted. Additionally, safety management system (SMS) 
tools that provide a quantitative evaluation of a flight can help pilots 
make clearer decisions. 

Finding 4

The NTSB observed that the operator lacked “documented policy and 
safety assurance evaluations to ensure that its pilots were consistently 
and correctly completing the flight risk analysis forms.” They determined 
this safety issue as an “incomplete implementation of its safety 
management system.”

  Lesson 4: Practice safety assurance.    Ensure your SMS and 
operational procedures are actually working.



As we learned in Lesson 1, risk is dynamic, not static, so your SMS must 
also be dynamic. Safety assurance is the means by which you make 
sure your SMS is working. This typically involves analyzing SMS data 
and performance against safety goals to ensure targets are being met 
and things are not trending in an unsafe direction. Without safety 
assurance, you will not have the ability to learn what is and is not 
working and to know when you need to develop new mitigation 
strategies.

Finding 5

The NTSB cited issues with the operator’s safety management process, 
noting the “benefits of a mandatory SMS” and a finding that an SMS 
could have helped the operator “to manage risks.” This isn’t the first time 
the NTSB has noted that an SMS may have allowed an operator to 
identify the safety shortcomings in advance.

  Lesson 5: You need an SMS.    Take it one step at a time, but 
start now.

There were many links in the error chain that led to this accident and if 
any one of those had been disrupted, it’s possible this accident could 
have been avoided. Your SMS is precisely designed to help you break 
these links.

You do need an SMS but keep it simple. A common misconception is 
that SMS is complicated and involves dozens of reporting forms and 
tools. Your SMS must be tailored to your operation: a two-person 
department’s SMS should be different from a large flight department.

SMS, like Crew Resource Management in the 1990s, is poised to 
become commonplace and is likely to be required by the FAA for Part 
135 operators in the next few years. Regardless of mandates, now is the 
time to take the necessary actions as a department to ensure you, your 
crews and your passengers return home safely every time.

Mark Baier is CEO of AviationManuals and ARC Safety Management of 
Rockville, Maryland.



Ditching of Bristow S-76C++, Off Nigeria, 3 February 2016

On 3 February 2016, Bristow Helicopters Nigeria Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ ditched while 

en route from the deepwater ExxonMobil Erha Floating Production Storage Offloading 

(FPSO) vessel to Murtala Muhammed Airport Lagos.

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ After Salvage (Credit: AIB Nigeria)



Accident Flight
The Accident Investigation Bureau Nigeria (AIB Nigeria) say, in their safety investigation 

report (issued 25 April 2019), that on the outbound flight the Captain was the Pilot Flying 

(PF) while the First Officer was Pilot Monitoring (PM):

A few minutes into the [outbound] flight, the Captain observed an unusual vibration of the 

aircraft and made a remark about this to the First Officer. About fifteen minutes later, the 

crew also reported that the Digital Auto Flight Control System (DAFCS) and TRIM FAIL 

lights illuminated twice and were reset. The No.1 autopilot decoupled on both occasions. 

Also…a passenger seated in the middle row reported perceiving a burning smell.

The aircraft (MSN 760656 not 76056 as stated early in the AIB report) continued to its 

destination.  On the Erha helideck the Captain “conducted visual checks but could not 

ascertain the source of the burning smell”.

At 09:50 h, 5N-BQJ departed Erha FPSO for Lagos on the second leg of the flight with nine 

passengers and two crew on board, the First Officer was the PF; estimating LAG 10:40 h and  

endurance of one hour plus thirty-five minutes maintaining an altitude of 3,000 ft above 

mean sea level (AMSL).

Fifteen minutes into the flight, there were repeated illuminations of ‘TRIM FAIL’ and Digital 

Automatic Flight Control System (DAFCS) indications. The Emergency Operating Procedure 

(EOP) was consulted and it recommended that the helicopter be flown hands and feet on the 

control.



EOP (Credit: Bri
stow via AIB)

At 10:08 h, about 75 NM from LAG, initial contact was made with Lagos Approach. The Pilot  

Flying (PF) complained of the collective being heavy and the autopilot decoupling. There was  

loss of power, high rate of descent and decreasing altitude. The Captain observed a slight 

turn to the right and asked the PF to check heading and the PF reported that there was 

problem with the compass.

The instrument readings were inaccurate and inconsistent, and the aircraft started drifting 

to the right.

At about 66 NM on radial 145º from LAG, the Captain made a distress call “MAY DAY, MAY 

DAY, MAY DAY” on the Approach frequency. Afterwards, the aircraft stabilized at an 



altitude of 1,500 ft AMSL on a NE-E heading and the Captain briefed the passengers that 

they would have to ditch the aircraft.

At about 10:19 h, 5N-BQJ made a controlled landing on water at approximately 77 NM on 

radial 139º of ‘LAG VOR’.

The Emergency Flotation System (EFS) deployed.  The Co Pilot stated:

The [external] life-raft on the left was not fully deployed. This led to most passengers and 

crew utilizing the life raft on the right side.

All 11 POB exited the aircraft without any injury.  They were picked up by the Sea Trucks 

Group craneship Jascon 25.  The aircraft subsequently over turned.

Analysis
The AIB note that:

This aircraft was equipped with a dual DFZ-760 DAFCS systems that combines autopilot and  

flight director functions and requires synchronized heading input from the compass control 

among other inputs.

With the compass control panel SLAVE-FREE switches set to SLAVE, the gyro is slaved to 

the earth’s magnetic field to provide accurate heading information to the pilot’s and co-

pilot’s EHSI [Electronic Horizontal Situation Indicators].

Where inputs from the compass control are not synchronized, a flight director malfunction 

may occur as was the case in this accident…[and]…as a result, the heading information 

being fed into the Flight Director were not synchronised, hence the crew were getting 

unreliable heading information.

The company Operations Manual (Part B) checklist requires that the compasses be selected 

to SLAVE mode after take-off.



Checklist (Credit: Bristow via AIB)

During the flight from Erha to Lagos, the CVR transcript confirmed that the crew executed 

the items in the Bristow S76C++ Pre-Taxi, Before Take-off and After Take-off checklists, but 



omitted the crucial6 th item on the After Take-off/GoAround 

Checklist-Compasses…Check/Slaved

[Physical] evidence available to the Bureau indicated that the No. 1 & 2 COMPASSES were in  

FREE DG mode.

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ Switch Position (Credit: AIB Nigeria)

According to the CVR transcript, the First Officer said “Setting…., Setting…. Setting. Set the 

Compass. OK because the Compass seems to be turning by itself.” The Captain responded, 

“Turn to your Side. The Compass is Confusing.” The First Officer also remarked “yeah, what 

is going on, because I’m turning.”   The Captain said, “Are you turning…I have control…”

The comments of the Captain and the First Officer indicated that they were alarmed.

AIB strangely make no comment that an S-76C+ (5N-BGD) had been lost in a fatal accident 

only 6 months before and the crew may well have had a heightened sensitivity to 

anomalous aircraft behaviour.  AIB go on:

The crew should have confirmed the position of the Compass control switch and returned 

same to the SLAVE mode and the heading synchronized appropriately. This should have 

resolved the Flight Director malfunction and the flight would have continued normally.



Of course its easy for investigators to say what people should have done with the luxury 

of being cognisant of the full situation.

The First Officer told the Captain that the Altitude Holding was “Fine but the Heading is not 

accurate”. The First Officer went further to say “Yeah, the problem is that we don’t know the  

Heading in which we are right now. Which direction?” The aircraft deviated from the 

intended flight path.

Due to either an uncommanded control input by a degraded auto pilot or an inadvertent 

control input from PF, the aircraft went into a high rate of descent (2,100 ft/min)…loosing 

speed from 148 KIAS to 64 KIAS over the same period (60 seconds) before stabilizing at 

1,500 ft

Sikorsky S-76C++ 5N-BQJ FDR Trace (Credit: UK AAIB via AIB Nigeria)

The crew became very agitated, but later regained control of the flight path at 1,000 ft 

AMSL. Thereafter, the crew stabilized the aircraft at 1,500 ft. According to the CVR 

transcript the Captain said, “we are maintaining 1,500 ft this time, we lost all our 

instruments.” The PF went further to say “Yeah, the problem is that we don’t know the 



heading in which we are right now. Which direction?” At this point the crew decided to 

ditch the aircraft.

Causal Factor
The crew switched the Compass to “FREE” DG mode for Landing on the helideck at Erha 

FPSO, and did not return to the “SLAVE” mode after take-off which caused the trim fail to 

cut off consistently which in turn disengaged the autopilot as a result of the unsynchronised 

heading inputs.

Contributory Factors
1) Non-adherence to Company Operations Manual (Part B checklist) as it relates to after 

take-off checks.

2)The crew did not disengage the autopilot to fly the aircraft manually.

Safety Recommendations
Four safety recommendations were made.  Two related to FDR annual maintenance (only 

four parameters [Pressure Altitude, Indicated Airspeed, Master Caution and Autopilot 

Engaged 1 & 2] were downloaded successfully).  One was to consider reviewing a 

procedure and the fourth was that the company “should ensure that Flight Crew follow 

approved checklist items, and procedures at all times”.



S-76C+ MLG Collapsed Due to Pothole

On the 18 February 2018 Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL suffered a landing 

gear collapse during taxy at Acadiana Regional Airport (ARA), New Iberia, LA.  The 

aircraft was performing an offshore oil and gas flight for  Talos Energy with 2 crew 

and 3 passengers.

Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL at ARA, New Iberia: Note Degraded Paving (Credit: FAA via NTSB)



The Accident

In their safety investigation report, the US National Transportation Safety Board 

(NTSB) say:

The pilot reported that, while the copilot was taxiing the wheel-equipped helicopter to  

the runway for departure, he saw a “bump” on the concrete. The copilot reported that  

he attempted to stop before the “bump,” which turned out to be a pothole, but the 

helicopter struck the pothole with the right main landing gear, which collapsed. The 

pilot and the copilot both reported that the taxi speed was less than 5 knots.

All 5 persons on board escaped uninjured.  The NTSB say that:

The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the internal fuselage structure.

Bristow US Sikorsky S-76C+ N860AL Structural Damage (Credit: FAA via NTSB)



The operator’s accident report form describes that this was a “non-maintained but 

commonly used taxiway/ramp” that was “made up of concrete sections that are 

approximately 12′ x 12′.”

The NTSB documentation does not discuss why the surface was not previously 

identified as damaged and there is no follow up with the airport authority.  It is 

relatively unusual for an S-76 to operate from ARA so its just possible it was ground 

taxing along a route in which skidded helicopters would normally hover taxi and so 

the degraded paving was not normally an issue.  No safety actions are reported.

Probable Cause

The NTSB determined the probable cause to be:

The helicopter’s striking of a pothole while taxiing, which resulted in the right main 

landing gear collapsing.

Taxonomies of Flight Safety

The NTSB classified this occurrence as an accident as per the following US legal 

definitions:

830.2 Definitions. As used in this part the following words or phrases are defined as 

follows:

Aircraft accident means an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft 

which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention 

of flight and all such persons have disembarked, and in which any person suffers 

death or serious injury, or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage. For 

purposes of this part, the definition of ‘‘aircraft accident’’ includes ‘‘unmanned aircraft  

accident,’’ as defined herein.



Substantial damage means damage or failure which adversely affects the structural  

strength, performance, or flight characteristics of the aircraft, and which would 

normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component. Engine 

failure or damage limited to an engine if only one engine fails or is damaged, bent 

fairings or cowling, dented skin, small punctured holes in the skin or fabric, ground 

damage to rotor or propeller blades, and damage to landing gear, wheels, tires, 

flaps, engine accessories, brakes, or wingtips are not considered ‘‘substantial 

damage’’ for the purpose of this part.

However, in the Bristow annual report for FY2018 (which ended 31 March 2018) the 

CEO oddly stated that the company “finished FY18 with no Class A or B air 

accidents” (i.e. no accidents with >$500k of damage).  This is a US 

 military   designation system, not usually used in civil industry.

Background

N860AL was the first Turbomeca Arriel 2S1 powered S-76C+ delivered, to what was 

then Air Logistics, on 28 April 2003.  Almost 15 years later it had flown 9866 flying 

hours. ARA is an ex-US Navy airfield with an 8,000ft runway and a 5,000ft seaway.  

The NTSB documentation does not state which taxiway was involved but it is likely to 

be at the north end of the airport.



ARA (Credit: FAA)



Down to a sunless sea
By
 Brendan Reinhardt
 -
May 18, 2022
626

image- Adobe stock | Nightman1965
I can see clearly now the rain is gone
I can see all obstacles in my way
Gone are the dark clouds that had me blind
It’s gonna be a bright (bright)
Bright (bright) sunshiny day.

Johnny Nash

The last few hundred feet of an instrument approach require 2 things from a 
helicopter pilot: a sensitive touch – no surprise there – but also a thorough 
knowledge of the aircraft’s flight control avionics  

Many a pilot has been thankful to become visual at the bottom of an instrument 
approach – breaking into a bright sunshiny day as if the heavens have been 



parted just for your landing. However, instrument approaches to minima do not 
always result in this rapid change to perfect conditions. 

A Sikorsky S-92 helicopter in Canada found itself in poor visibility and cloud on 
the way to an oil rig in July 2019 and was required to do an instrument approach 
to get visual1. The crew had over 5,000 flying hours each, over 2,000 flying hours on 
the S92 and had received military helicopter training at the beginning of their 
careers. They belonged to a large company that had extensive experience in 
offshore operations. 

The crew attempted 2 offshore airborne radar approach procedures without 
getting visual with the oil rig. Partway through the second missed approach, the 
crew noticed they could now see the oil rig and decided to do an abbreviated 
visual approach. A quick turnaround was conducted. There was fog beneath them 
and scattered to broken cloud above them and the ocean was visible directly 
below through the fog. 

At half a mile from the oil rig, the crew disconnected airspeed hold, heading hold 
and RADALT hold and started hand flying the helicopter. The flying pilot was 
holding the force trim release (FTR) button in. Descent was started and it was 
noted that the approach was steeper than normal. Airspeed was a little high and 
up to 17 deg nose up was used to slow the helicopter on the descent. The rate of 
descent started to increase and at 250 feet was 1200 fpm with a lateral sideslip 
starting to develop. Changes in aircraft pitch and angle of bank occurred and 
progressively more sideslip occurred. 

AT 40 FEET, THE TAIL ROTOR NO 
LONGER HAD ENOUGH AUTHORITY 
TO COUNTER THE ROTOR TORQUE 

AND THE HELICOPTER STARTED 
SPINNING.

The helicopter descended through the height of the helideck with 1800 fpm and 
entered fog. The non-flying pilot realized the developing situation and puts his 
hands on the controls to level the helicopter in anticipation of water impact. At 70 
feet the collective was raised to 146 per cent, the rotor RPM decreased, and the 
low rotor horn came on. At 40 feet, the tail rotor no longer had enough authority to 
counter the rotor torque and the helicopter started spinning, going through 845 
deg over 55 seconds. Due to the low rotor RPM, the aircraft generators lost power, 
the automatic flight control system (AFCS) degraded and the primary flight 
displays went blank. 



Somehow, while flying in cloud on the standby instruments, the pilots stopped the 
yaw, avoided the ocean, recovered rotor RPM and started climbing before heading 
back to shore and a safe landing.

Most accidents have more than one contributing factor in the chain of events that 
lead to their outcome. In this case there were several, including not completing 
the missed approach and a non-stabilized approach. In this article we are going to 
review the use of the AFCS in a poor useable cueing environment.

To fly to the absolute minima of an ILS requires not only radio aid and panel 
instrument guidance, but also ground-based visual aids associated with the 
landing threshold, approach lighting [high-intensity approach lighting (HIAL)] and 
glideslope guidance [precision approach path indicator (PAPI)]. The HIAL lines us 
up with the runway and the PAPI is aligned with the glideslope, so a continuous 
descent angle can be flown to the runway. There have been previous incidents 
where large aircraft at the bottom of an ILS have made a quick dart for the 
threshold and ended up landing short. The PAPI is meant to prevent this by giving 
the pilot continued glideslope guidance once past the decision altitude. Without 
HIAL and PAPI, increased minima are required. 

Figure 1: S92 incident helicopter flight path – courtesy Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada Report.
Looking at a typical ILS approach plate, the minimum visibility can be down to 800 
m. If we check the Aeronautical Information Publication, we will see that to utilise 
this low level of visibility, the HIAL must be working and, if not, the visibility must 
be increased to 1500 m.



Further, if the aircraft is not manually flown utilising a flight director or the aircraft 
is not flown by the autopilot coupled to the localizer and glidepath, then the 
visibility is increased to 1200 m even with HIAL. From these 2 points we can see 
that in low visibility conditions, the pilot must have extra guidance to line up on 
the runway when the visibility is less than 1500 m and extra help from aircraft 
systems to keep the aircraft stable when the visibility is less than 1200 m. 

It should be clear now that in low-visibility conditions without good attitude and 
lateral cues, the pilot must rely on external horizontal and vertical guidance as 
well as automation to ensure the helicopter safely gets from the minima to having 
wheels on the runway.

Fixed-wing aircraft come down ILS finals and maintain a smooth constant flight 
path until touchdown. A small reduction in power once visual to reduce speed 
slightly to threshold speed is perhaps required. There aren’t any large changes in 
power or attitude until you flare onto the runway. Once on the runway, the earth 
holds the airplane upright using the undercarriage. 

Helicopters don’t normally run on at high speed. The helicopter at the bottom of 
an ILS must transition to visual flight while decelerating to enable a hover, air taxi 
or a low-speed run on. How the helicopter is managed from the minima to safely 
taxiing requires some thought.

At minima there may be no visual horizon. Instead, you can see the runway 
approach lighting and maybe the PAPI through the mist. There will be very little 
and even confusing cues for the aircraft attitude. The helicopter is in a low visual 
cue environment. Utilization of the AFCS and the correct modes is critical to 
reduce workload and keep the helicopter in controlled flight as it transitions from 
in cloud to a visual, low-speed run on or hovering landing. This is even more 
challenging than fixed-wing aircraft due to the greater changes in attitude and 
speed required in a helicopter.

In this incident, the S-92 was doing an approach to an oil rig, without approach 
lighting and glideslope guidance. Figure 2, from the Canadian incident report, 
shows what the useable cueing environment might have been like. 

Here we can see there are very few visual vertical cues to aid setting a pitch 
attitude and very few visual horizontal cues to indicate ground speed or lateral 
drift. Sideslip would also be difficult to detect. There are no lateral or vertical 
lights helping guide the helicopter on its approach path to the oil rig landing deck.

Remember earlier that the flying pilot was holding the FTR button in. The S-92 has 
an attitude hold system that will maintain the aircraft attitude – this does not 
function when the force trim is held in. A Canadian Air Force study found that 
pilots who utilize the attitude mode while minimizing the use of the FTR had far 
better control in a degraded visual environment than those who attempt to fly with 
the FTR depressed. Those who fly with FTR depressed: 



Figure 2: Representation of useable cueing environment on S92 visual approach to oil 
rig – courtesy Transportation Safety Board of Canada Report.

‘Often failed to interpret residual pitch or roll rates (or vertical velocities) due to 
the reduced cues and aircraft control suffered resulting in ineffective approaches 
or, in the worst case, ground impact.’

Operating in such low useable cue environments requires help for the pilot. On 
land we can have approach lighting to align ourselves and give us heading and 
drift cues. We can have PAPI to help us maintain glide path. 

Rules prohibit the use of the autopilot or flight director when the useable cue 
environment – visibility – is really low. The flying pilot did not use the correct 
AFCS mode required for flight in the reduced visibility. Holding in the FTR 
disabled the attitude hold. The pilot should not have pushed in the FTR and 
instead should have used the upper modes of the AFCS longer before 
transitioning to hand flying, utilising the trim system to keep the attitude hold 
function engaged. 

Comparing the requirements for an ILS, we can see there was no external 
guidance on azimuth or glideslope from the oil rig and the pilots were not using a 
flight director or the appropriate modes on the AFCS to reduce pilot workload. 
Because of the low useable cue environment, the pilots did not pick changes in 
attitude, sideslip, rate of descent or ground speed. This led to an excessive rate of 
descent which ultimately resulted in going into cloud very close to the ocean and 
losing control of the helicopter when applying a massive amount of collective to 
avoid hitting the ocean.



Helicopter pilots need to understand their aircraft’s AFCS. What does each mode 
enable and how is it meant to be used? Flying in low useable cue environments 
requires the use of upper modes for as long as possible and after this, use of the 
AFCS with at least attitude hold mode engaged. 

Helicopter AFCS all have subtle differences; however, approaches in low useable 
cue environments should be flown slowly and deliberately, within the trim 
system’s rate capabilities to minimize the use of the FTR. 

If the FTR is required, then it should be used quickly or momentarily and definitely 
not held in for extended periods of time. This will ensure that attitude hold is 
available to prevent excessive pilot workload and entering unusual attitudes or 
even losing control of the helicopter. 

Flying modern helicopters requires a detailed understanding of AFCS and how to 
use them – without this knowledge, pilots should be only flying on bright (bright) 
sunshiny days. 



28 May 2020

We are often asked about the main Safety Issues for the different parts of the 
Helicopter Community.  On this page you can find the latest lists for each of 
the main operational areas.  We will build on this information with a lot more 
detail to help you understand more about the top issues that are identified 
from the collaborative analysis work. 

Offshore helicopters – Safety Issues 
The most important safety issues for Offshore Helicopter 
operations are: 

 System Reliability 
 Crew Resource Management (CRM) and Operational 

Communication
 Flight Planning and Preparation
 Navigation and Airspace Knowledge
 Wrong Deck Landing
 Flight Path Management
 Helicopter Maintenance


 



Commercial ops (Other than offshore) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Commercial Helicopter 
Operations other than Offshore are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Decision Making and Planning
 Software and Configuration
 Flight Path Management
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals



 

Helicopter specialised ops (Part SPO) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Helicopter specialised 
operations are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Flight Path Management
 System Reliability
 Development and Application of Rules and Procedures
 Adverse Weather
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals
 Handling of Technical Failures
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Decision Making and Planning

 



Helicopter non-Commercial ops (GA) – Safety 
issues 
The most important safety issues for Helicopter Non-Commercial 
operations are: 

 Perception and Situational Awareness
 Flight Path Management
 System Reliability
 Experience, Training and Competence of Individuals
 Decision Making and Planning
 Flight Planning and Preparation
 Helicopter Obstacle See and Avoid
 Operations in Degraded Visual Environments
 Human Performance