Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Engineering Structures

journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/ locate /engstruct
Progressive reliability method and its application to offshore mooring
systems
⇑ Corresponding author. Present address: Aker Solutions Inc., 3010 Briarpark Dr.,
Suite 500, Houston, TX 77042, USA. Tel.: +1 713 98112047.

E-mail address: emad.mousavi@akersolutions.com (M.E. Mousavi).

0141-0296/$ - see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2013.08.016
Mir Emad Mousavi a,⇑, Paolo Gardoni b, Mehdi Maadooliat c

a Zachry Department of Civil Engineering, Texas A&M University, USA
b Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
c Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI, USA

a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 30 January 2013
Revised 26 July 2013
Accepted 13 August 2013
Available online 27 September 2013

Keywords:
Reliability
Probability of failure
Structure
Offshore
Mooring system
Reliability-based design
Maintenance
a b s t r a c t

Assessing the reliability of complex systems (e.g. structures) is essential for a reliability-based optimal
design that balances safety and costs of such systems. This paper proposes the Progressive Reliability
Method (PRM) for the quantification of the reliability of complex systems. The proposed method is a
closed-form solution for calculating the probability of failure. The new method is flexible to the definition
of ‘‘failure’’ (i.e., can consider serviceability and ultimate-strength failures) and uses the rules of proba-
bility theory to estimate the failure probability of the system or its components. The method is first dis-
cussed in general and then illustrated in two examples, including a case study to find the safest
configuration and orientation of a 12-line offshore mooring system. The PRM results are compared with
results of a similar assessment based on the Monte Carlo simulations. It is shown in the example of two-
component that using PRM, the importance of system components to system safety can be quantified and
compared as input information for maintenance planning.

 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

The safety and cost-effectiveness of a system can be maximized
if a reliability-based method is used for its design. For example, the
safety of a structural system usually depends on numerous random
variables, including environmental demands (loads), material
properties and structural capacities (strengths). Therefore, the
safety of such system is uncertain. In practice, for the design of reli-
able structures, a number of safety criteria are fulfilled as recom-
mended by design codes, normally through the use of factors of
safety (FoS). Using FoSs that locally assesses the system safety
has been practiced for many years and has produced structures
that function under various circumstances. However, concerns
remain in terms of the system reliability. Using FoS provides little
quantitative information about the overall reliability of the struc-
tural systems. In turn, quantitative reliability methods quantify
the system safety and reliability in terms of their failure probabil-
ity and provide a basis for changing and optimizing the design vari-
ables to achieve sufficiently safe structures that are not
overdesigned.
This paper proposes a Progressive Reliability Method (PRM) as a
closed-form solution for quantifying the system reliability using
the basic rules of the probability theory. This general method can
compute the probability of system failure in terms of its function-
ality and performance or the failure of certain system components
(this method is flexible to the definition of system failure). For
example, in structural engineering, the maximum deformation of
the structure to a certain level or the ultimate-strength failure of
one or some of the system components usually defines the system
failure. In a PRM, the reliability assessment accounts for the possi-
ble progressive failures of the system components until the system
failure criterion is met. Such assessment requires calculating the
probability of various failure scenarios and calculating the proba-
bility of system failure under each scenario. Because after each
component failure, the probability space of the remaining compo-
nents changes (due to the redistribution of the demands), and any
damaged state of the system may occur through multiple failure
scenarios, a general solution that accounts for all such complexities
is developed.

The PRM uses known rules of probability to formulate a general
method for calculating the reliability of complex systems. The pro-
posed method provides a closed-form solution that accounts for
the dynamic changes in the stochastic model associated with the
possible progressive failures of the components. This general
method captures the complexities that are not captured when only



2132 M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138
one or two failures of a limited number of components are consid-
ered. For example, multiple paths can lead to the same damaged
systems with several failed components. By using the well-known
total probability rule, converting the problem to a fragility (condi-
tional probability of system failure given system demands) prob-
lem, and making the assumption that only one component fails
at a time, PRM is a novel formulation based on known concepts
to compute the probability of failure of complex systems.

A PRM can be applied in the design of many complex systems.
As an illustration, this paper shows how the proposed method
can be applied to an offshore mooring system. Offshore mooring
systems are important structures, especially in development of
oil and gas drilling and production systems. The main function of
a mooring system is to maintain a floating structure within a cer-
tain offset of its still position. The offshore industry has used sev-
eral mooring systems in deepwaters; however, some of them
have failed during service or extreme conditions. A mooring sys-
tem consists of multiple mooring lines. Each line includes a few
components. Because of the uncertainties in the strength of the
system components and the environmental loads, a reliability-
based design optimization can improve the design of the mooring
systems more accurately than the conventional FoS-based meth-
ods. Furthermore, the failure of any individual component in a
mooring system does not necessarily compromise its functionality;
therefore, a PRM can be used for an unbiased and comprehensive
reliability-based optimization.

Calculating the probability of failure of offshore mooring sys-
tems or their components has been the subject of a number of
studies in the last few years. Stiff et al. [1] calculated the probabil-
ity of failure of mooring systems using a closed-form solution
accounting for the ultimate-strength (overloading) failure only
and based on a quadratic model for the failure of the individual line
components. Shah et al. [2] assessed the reliability of mooring sys-
tems by calculating the probability that incoming waves have a
frequency near the natural frequency of the mooring system. The
reliability of individual components and individual lines in a moor-
ing system was discussed by Vazquez-Hernandez et al. [3] and
Montes-Iturrizaga et al. [4] concerning the design criteria and a
method to quantify the probability of a component failure in an in-
tact system. Grimea and Langley [5] used a simplified model to
compare the probability of failure of mooring systems under differ-
ent extreme environmental loads. Ku et al. [6] performed a limited
number of Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the probability of
mooring system failure with various system properties. The prob-
ability of failure of suction caissons in mooring systems was dis-
cussed by Najjar and Gilbert [7]. Montes-Iturrizaga et al. [8] also
analyzed individual mooring lines for their reliability and used a
new equation to calculate the probability of failure of the
individual lines in the intact system. Mousavi [9] calculated the
probability of failure of mooring systems using Monte Carlo
simulation and a new definition for the failure based on system
functionality by making the assumption that one mooring compo-
nent fails at a time.

The main function of a mooring system is to maintain a vessel
within an allowable offset of its still position. However, a review
of the existing studies on the calculation of the probability of fail-
ure of mooring systems shows that the probability of serviceability
and functionality failure (the probability that the offset of a
moored vessel exceeds an allowable limit) is typically not consid-
ered. Mousavi [9] discussed this probability, suggesting a method
to evaluate the probability of serviceability failure in an offshore
mooring system. However, the proposed method is based on the
Monte Carlo simulations. The simulation-based methods are used
for the reliability analysis of other complex systems considering
serviceability limit states. For example, Hernandez-Fajardo [10]
used a Monte Carlo analysis to quantify the reliability of urban sys-
tems under seismic hazard accounting for the interdependency of
the component fragilities. However, the simulation-based methods
are usually time consuming and require extensive analyses. The
proposed PRM can quantify the reliability significantly faster than
such simulation-based approaches, accounting for the dependency
of the component failures using the total probability rule and by
computing the conditional probabilities of failure of components
under all relevant configurations. PRM can also be used to quantify
the likelihood of each scenario of system failure and compare the
importance of the components to maintain system safety. A simpli-
fied example is used in the paper to highlight such application.

In the following sections, the PRM is first formulated in general
terms and explained also using an idealized system with two com-
ponents. Then, as an illustration, it is used in two case studies for
mooring systems.
2. Progressive Reliability Method (PRM)

A PRM calculates the failure probability of a structural system
accounting for the progressive failure of system components until
the system fails. In this method, two important terminologies are
essential and frequently referred to, which are (a) a configuration
and (b) a failure scenario. We will first introduce these terms and
then discuss the method.

2.1. System configurations and failure scenarios

We define a configuration as any possible state of the structure
in terms of the possible state (failure or no failure) of its compo-
nents. This definition is based on the assumption that any compo-
nent may fail and is always either in the state of failed or in the
state of not failed. Any structural system has an initial arrangement
of its components. We call the initial state of a structural system
(with no failed components) as the intact configuration. Under
the effect of environmental loads, some components may fail.
Any component failure leads the system to a new configuration.
If a system has N components that may potentially fail, the total
number of possible configurations is 2N, which includes the intact
and 2N – 1 unique damaged configurations (including a configura-
tion with all components failed). A system configuration can be
shown using a binary row vector with N columns so that each col-
umn refers to the status of a component under that configuration;
if component j fails, the jth column is 1; otherwise it is 0. We refer
to each configuration with Xi, where the index i is the decimal rep-
resentation of the binary vector corresponding to that configura-
tion. The intact and the most damaged (all components failed)
configurations are therefore shown as X0 ¼ ½|0fflffl0fflfflffl0ffl{.z.fflfflffl.fflffl0ffl} and

N
X2N1 ¼ ½|1fflffl1fflfflffl1ffl{z. .fflfflffl.fflffl1ffl}, respectively.

N
We define a failure scenario of Xi as a group of steps (or the

path) that leads the system from X0 (the intact configuration) to
Xi. In general, the occurrence of Xi can be through one or more fail-
ure scenarios. However, because in a structural system, the envi-
ronmental loads usually vary within a time frame until reaching
to a maximum load, and that the capacity of the components are
random, it is almost impossible that in more than one component,
the internal force exceed the capacity at the same time. Therefore,
as suggested by Mousavi [9], we assume that one component fails
at a time. This assumption means that after each component fail-
ure, any next failure may occur only after the loads are redistrib-
uted among the remaining components under the new
configuration. With this assumption, if Xi has ni failed components,
the total number of possible unique failure scenarios leading to
this configuration are:



M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138 2133
Ki ¼ ni! ð1Þ
Eq. (1) shows that if Xi has more than one failed components, multi-
ple failure scenario is possible. We show the kth possible failure
scenario of Xi by Xe ðkÞ ð Þ

i . Xe k
i is a matrix in which the first row is a bin-

ary vector describing the intact system, X0, the middle rows (from
the 2nd to the nith row) are binary vectors describing the configu-
rations that occur in between, and the last row is Xi. The number
of rows in this matrix is ni + 1, since it includes a row for the intact
system and ni failure steps. We show the rth row of the kth possible
failure scenario as Xe ðk;rÞi , and we denote the jth column of Xe ðk;rÞi as

xðk;r;jÞi , which is the status of component j in the rth step of this fail-
ure scenario.

The notation used for the configurations and failure scenarios
can be illustrated in an example. In a system with 8 components,
we show the configuration that the first and the third components
failed using X5 = [00000101], where the index 5 is the decimal
number equivalent to the binary vector in the brackets. As sug-
gested 2by Eq. (1), X

6 35 has two fa2ilure scenarios. They are:

e 00000000
Xð1Þ5 ¼ 4 000000017 6 3

5; Xe 00000000
ð2Þ
5 ¼ 4 0000010075

00000101 00000101

We also note that the intact configuration of a system always
has only one scenario, which is Xe ð1Þ0 ¼ ½00000000 in this example.

2.2. Fragility model

In a PRM, the conditional probability of system failure under a
given environmental load depends on the probability that each
configuration occurs as well as the probability that the system fails
under that configuration and demand. The configurations of a sys-
tem constitute a finite set of mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive events because they are all unique and span all the pos-
sible options. Therefore, for a given demand (environmental load)
dE, we can calculate the conditional probability of failure, or fragil-
ity [11,12], as

2XN1
Pðgs 6 0jdEÞ ¼ fPðgs 6 0jXi;dEÞ  PðXijdEÞg ð2Þ

i¼0

where gs is the system limit-state function defined such that
Pðgs 6 0jXi;dEÞ indicates the probability of system failure under Xi
and dE, and P() denotes the probability of the event described in
the parenthesis. Eq. (2) formulates the fragility of a structural sys-
tem based on the PRM. By using the likelihoods of the demands,
the overall system failure probability can then be calculated using
the total proZbability rule [13] Z 2XN1
Pðgs 6 0Þ ¼ Pðgs 6 0jdEÞ  f ðdEÞddE ¼ fPðgs

B B iZ¼0

2XN1
6 0jXi; dEÞ  PðXijdEÞg  f ðdEÞddE ¼ 1 fPðgs

B i¼0

> 0jXi;dEÞ  PðXijdEÞg  f ðdEÞddE ð3Þ
where f() is the probability density function (PDF) and B is the do-
main of dE.Eqs. (2) and (3) indicate that the number of possible con-
figurations in a system exponentially increases by increasing the
number of components, implying that numerous deterministic
analyses should be completed to evaluate the terms in these equa-
tions. However, as will be discussed later, it is expected that the
term P(gs > 0|Xi,dE)becomes 0 or negligible for most configurations
with multiple failed components. For any such Xi and dE, the rest
of the terms in Eq. (3) become irrelevant. Moreover, any larger de-
mand on that configuration or any progressive failures following
that configuration also become irrelevant (i.e., their conditional
probabilities of system failure are 0 too). Finally, if some of the com-
ponents form groups of series subsystems so that the failure of any
component in the group makes other components of that group
irrelevant to the system safety, then one deterministic analysis is
sufficient to account for the failure of each series subsystem under
a given demand and configuration. Therefore, to use Eq. (3), we only
need to analyze the system for a limited number of configurations
and range of demands with nonzero P(gs > 0|Xi,dE). Hence, the decay
of P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) with progressive failures has an important role on
reducing the analyses of the PRM, because it identifies the configu-
rations and the range of demands that are irrelevant in Eq. (3).

2.3. Calculating the conditional probability that system does not fail
under each configuration

Eq. (3) requires calculating P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) for all the relevant Xi
and dE. This conditional probability depends on the definition of
system failure. For example, a structural failure can be defined
based on the ultimate-strength failure of some structural compo-
nents, the serviceability of the structure, or a combination of these
two. If a system failure is defined based on the ultimate-strength
failure of certain components or certain number of components
in a system, then if in Xi, those components or number of compo-
nents are already failed, then P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) is 0; otherwise, it is 1.
Similarly, if a system failure is defined by a certain limit for the sys-
tem response (e.g. deformation in a structure) and the modeling
error is negligible, then P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) is either 0 (when the failure
criterion is met) or 1 (when the failure criterion is not met). How-
ever, if the modeling error is not negligible, then P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) is a
number between 0 and 1 that should be estimated using a reliabil-
ity analysis (e.g. FORM, SORM).

2.4. Calculating the conditional probability of each configuration

According to Eq. (3), for calculating the system failure probabil-
ity, we should calculate the conditional probability of each config-
uration given the demand on the system. Because any
configuration Xi can occur through any of the Ki failure scenarios
leading to this configuration, we need to determine the conditional
probabilities of all these failure scenarios to compute the condi-
tional probability of this configuration. The failure scenarios of
each configuration are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaus-
tive; hence, we have

[ !
Ki XKi   

ð Þ ¼ P Xe 
P X ðkÞ

ijd i dE ¼ P Xe ðkÞE i dE ð4Þ
k¼1 k¼1

where

  0
P Xe ðkÞ B \ 1

@ C  
n\iþ1

i jdE ¼ P gj > 0jX Xei;dEA
!

 P ðk;rÞ
i jdE ð5Þ

f :x
ðk;niþ1;jÞ

j ¼0g r¼1
i

in which gj is the limit-state function of component j and is non-
positive when this component fails:

gj ¼ cj  dj ð6Þ
where cj and dj are the capacity and the demand of component j,
respectively. Eq. (6) implies that if we know the probability density
function (PDF) of cj and calculate dj given Xi and dE, we can calculate
the fragility of this component [6–8]. In Eq. (5), the first term calcu-
lates the conditional probability of no failure in the remaining com-
ponents given the probability space of Xi and dE, and the second
term computes the conditional probability of previous failure steps
that lead to this probability space given dE. Assuming that given Xi



2134 M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138

d1, k1, c1

d2, k2, c2

d1, k1, c1

dE
d2, k2, c2

Δ

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the example two-component system.
and dE, the failures of the components are independent from each
ot0her, for the first term of Eq. (5) we have

PB
1

@ \ gj C Y
> 0jXi;dEA ¼  f1 Pðgj

ðk;n þ1;jÞ ðk;n þ1;jÞ
j:~x i ¼0 j:~x i ¼0

i i

 0jXi;dEÞg ð7Þ
Also, for the second term of Eq. (5), considering the Markov prop-
erty of the steps of Xe ðkÞi [14] (which is that any further failure in
the system given its current state is independent from the previous
failure steps that led to this state), for any q between 1 and ni, we
ca n write !

q\þ1

P Xe 
ðk;rÞ
i jdE ¼ P Xe ðk;qþ1Þ ðk;

i jXe   \q
qÞ k

i ; dE  P Xe !
ð ;rÞ
i jdE ð8Þ

r¼1 r¼1

where

P Xe ðk;qþ1Þn Þ
i jXe 

ðk;qi ;dE ¼

fðk;qÞ j
i  P g 6 0jXe 

ðk;qÞ
i ;dE

 Y
 h i9

1 Pðgj k q
6 0jXe >=

ð ; Þ
i ; dEÞ >; ð9Þ

j:xðk;q;jÞ¼0^j– j
i

Here ~j indicates the component that is failing in the latest step (only
~j satisfies ~xðk;qþ1;~jÞ

i  ~xðk;q;
~jÞ

i ¼ 1). Eq. (8) recursivelycomputes the con-
ditional probability of the first q failure steps of XðkÞ i given the initial
condition of PðXðk;1Þi jdEÞ ¼ 1 for any k, dE, and i (because the system
is always initially in the intact configuration), and Eq. (9) deter-
mines the conditional probability of each failure step of XðkÞi given
that the previous failure step already has occurred. In Eq. (9), fðk;qÞi
is an adjustment factor that takes into account the one-at-a-time-
failure assumption. This adjustment is necessary because, given
Xðk;qÞi and dE, the summation of the conditional probabilities of all
the possible immediate events (failure or no failure) after each fail-
ure step must be 12. Hence

64 Y 
1

2  1P gj 0Xe ðk;qÞi ;d
 n  o37

E 5
j ðk;q jÞ
:x ; ¼0

fðk;qÞi ¼

n X 6   i

   o P g j 0
3

4  Xe 
ð Y
k;qÞ

i ;dE  1


j ðk;q;jÞ 
n  o

P gj 60jXe ðk;qÞi ;d 7
E 5

j ðk
:x ;q; j Þ¼0 :x ¼0^j– j

i i

ð10Þ

In Eq. (10), the num erator is the conditional probability of any fur-
ther failure given Xðk;qÞi and dE, and the denominator is the summa-
tion of the conditional probabilitiesof all the possible immediate
one-at-a-time-failure events given Xðk;qÞi and dE.We can use Eqs.
(5)–(10) to compute the conditional probability of each XðkÞi and
then Eq. (4) to calculate the conditional probability of Xi given dE.

2.5. Deterministic analysis

A PRM requires deterministic analysis of all the system config-
urations (Xi) and demands (dE) with P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) > 0. To do so, we
should first discretize the environmental loads and calculate the
response of the intact configuration and find the range of dE within
B that P(gs > 0|X0,dE) > 0. This range is also the largest range of dE
that should be included in deterministic analysis of all the other
configurations because all other configurations are products of fail-
ure in the intact system. We call this range of dE as the functional
range of demands. We should then consider N new configurations
where each of them has one fewer component compared to the
intact configuration. For each new Xi, deterministic analysis should
be performed. Then, only if P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) > 0 within the functional
range of demands, all possible new configurations with one fewer
components should be considered. The functional range of
demands with P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) > 0 may shrink for each new configu-
ration and thus for other configurations with further failures. Anal-
ysis of configurations with progressive failure should continue
until P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) becomes 0 or negligible for any dE, which deter-
mines an end to that path of progressive failures that must be con-
sidered. At the end of deterministic analysis, the internal forces for
all the demands and configurations with P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) > 0 are
available and can be used to calculate the conditional probabilities
of relevant configurations.

In summary, in a PRM analysis, after the deterministic analyses
are completed for all the configurations and demands with
P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) > 0, all the corresponding failure scenarios have to
be determined and their conditional probabilities must be com-
puted. Then, using Eq. (4), the conditional probability of each con-
figuration can be determined. Next, Eq. (2) gives the conditional
probability of system failure. Finally, Eq. (3) computes the proba-
bility of failure of the system. The proposed formulation can be
used also to compute the probability of exceeding a specified dam-
age level by defining an appropriate system limit-state function gs
so that gs 6 0 indicates exceedance of the selected damage level.

The computations for the PRM are illustrated using an example
of a two-component structural system.

3. Example of two-component structural system

We illustrate the computations of the PRM using an example
two-component structural system. In this example, given the envi-
ronmental load, we calculate the conditional probabilities of (1)
serviceability failure of the system, (2) ultimate-strength failure
of the system (exceedance of one component failure in the system),
and (3) failure of each component. The components of this system
are two springs arranged in a parallel form as shown in Fig. 1. Each
spring is under a tension of dj induced by dE and has a fixed stiff-
ness of kj but an uncertain strength of cj. The cylinder is a rigid ele-
ment with negligible friction with the two side-walls. Because of
the side-walls, dE will be distributed among the active (not failed)
component(s) as axial loads only. The capacity of each component
is independent from the other.

For this example, we define the serviceability failure as if D, the
cylinder displacement, exceeds D0, an allowable displacement,

Pðgserviceability
s  0jdEÞ ¼ PðD  D0jdEÞ ð11Þ

where considering the basic physics of this system,

D ¼X dE ð12Þ
N¼2
½kj  ð1 xj

iÞ
j¼1

in which xj
i indicates the status of each component and is 1 if com-

ponent j fails and is 0 otherwise, (j is the component ID and is 1 or 2



M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138 2135
in this example.) Eqs. (11) and (12) indicate that the conditional
probabilities of serviceability failure cannot be calculated without
conditioning on the statuses of the components because D is a func-
tion of xj

i. Therefore, Eq. (2) can be used to compute this conditional
probability as

2NX1¼3
Pðgserviceability

s 6 0jdEÞ ¼ fPðD  D0jXi; dEÞ  PðXijdEÞg ð13Þ
i¼0

We define the ultimate-strength failure of this system as if both
the system components fail:

Pðgultimatestrength
s 6 0jdEÞ ¼ Pðn ¼ 2jdEÞ ð14Þ

where n is the number of failed components in the system. This sys-
tem has four possible configurations, which are:

X ¼ fX0;X1;X2;X3g ¼ f½00; ½01; ½10; ½11g ð15Þ
Because the number of failed components is less than 2 for X0,

X1, and X2 and is 2 for X3,Xbased on Eq. (2), we can write
3

Pðgultimatestrength
s 6 0jdEÞ ¼ Pðn

i¼0

¼ 2jXi; dEÞ  PðXijdEÞ¼ PðX3jdEÞ ð16Þ
The failure of each component is assessed using the component

limit-state functions introduced in Eq. (6). In this example, we can
write

dj ¼ kjD ð1 xj
iÞ ð17Þ

Thus, using Eq. (2), the conditional probability of failure of each
component forXthis example will be

3 X3
Pðgj  0jdEÞ ¼ fPðgj  0jXi; dEÞ  PðXijd Þg ¼ fPðcj

E
i¼0 i¼0

 djjXi; dEÞ  PðXijdEÞg ð18Þ
Eqs. (13), (16), and (18) calculate the system and component condi-
tional probabilities of failure given dE and Xi based on the PRM.

Here, we calculate the conditional probabilities of system and
component failures under dE for some arbitrary input information.
We assume that the component capacity, cj, follows a lognormal
distribution. The component stiffness and the mean and standard
deviation of each cj are given in Table 1. The environmental load
dE and the allowable displacement D0 are taken to be 50 kN and
1.2 m, respectively.

Considering the four possible configuration of this system in Eq.
(15), five failure scenarios fXe ð1Þ ð Þ e ð1

0 ; Xe 1 Þ e ð1Þ
1 ; X2 ; X3 ; Xe ð2Þ3 g are possible.

Using the input information for this example and Eqs. (12) and
(17), the system displacements, and the component demands
Table 1
Properties of the components in the two-component example system.

Component ID lj
c (ln(m)) rj

c (ln(m)) kj (kN/m)

1 10 3 4.0  104

2 15 4.5 4.0  105

Table 2
Deterministic results and conditional probabilities of component failure under each Xe ðk;qÞi .

Failure step Corresponding Xi D d1

Xe ðk;1Þ X0 = [00] 0.11 4.6  1
i

Xe
0

ð1;2Þ

e Xe 1; Þ
1 ¼ ð 2

e X1 = [01] 1.25 5.0  10
3

Xð1;2Þ2 ¼ Xð2;2Þe X2 = [10] 0.13 –
3

Xð1;3Þ3 ¼ Xe ð2;3Þ X3 = [11] 1 –
3

and conditional probabilities of failure under dE and all the failure
steps (and their corresponding configurations) are computed as
shown in Table 2.

Results in Table 2 indicate that D is greater than D0 for X1 and
X3, but it is less than D0 for X0 and X2; thus,
PðD  D0jX1; dEÞ ¼ PðD  D0jX3; dEÞ ¼ 1 and PðD  D0jX0; dEÞ ¼
PðD  D0jX2; dEÞ ¼ 0 , which simplifies Eq. (13) to

P gserviceability  	
s  0 dE ¼ PðX1jdEÞ þ PðX3jdEÞ ð19Þ

Hence, similar to the conditional probability of ultimate-strength
failure in Eq. (16), the conditional probability of serviceability fail-
ure can be computed directly using the conditional probabilities
of configurations.

We calculate the conditional probability of all the failure sce-
narios using the information in Table 2 and the proposed PRM.
The computations based on Eqs. (7)–(9) are illustrated in Fig. 2.
In this figure, based on Eq. (10), the adjustment factor for the first
failure is

fðk;1Þi ¼ 1 ð1 0:2994Þð1 0:1710Þ
ð1 0:2994Þð0:1710Þ þ ð0:2994Þð1 0:1710Þ ¼ 1:1394

and the rest of the adjustment factors are 1.
Using the results in Fig. 2 and considering Eqs. (4) and (5), we

compute the conditional probabilities of all the configurations as

PðX0jdEÞ ¼ PðXe ð1Þ0 jdEÞ ¼ 0:5807

PðX1jdEÞ ¼ PðXe ð1Þ1 jdEÞ ¼ 0:3923 0:1365 ¼ 0:0535

PðX2jdEÞ ¼ PðXe ð1Þ2 jdEÞ ¼ 0:8235 0:2828 ¼ 0:2329

PðX3jdEÞ ¼ PðXe ð1Þ Þ
3 jd

ð
EÞ þ PðXe 2

3 jdEÞ
¼ 0:6077 0:1365þ 0:1765 0:2828 ¼ 0:1329

Please note that as it is required (configurations are mutually
exclusive and collectively exhaustive),

PðX0jdEÞ þ PðX1jdEÞ þ PðX2jdEÞ þ PðX3jdEÞ ¼ 1

These results can be used to calculate the conditional probabil-
ities of failure of the system and its components. Using Eqs. (19)
Fig. 2. Calculating the conditional probabilities of configurations in the two-
component structure.

d2 P(g1
6 0|Xi,dE) P(g2

6 0|Xi,dE)
3 4.6  104 0.2994 0.1710
4 – 0.6077 1.0000

5.0  104 1.0000 0.1765
– 1.0000 1.0000



2136 M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138
and (16), the conditional probabilities of serviceability and ulti-
mate-strength failure given dE become 0.1864 and 0.1329, respec-
tively. Finally, using Eq. (18) and the probabilities in Table 2, the
conditional probabilities of failure of the first and the second com-
ponents under dE become 0.5721 and 0.3268, respectively.

One of the applications of the proposed PRM is identifying the
most critical failure scenarios or components of a system, which
can be used for maintenance planning and failure prevention. By
assessing the likelihood of each failure scenario or configuration
and their influence on system functionality, the significance of
each component to the system safety can be assessed and com-
pared. For example, results in Table 2 show that an initial failure
of Component 1 already corresponds to a system failure (because
even if Component 2 does not fail, the system displacement still
exceeds the allowable limit). Conversely, the system could remain
functional after the initial failure of Component 2. Therefore, Com-
ponent 1 seems to be the more critical to the safety of this system.
Using the calculations in Fig. 2, initial failure of Component 1 has a
(conditional) probability of about 0.1365 and thus the likelihood
that the system failure occurs through an initial failure in Compo-
nent 1 equals 0.1365. In turn, if Component 2 initially fails, this
system still has a 0.8235 chance of survival. Based on the calcu-
lated probabilities, the likelihood that this system loses its func-
tionality through an initial failure of Component 2 is
0.2828  0.1765 = 0.0499. This implies that in the intact condition
of this system, preventing the failure of Component 1 is about 2.7
times more important compared to Component 2 for maintaining
the system safety. This information can be used as an input to
maintenance planning of such system. Similar analysis can be per-
formed in more complex systems to identify the likelihood of each
failure scenarios and optimize their maintenance planning.
Load Direction 

Fig. 3. Schematic view of the mooring Systems A (left), B (middle), and C (right).
4. Case study: a mooring system

In this section, we show the application of the PRM for calculat-
ing the failure probability of offshore mooring systems. This sec-
tion has two parts. First, the results of the PRM are compared
with those we produced using Monte Carlo simulations following
the algorithm developed by [9] for three mooring systems of differ-
ent water depths under determined environmental loads. Then the
PRM is used to identify a safer arrangement from among multiple
mooring systems with a same number but different arrangements
of the mooring lines under multidirectional environmental loads.
Since the main function of a mooring system is to hold the vessel
within allowable offset, a maximum allowable offset is used to de-
fine the system failure. However, because in practice it is common
to set a limit for the allowable number of line failures, the effect of
setting a limit for number of failed lines is also assessed.

The analyses for this study were performed using Mooring-3D
[9] based on quasi-static method; however, the proposed method
can be used based on more advanced analysis methods (e.g. dy-
namic time or frequency domain). For calculation of the mean
capacity of the suction caisson, Mooring-3D used the method rec-
ommended by Aubeny et al. [15]. For probabilistic analysis of this
study, Mooring-3D first calculated the internal forces in all the
Table 3
Basic properties of the mooring system in the first part of the case study.

ID Arrangement Water depth (m) Initial pretension (KN) Mooring line

Top

A 3  2 500 850 4 (150)
B 4  2 1000 1500 4 (200)
C 4  3 1500 400 3 (200)
mooring components and the vessel offset under all configurations
and environmental loads with P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) = 1. Then, the PRM
calculations or Monte Carlo simulations were performed. Because
each mooring line is a series subsystem, one deterministic analysis
was completed when assessing the component failures of each line
under given demand and system configuration. In the Monte Carlo
simulations, Mooring-3D was set to continue the simulations until
either completing a hundred million realizations or reaching a
COV. of less than 0.005 for the system failure probability.

In the first part of this case study, results of the PRM are com-
pared with those of Monte Carlo simulations for three typical cat-
enary mooring systems located at 500, 1000, and 2000 m waters.
All the three mooring systems held a spar with a radius of 25 m.
The allowable offsets of the spar under the determined 100-year
eastward loads of 850, 1350, and 800 kN were 20, 40, and 60 m
(4% of the water depth) from its still position. The general proper-
ties of the mooring systems are given in Table 3. Fig. 3 shows the
intact configurations of the mooring lines in each system.

Each mooring line consisted of three segments and a suction
caisson at the seafloor. Thus, the number of capacity random vari-
ables for Systems A, B, and C were 24, 32, and 48 respectively. In
reference to Table 3, the properties of the mooring segments types
are provided in Table 4. All the mooring lines in each mooring sys-
tem had the same properties. The seabed slope was taken to be
negligible in all systems. Each mooring line was attached to a suc-
tion caisson at 67% of the length of the caisson below the seabed.
The length-to-diameter ratios of all the suction caissons were ta-
ken to be six. The sizes of the suction caissons in each mooring sys-
tem are also given in Table 3. The capacities of the suction caissons
were calculated based on a soil shear strength of 3.8 kPa (80 psf) at
the seabed with a linear gradient of 1.57 kPa/m (10 psf/ft) below
the seabed; the coefficient of variations (COV) of the lateral capac-
ity of the suction caissons was taken to be 0.3 [7]. Both the lateral
capacity of the suction caissons and the tensile strength of the
mooring line segments were assumed to follow lognormal distri-
butions; however, a lower-bound capacity of 55% the mean capac-
ity was assumed for the suction caissons [7].

Results of probabilistic analysis of Systems A, B, and C using
both the PRM and the Monte Carlo simulations are given in Table 5.
The results are compared in two levels. First, the deterministic
analysis was limited to the intact configuration only, thus, a large
offset or any component failure defined a system failure. Then,
the functionality of all the configurations with one failed line
was also assessed, so the system failure was defined as if at least
two components fail or the vessel offset exceed the allowable off-
set. Comparison between the results of the two methods in this ta-
ble suggests that the differences between the results of these two
segment type IDs (length, m) Suction caisson diameter  length (m m)

Middle Bottom

5 (1200) 6(150) 1.5  9.0
5 (2000) 6(400) 1.8  10.8
2 (2500) 1(630) 1.1  6.6



M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138 2137

Table 4
Basic properties of mooring line segments.

Segment type ID 1 2 3 4 5 6
Type Wire rope Polyester Rig wire R4 anchor chain Neptune omega insert wire R5 rig chain
Unit length wet weight 350 N/m 50 N/m 300 N/m 1264 N/m 334 N/m 1264 N/m

Friction coefficient 0.1 0.1 0.2 1 0.6 1
EA (stiffness) 4.7  105 kN 2.2  105 kN 4.4  105 kN 6.0  105 kN 7.5  105 kN 6.0  105 kN
Mean tensile strength 7063 kN 7848 kN 6580 kN 6449 kN 8113 kN 8224 kN
Strength COV 10% 15% 10% 15% 15% 15%

Load Direction 
(Degrees) 

Fig. 5. The solid line indicates the 100-year environmental load in each direction.

Fig. 6. The fragilities of 12-line mooring systems.
methods are negligible. This indicates the significant advantage of
the PRM because it is a closed-form solution and its computations
are considerably faster than those of Monte Carlo simulations.

The second part of this case study compares the safety of some
alternative arrangements of the 12 mooring lines of System C. As
shown in Fig. 4, the 12 mooring lines of System C can spread as
individual lines (System D), or be arranged in three groups of four
paired lines (System F), or in six groups of two paired lines (System
H). Also, given the asymmetrical directional 100-year environmen-
tal loads as shown in Fig. 5, rotating the asymmetrical Systems C
and F for 30 clockwise can lead to possibly safer Systems E and
G respectively. Identifying the safest system from among all these
12-line alternatives is possible by calculating and comparing their
fragilities using the PRM. In this assessment, again the system
functionality is defined based on the vessel offset and the ulti-
mate-strength failures of the lines. We considered three definitions
for the system failure. The system was assumed to fail after either
exceeding the allowable vessel offset of 60 m or the failure of at
least one, two, or three lines. Therefore, the deterministic analyses
were extended to all the possible system configurations with up to
2 failed lines.

Fragility results of the PRM for the alternative systems with 12
mooring lines are shown in Fig. 6. An overview of the results in this
figure indicates that the calculated fragilities have reduced when a
second line failure is also assessed compared to when a first line
failure was considered only; however, accounting for a third line
failure has not changed the fragilities. This indicates that after
the two line failures, the system is no longer functional and thus
the range of dE with P(gs > 0|Xi,dE) = 1 is empty due to the vessel
offset criterion; hence, this criterion governs such results. On the
other hand, results in this figure show that the relative difference
between the reliability of the alternative systems becomes more
significant when accounting for higher number of progressive fail-
ures. For example, among the six analyzed arrangements of the 12-
Table 5
Comparison between results of PRM and Monte Carlo simulations.

Mooring system ID System fragility

No allowable line failure One allowable line failure

PRM Monte Carlo PRM Monte Carlo

A 1.92  102 1.93  102 1.91  102 1.91  102

B 8.43  103 8.52  103 8.40  103 8.47  103

C 8.05  102 8.03  102 8.00  102 7.95  102

(D) (E) (F) (G) (H)

N

Fig. 4. Schematic view of other alternative 12-line mooring systems.



2138 M.E. Mousavi et al. / Engineering Structures 56 (2013) 2131–2138
line mooring systems, System F has the highest and System C has
the lowest safety. The fragility of System F is about 17% less than
that of System C when the analysis accounts for the first failure
only; however, this difference is increased to near 50% when the
analysis is extended to a second line failure. These results highlight
the significance of accounting for the damaged but functional con-
figurations in the risk assessments. Results also suggest that Sys-
tems C, D, E, and H are equally safe despite the differences in
their arrangement. In summary, System F is found to have the saf-
est arrangement for 12-mooring lines for the given environmental
load and alternative options.
5. Conclusions

This paper proposed a Progressive Reliability Method (PRM) for
calculating the probability of failure of structural systems. The PRM
is a closed-form solution based on known rules of probability to
quantify the reliability of system functionality, ultimate-strength
failure (exceeding a damage level), or component failures. In this
method, all the possible system configurations in terms of the fail-
ure statuses of its components are first determined. By developing
a fragility model, the response of the system under conditioned
environmental loads is then evaluated. Using the probability den-
sity functions of the system component capacities (strengths)
and results of structural (deterministic) analysis for the component
demands (internal forces), the fragilities of the system under any
configuration and environmental loads that is considered to be
not-failed according to the definition of system failure is calcu-
lated. The total probability rule is then used to summarize the
probabilistic results and calculate the system failure probability.
The definition of failure in this method is flexible and can refer
to the serviceability failure, the ultimate-strength failure of certain
subsystems within the main system, a combination of the service-
ability and ultimate-strength failures, or any other criteria as long
as it can be checked given a configuration and demand. This meth-
od can be used to quantify the reliability and safety of complex
structures. PRM can also be used to assess and compare the likeli-
hoods of various failure scenarios and the importance of the sys-
tem components to system safety, as illustrated in the example
of a two-component structure. Such information can be also used
as input for maintenance planning or risk assessments of the sys-
tem components.

The PRM is illustrated in a case study for offshore mooring sys-
tems. First, the results of this method are compared with those of
Monte Carlo simulations. Then a 12-line mooring system is
analyzed under directional environmental loads to identify the saf-
est arrangement and orientation among several possible options.
The results show that the PRM results are very close to those of
Monte Carlo simulations. They also indicated that for an example
mooring system of this study, the reliability of this system is al-
most the same when the lines are arranged individually or in
groups of two or three paired lines with different orientations.
However, the reliability of the mooring system is considerably im-
proved, up to 50%, when the lines are formed in three groups of
four and oriented against the peak directional loads. Results show
that the PRM must be extended to two damaged lines to accurately
quantify the reliability of system concerning the allowable vessel
offset in this example.

References

[1] Stiff J, Ferrari J, Ku A, Spong R. Comparative risk analysis of two fpso mooring
configurations. In: Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, TX, USA; 2013.

[2] Shah AA, Umar A, Siddiqui NA. A methodology for assessing the reliability of
taut and slack mooring systems against instability. J Ocean Eng
2005;32:1216–34.

[3] Vazquez-Hernandez AO, Ellwanger GB, Sagrilo LVS. Reliability-based
comparative study for mooring line design criteria. J Appl Ocean Res
2006;28:398–406.

[4] Montes-Iturrizaga R, Heredia-Zavoni E, Silva-Gonźalez F. Short communication
on the estimation of mooring line characteristic resistance for reliability
analysis. J Appl Ocean Res 2007;29:239–41.

[5] Grimea AJ, Langley RS. Lifetime reliability based design of an offshore vessel
mooring. J Appl Ocean Res 2008;30:221–34.

[6] Ku A, Stiff J, Huang B, Puskar F. MODU mooring reliability analysis for
hurricane condition in the gulf of mexico. In: Offshore Technology Conference,
Houston, TX, USA; 2009.

[7] Najjar SS, Gilbert RB. Importance of lower-bound capacities in the design of
deep foundations. J Geotech Geoenviron Eng 2009;135(7):890–900.

[8] Montes-Iturrizaga R, Heredia-Zavoni E, Silvia-Gonzalez F, Straub D. Nested
reliability analysis of mooring lines for floating systems. J Appl Ocean Res
2012;34:107–15.

[9] Mousavi ME. Reliability-based design of offshore mooring systems, PhD
dissertation, Texas A&M University, 2013.

[10] Hernandez-Fajardo I. Probabilistic fragility of interdependent urban systems
subjected to seismic hazards. Rice University. PhD dissertation; 2012.

[11] Gardoni P, Der Kiureghian A, Mosalam KM. Probabilistic capacity models and
fragility estimates for reinforced concrete columns based on experimental
observations. J Eng Mech 2012;128(10):1024–38.

[12] Gardoni P, Mosalam KM, Der Kiureghian A. Probabilistic seismic demand
models and fragility estimates for RC bridges. J Earthquake Eng
2013;7(sup001):79–106.

[13] Ang AH, Tang WH. Probability concepts in engineering: emphasis on
applications in civil & environmental engineering. Wiley; 2012.

[14] Ethier SN, Kurtz TG. Markov processes: characterization and
convergence. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.; 1986.

[15] Aubeny CP, Murff JD, Moon SK. Lateral undrained resistance of suction caisson
anchors. Int J Offshore Polar Eng 2001;11(3):211–9.



Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Safety Science

journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /ssc i
Fundamentals of safety management: The Offshore Helicopter
Transportation System Model
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1293 573705.
E-mail addresses: f.nascimento09@alumni.imperial.ac.uk (F.A.C. Nascimento), a.

majumdar@imperial.ac.uk (A. Majumdar), w.ochieng@imperial.ac.uk
(W.Y. Ochieng), w.schuster@imperial.ac.uk (W. Schuster), m.studic11@imperial.ac.
uk (M. Studic).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2016.01.019
0925-7535/ 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Felipe A.C. Nascimento ⇑, Arnab Majumdar, Washington Y. Ochieng, Wolfgang Schuster, Milena Studic
Imperial College London, The Lloyd’s Register Foundation Transport Risk Management Centre, Centre for Transport Studies, United Kingdom

a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 26 August 2014
Received in revised form 26 December 2015
Accepted 25 January 2016

Keywords:
Safety management
Offshore helicopter operations
System modelling
Task analysis
Hazard identification and risk analysis
a b s t r a c t

A precondition for a holistic, systemic and systematic management of offshore helicopter operations’
safety is an in-depth understanding of the corresponding system. This is essential because the compo-
nents and the interactions between these components largely shape system and human performance,
with the potential to create safety hazards and risks. However, current techniques of system component
description in aviation are poorly specified, which contributes to a silo approach to hazard identification
and risk analysis, poor safety management and missed safety targets. This paper addresses this shortcom-
ing by developing a novel process to characterise the component-based system architecture of commer-
cial air operations and implementing the process to create the Offshore Helicopter Transportation System
Model. The paper discusses the theoretical justifications for generating such a system model and the
shortcomings of the techniques currently recommended. In order to redress these, the process combines
two task analysis techniques to derive an unbiased seminal systemmodel, which is then compared to rel-
evant models in the safety literature to ensure completeness. The process and resulting system model are
validated by carefully selected subject matter experts during training sessions in high-fidelity flight sim-
ulators. The process can be applied to describe, by means of a system model, the activities of other indus-
tries in the aviation domain. Moreover, the model derived provides, for the first time, the necessary
anchoring for future safety analyses in offshore helicopter operations.

 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

Effective safety management in complex human-centred activ-
ities, such as offshore helicopter operations (Nascimento et al.,
2014a, 2012), requires a holistic systemic view capable of mapping
all system components that may influence human and system
performance (e.g., Carvalho et al., 2009; Endsley, 1995; Hollnagel,
2009; Dougherty, 1990).

Characterising the components of a system usually involves the
elicitation of subject matter expertise, which in turn requires some
form of task analysis to be applied (Hollnagel, 2012, 2009, 2004;
Marti, 2000; Militello and Hutton, 2000; Ainsworth and Marshall,
2000). By analysing the tasks involved in the operation of an indus-
try, the industry’s safety-critical components can be identified and
systematically organised to specify the overarching system
architecture. The system architecture may then be used to support
the holistic identification of what might otherwise appear to be
disconnected and unfamiliar hazards (Hollnagel, 2012, 2009,
2004; Kontogiannis and Malakis, 2011; FAA, 2006; ICAO, 2012;
Arendt and Adamski, 2011; Stolzer et al., 2008; FAA Air Traffic
Organization, 2008; Deming, 2000; Roland and Moriarty, 1990).

In aviation, the use of task analysis to describe an industry’s
safety-critical components in anticipation of hazard identification
is widely recommended (e.g., Stolzer et al., 2008; FAA Air Traffic
Organization, 2008; FAA, 2006; Arendt and Adamski, 2011; ICAO,
2012; Wilke et al., 2014). However, the task analysis techniques
suitable for this purpose are poorly specified, with the conse-
quences that the uptake of such techniques is still very limited in
offshore helicopter operations and the characterisation of the
industry’s safety-critical components is currently absent.

The guidelines for using task analysis for describing an indus-
try’s safety-critical components in the aviation sector are vague
adaptations of systems engineering, probabilistic risk assessment
(PRA) and human reliability analysis (HRA) processes (e.g., FAA
Air Traffic Organization, 2008; ICAO, 2012). However, such
processes are best suited for tightly-controlled operations and they
fail to account holistically for the totality of the system which
may promote human and organisational failures in adaptable



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204 195
commercial operations (e.g., Apostolakis, 2004; Dougherty, 1990;
Hollnagel, 2012; 2009). Therefore, a novel process is required to
enable the description of the safety-critical components of
commercial air operations in support of hazard identification
and risk analysis. This is particularly relevant in the offshore heli-
copter industry since poor hazard identification and risk analysis
currently contributes to high accident rates (Nascimento et al.,
2013, 2014; Oil and Gas UK, 2011; OGP, 2010), missed safety
targets (Stevens, 2013), close public scrutiny (CAA, 2014) and the
potential of discontinued operations (Mitchell and Braithwaite,
2008).

Given the background above, this paper aims to (i) develop a
novel task analysis-based process to describe the safety-critical
components of an industry in the aviation sector and (ii) imple-
ment the process to generate the Offshore Helicopter Transporta-
tion System Model. These aims add to current knowledge and
practice by providing a generic process applicable to commercial
air operations and a specific model which may be used to support
hazard identification and risk analysis in the offshore helicopter
domain. Section 2 describes the pursuit of the first aim. The second
aim is pursued in Section 3.
2. Process development

2.1. Task analysis techniques

With over 100 techniques available in the literature (Annett and
Stanton, 2000b; Kirwan and Ainsworth, 1992; Drury, 1983;
Stanton and Annett, 2000; Chipman et al., 2000), case-based
reasoning (i.e., the study of similar cases of successful and unsuc-
cessful task analyses to inform the selection of an approach for a
new task analysis problem; Chipman et al., 2000) indicates that a
combination of high-level mission analysis (Jarvis and Harris,
2008; Arendt and Adamski, 2011) and Hierarchical Task Analysis
(HTA; Annett and Duncan, 1967) have the potential to address
the first research aim.

High-level mission analysis enables the operation to be
described by its constituent parts prior to further in-depth analy-
sis. This technique was used by Jarvis and Harris (2008) to support
human factors analyses on the basis of phases of glider flights. HTA
in turn is the most consistently-applied, flexible and fundamental
approach to task analysis and involves describing a task by a hier-
archy of sub-goals and plans that indicate the conditions under
which the sub-goals should be executed (Shepherd, 2000;
Shryane et al., 2000; Salmon et al., 2011). HTA has been applied
in various domains and, in aviation, has been used to support
pilot-friendly cockpit design and risk assessment in airport
operations (Wilke et al., 2014; Harris et al., 2005).
2.2. Process’ steps

The combined use of high-level mission analysis and HTA
begins with the use of the former for the identification of typical
flight profiles. For each profile, the typical phases of flight are iden-
tified from the literature. HTA is then applied on the basis of vari-
ous sources of information (e.g., operational documentation and
unstructured interviews of pilots reviewed by senior pilots
(Kirwan and Ainsworth, 1992)) to highlight the tasks that typically
need to be undertaken for the successful completion of each of the
phases. This requires that the purpose of and stopping rules for
conducting the HTA are established (Kirwan and Ainsworth,
1992; Hollnagel, 2012, 2009). Such purpose and stopping rules
are essential in order to ensure that the system model is suffi-
ciently broad to fulfil its creational purposes whilst still compact
enough to be manageable (Harris, 2008; Kirwan and Ainsworth,
1992; Annett and Stanton, 2000a).

For each task identified, the actors (defined in Section 3.4) who
should perform or participate in them are identified. Then, by
grouping the actors meaningfully, a system model is provisionally
outlined. Subsequently, the provisional model is compared to rele-
vant component-based structures in aviation, risk and accident
models and performance shaping factors. This is aimed at ensuring
completeness of the developing model. Finally, the model is vali-
dated. Fig. 1 summarises the steps of the procedure to outline
the system model.

Whilst the system description is component-based, where the
components are described through the actors that execute and
support helicopter operations, the couplings between the actors
described in the model (i.e., the processes, dependencies, controls
present during the operation of the industry) are embedded into
the HTA exercise. These are described in textual format in the
tables produced. However, since such couplings are deliberately
generic and may vary considerably in response to specific condi-
tions, coupling may be better understood on a conditional basis,
e.g., by instantiating accident/conflict scenarios of interest prior
to conducting a detailed risk assessment (Hollnagel, 2012; NASA,
2013; CAA, 2010; Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002).

An example of this is offered in Section 3.8, using the statistical
analyses of worldwide offshore helicopter accidents during the
1997–2011 period, produced by Nascimento et al. (2014a, 2013).
In such analyses, bivariate testing revealed that nighttime acci-
dents were significantly associated with compromised pilot perfor-
mance (in the form of controlled flights into terrain – CFIT), mid-
weight twin-turbine (MT) helicopters and region operation (i.e.,
when operating away from the USA’s Gulf of Mexico).

2.3. Process validation

In order to ensure that the process outlined could fulfil its aim,
experts in the field were invited to comment on the face validity of
the process and its constituent steps. The experts were a consul-
tant in airport safety and a lecturer in aviation and transport, both
with a PhD degree in a related subject, and two senior offshore
helicopter pilots involved in safety management. All experts
agreed that the process can deliver the results intended.
3. Process implementation and discussion

3.1. High level mission analysis

The definition of offshore helicopter operations presented in
Nascimento et al. (2013) was used to analyse the mission at a
high-level and derive the associated flight profiles. According to
the definition, offshore helicopter transportation occurs to, from
or between installations at sea (i.e., fixed platforms and moving
boats) and the following eight flight profiles encompass this: from
onshore airport to offshore fixed platform; from onshore airport to
offshore moving boat; from offshore fixed platform to onshore air-
port; from offshore moving boat to onshore airport; and the fol-
lowing types of inter-installation shuttling: between offshore
fixed platforms; between offshore moving boats; from offshore
fixed platform to offshore moving boat; from offshore moving boat
to offshore fixed platform.

3.2. Identification of typical phases of flight

Phases of offshore helicopter flights were described in Teixeira
(2006) and represent a considerable improvement over current
taxonomies derived from the fixed wing-domain (e.g., CAST/ICAO,



196 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204

Idenficaon of 
typical phases of Identificaon of Comparison to 

actors relevant models
• Define activity, flight

e.g., offshore •List of phases of 
helicopter •List of flight flight •List of actors •System model is 

•Seminal system amended and 
transportaon profiles •List of tasks per model is born completed

phase of flight
High level  mission  
analysis for typical Identificaon of  tasks Grouping actors in a 

flight profiles to be performed meaningful way Validation

Fig. 1. Process to establish a system model (initial condition and interim deliverables described in the white boxes; process’ tasks described in the blue boxes. For
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article).
2011; see discussions in Nascimento et al. (2015, 2014b)).
Teixeira’s phases are used in this step and shown in Fig. 2.

3.3. Identification of tasks to be performed

For each phase of flight of each flight profile, HTA was applied
with the following purpose: to consolidate a holistic description
of the offshore helicopter transportation industry with respect to
its safety-critical components. The stopping rule determines that
the analysis stops when further analysis would require describing
tasks specific to aircraft types, operators (e.g., company proce-
dures) or countries. This aims to ensure that the system model is
developed at a holistic and generic level with worldwide
applicability.

The realisation of the HTA exercise was based upon the analysis
of operational procedures, observations and unstructured inter-
views (i.e., open-ended conversations over the tasks typically exe-
cuted) with over 100 experts in the field (i.e., pilots, maintenance
engineers, air traffic controllers, flight dispatchers, helideck land-
ing officers, safety officers and safety research managers) during
on-site visits to offshore helicopter operators, regulators, high-
fidelity flight simulation facilities and offshore installations. The
on-site visits occurred in the UK, Norway, Netherlands, Spain,
France, Brazil and USA.

Appendix A presents in tabular format the results of the first of
the eight flight profiles analysed, together with the identified
actors further detailed in Section 3.4. The sub-goals and the typi-
cally sequential HTA plans are embedded in the texts of the table
produced (i.e., a task should typically be executed as the preceding
one is completed). The tables covering the other flight profiles are
omitted for practicality.
Fig. 2. Typical offshore helicopter flight pro
3.4. Identification of actors

From the tasks outlined, both online and offline actors were
identified (Sklet, 2004; Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002;
Rasmussen, 1997; Helmreich and Merritt, 1998). Online actors rep-
resent the human and non-human components (e.g., people, proce-
dures, machinery) jointly operating within an environment. Their
actions, inactions or states might immediately affect safety. Offline
actors are those whose actions, inactions, or states lie dormant in
the system during task execution, frequently remaining uncalled
for until some triggering conditions occur. This classification refers
to the safety-critical components of the industry and is in line with
the concepts of active and latent failures (Reason, 1997) and sharp
end versus blunt end relations in the working context (Hollnagel,
2004; Annett and Stanton, 2000a). The following actors were iden-
tified: flight crew, cabin crew, maintenance engineers, aircraft, air-
port, offshore installations, procedures, environment, air traffic
control (ATC), helicopter company’s administrative support per-
sonnel, helicopter company’s policies, customer requirements,
original equipment manufacturer (OEM), regulatory framework.

3.5. Grouping of actors

By re-arranging the actors above, the following parts of the sys-
tem model are developed: (i) helicopter operators, which host:
flight crew, cabin crew and procedures, under its ‘flight operations’
part; maintenance engineers under the ‘aircraft & systems mainte-
nance’ part; helicopter company administrative support personnel
(e.g., flight dispatchers) under the ‘ground operations’ part; and
helicopter company policies subsumed under the ‘corporate’ part;
(ii) aircraft/original equipment manufacturer (OEM); (iii) airport;
file and phases (Teixeira, 2006, pp.52).



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204 197
(iv) air traffic control (ATC); (v) customers, which host customer
requirements (relabelled ‘contractual requirements’) and offshore
installations; (vi) environment; and (vii) regulatory framework.
Fig. 3 outlines the initial version of the system model, which
encapsulates the parts above.
3.6. Ensuring the completeness

System structures applicable to aviation are reviewed to com-
plement the developing Offshore Helicopter Transportation System
Model and ensure that it is exhaustive and complies with the stop-
ping rules. This review is important as it corrects any bias stem-
ming from the task analysis approach which covered mostly the
tasks executed by pilots during the previous steps.

Because system structures are seldom outlined with the aim of
framing the operation of aircraft by means of a system model, this
section also reviews relevant risk and accident models. These mod-
els represent a pre-defined understanding (i.e., a set of assump-
tions) of how risks exist or accidents occur in an industrial
setting (Svedung and Rasmussen, 2002; Salmon et al., 2011;
Hollnagel, 2012; Lundberg et al., 2009; Hokstad et al., 2001). As
such, risk and accident models usually refer to some sort of pre-
conceived system structure, even though this is not always made
explicit (Hollnagel, 2012).

By reviewing only the accident models which incorporate an
explicit underlying system structure (i.e., morphological accident
models; Sklet, 2004), this section does not intend to be an exhaus-
tive review of all possible models since such reviews already exist
in the literature (e.g., Hollnagel, 2004, 2009, 2012; Rollenhagen
et al., 2010; Lundberg et al., 2009; Salmon et al., 2011; Reason,
2008; Sklet, 2004; Kjellén, 2000; Borys, 2000; Saleh et al., 2010).
Finally, the literature on performance shaping factors is also dis-
cussed since such literature refers to system elements, i.e., those
which affect human performance.
3.6.1. Aviation system and risk models
3.6.1.1. Subotic et al. (2005). The authors described the Air Trans-
port System from an Air Traffic Management’s (ATM) perspective,
in order to derive target levels of safety (TLS) for equipment failure.
The parts of Subotic et al.’s model used to complement the devel-
oping Offshore Helicopter Industry System Model are ‘aircraft sys-
tems’, ‘aircraft structures’ (both placed under ‘aircraft/OEM’),
‘ground-based ATM’, ‘airborne ATM’ (both placed under ‘ATC’), ‘in-
frastructure’, ‘handling’ and ‘fire-fighting’ (all placed under ‘air-
ports’). The other parts of the model are not directly relevant
given the stopping rules adopted.
Offshore H

Helicopter 
operators Aircra/OEM Airports

Aircra & 
Corporate Flight 

operaons systems Ground 
maintenance operaons 

Flight crew Maintenance Flight 
engineers dispatchers

Cabin crew

Procedures

Fig. 3. Developing Offshore Helicopte
3.6.1.2. Greenberg et al. (2005). The authors proposed a model for
the safety assessment of fixed-wing civil aviation operations using
a Bayesian belief network. The model is based on each crew mem-
ber’s readiness to fly (e.g., level of fatigue, age and medical situa-
tion); level of airworthiness of aircraft (e.g., severity of any
existing malfunction); roster policy, company’s economic situation
and safety culture; society type (i.e., hierarchical or not) and
authority gradient; atmospheric weather and visibility and finally
mission characteristics (e.g., flight length and altitude).

Whereas the crew, aircraft and company aspects were covered
by the developing system model’s ‘flight crew’, ‘aircraft/OEM’ and
‘corporate’ parts, respectively, society type and authority gradient
might be largely determined by national traits (Helmreich and
Merritt, 1998; Li et al., 2007). Therefore, the ‘country of operation’
part of the model was created.

The ‘atmospheric weather’ and ‘visibility’ were incorporated as
a breakdown of the ‘environment’ part of the developing system
model. Finally, the ‘mission characteristics’ were incorporated into
the ‘regulatory framework’ part since, in offshore helicopter trans-
portation, regulations primarily dictate the limits of the opera-
tional envelope (e.g., Quintão, 2010; ICA, 2008).

3.6.1.3. Hokstad et al. (2001) and Herrera et al. (2010). The risk
model originally developed by Hokstad et al. (2001), which was
improved by Herrera et al. (2010) confers a structure for the
assessment of offshore helicopter risk on the Norwegian continen-
tal shelf. The model is composed of two sub-models which enable
the assessment of the frequencies and consequences of a range of
factors relevant to risk. The consequence sub-model was deemed
excessively detailed in comparison to the analysis’ stopping rules
adopted. The frequency sub-model led to the incorporation of ‘he-
licopter design’, ‘continued airworthiness’ and ‘design organisa-
tions’ under the ‘aircraft/OEM’ part of the developing system
model. ‘Helideck’ was incorporated as a breakdown of the ‘offshore
installations’ sub-part of the ‘customer’ part. Additionally, ‘proce-
dures’ and ‘platform metalwork’ were incorporated to this sub-
part in order to account for the marshalling and obstacle avoidance
activities listed in the tables produced (see Appendix A). Moreover,
‘airworthiness’, ‘licensing’, ‘mission requirement’ and ‘flight safety’
were incorporated into the ‘contractual requirements’ sub-part to
reflect the safety management role of the oil and gas industry.
Finally, ‘international aviation authorities and organisations’ were
incorporated as an overarching part called ‘international regula-
tions’ in the developing system model.

3.6.1.4. Gibb et al. (2010). The authors proposed an aviation system
model without specifying the origins of the elements considered,
elicopter Transportaon System

ATC Customers Environment Regulatory 
framework

Contractual 
requirements

Offshore 
installaons

r Transportation System Model.



198 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204
though these seem to have been derived from experience and com-
mon sense. The three main parts considered (i.e., environment,
pilot and aircraft) are already covered by the developing system
model. The discrimination of these parts into sub-parts led to the
addition of ‘lighting’ and ‘maritime’ under the ‘environment’ part,
accounting for the ‘day/night’ and ‘discernible horizon’ sub-parts
in Gibb et al.’s model.

3.6.1.5. Harris and Smith (1997). The 5 M system model (Harris and
Smith, 1997, cited in Harris (2006) and Stolzer (2008)) incorporates
the following six aspects that must be considered in order to assess
operations in engineered transportation systems: man, machine,
mission, management, physical medium and societal medium
(e.g., regulatory requirements). These aspects are already covered
in the developing system model.

3.6.2. Morphological accident models
Three main and four subsidiary accident models which refer to

system structures were identified. The main models were the Swiss
Cheese model (Reason, 2008), Risk Management Framework and
Migration of Work Practice model (Rasmussen, 1997) and Systems
Theoretic Accident Modelling and Processes (STAMP; Leveson,
2004). The subsidiary models identified were the Tripod Diagnostic
Evaluation Tool for Accident Prevention (i.e., DELTA) model and the
Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS), both
derived from the Swiss Cheese model; and the AcciMap and Actor-
Map, which were derived from Rasmussen’s model. Sections
3.6.2.1,3.6.2.2 and 3.6.2.3 discuss each model and their associated
subsidiary models sequentially, with the aim to complete the
developing model of the offshore helicopter transportation system.

3.6.2.1. Swiss Cheese and subsidiary models. The Swiss Cheese
model, described in Reason (1997, 2008), introduces the idea that
production systems are typically protected by defences-in-depth.
These refer to multiple layers of controls which aim to prevent
active failures from leading to an accident.

Whilst ‘board decisions and policy’ are covered by the ‘corpo-
rate’ part of the developing system model, ‘line management’
(i.e., ‘maintenance supervision’) was incorporated since it is impor-
tant for the supervision of aircraft maintenance (Herrera et al.,
2009).

From the version of the Swiss Cheese model outlined in ICAO
(2012), ‘training’ was additionally identified as a transferable ele-
ment, which was placed under the ‘flight operations’ sub-part of
the developing system model.

The Tripod DELTA (Hudson et al., 1994) is formed by a set of
checklists designed to perform health checks in organisations
according to the elements of the Swiss Cheese model. Therefore,
the elements of the Tripod DELTA have already been covered.

The HFACS was also developed from the Swiss Cheese model to
construct taxonomies of latent failures and unsafe acts using mili-
tary aviation accident reports (Wiegmann and Shappell, 2003).
HFACS has since been adapted to several domains, including ship-
ping and mining operations. The most complete version of HFACS
was developed for rail operations and incorporates failures outside
the organisation under analysis. This version was introduced in
Salmon et al. (2011).

The ‘technological environment’ led to the incorporation of
Helicopter Flight Data Monitoring (i.e., ‘HFDM’) under the ‘flight
operations’ part of the developing system model. The phases of
flight of Section 3.2 were developed from HFDM analysis.

3.6.2.2. Risk Management Framework and Migration of Work Practice
model, AcciMap and ActorMap. Rasmussen (1997; cited in Salmon
et al., 2011, pp. 3) developed the model aforementioned to deal
with accidents as failures in control loops. The model outlines a
hierarchy of actors (e.g., individuals and organisations), from
which interaction risks might emerge. Rasmussen’s model has
been applied in many domains, such as public health (Woo and
Vicente, 2003).

The element ‘associations’ of Rasmussen’s model was incorpo-
rated into the developing taxonomy to account for the influence
that class associations (described as ‘workers’ unions’) have in
rule-making and on work conditions, with an associated impact
on safety (CAA, 2014; Nascimento et al., 2012).

The AcciMap and ActorMap (Rasmussen and Svedung, 2000) are
derivatives of Rasmussen’s model and enable safety events to be
analysed by mapping them onto a system’s model structure
(Hollnagel, 2012). Both the AcciMap and the ActorMap impose a
structure onto the socio-technical system associated with an acci-
dent, with indications of preconditions and the functions of the dif-
ferent system levels involved (Rasmussen and Svedung, 2000).
However, since their underlying model has already been discussed,
these two models do not offer further insight to improve the devel-
oping Offshore Helicopter Transportation System Model.

3.6.2.3. Systems Theoretic Accident Modelling and Processes (STAMP).
This is another control theory-founded model which encapsulates
assumptions about system control and structure. It prescribes two
hierarchical control structures (i.e., one for system development
and the other one for system operation) and the interactions
between them. Like with the previous model, safety (and con-
versely accidents) are deemed to emerge from the control func-
tions outlined (Hollnagel, 2012; Salmon et al., 2011), i.e.,
accidents occur when the control of safety-related constraints fails.

‘Project management’ in STAMP refers to the management of
safety and was incorporated as a new sub-part of the developing
system model, reflecting the tasks of safety officers (called ‘safety’)
within ‘helicopter operators’. ‘Manufacturing’, ‘manufacturing
management’ and ‘maintenance and evolution’ were incorporated
as sub-parts of the ‘aircraft/OEM’ part of the developing system
model. ‘Maintenance and evolution’ refers to the technical assis-
tance provided by the OEM, which is expected to enable product
evolution based upon the feedback of the helicopter operators.
‘Implementation and assurance’ was incorporated into the ‘aircraft
& systems maintenance’ sub-part and was labelled as ‘quality
assurance’.

3.6.3. Performance shaping factors
Performance shaping factors (PSFs) were developed in recogni-

tion that the performance of humans, as individuals and in a group,
to a significant extent is determined by a limited set of factors pre-
sent in the context in which human actions take place (Hollnagel,
2004). A review of the PSF literature allows for a list of the factors
that may affect human performance in offshore helicopter opera-
tions. Conversely, it is possible to identify which parts of the indus-
try could contribute to this shaping of performance and thus,
safety.

Subotic et al. (2007) reviewed 13 taxonomies of performance
shaping factors and summarised the factors into 14 groups. Similar
factors were proposed by Hollnagel (2004) and Annett and Stanton
(2000a). Typical factors include ‘training’, ‘support of the organisa-
tion’ and ‘conditions of work’, e.g., ‘ambient lighting’ and ‘glare’. All
factors are either not applicable given the purpose and stopping
rules of the present study or are already incorporated into the
developing Offshore Helicopter Transportation Industry System
Model.

The final version of the Offshore Helicopter Transportation Sys-
temModel is shown in Fig. 4. Each of the parts and sub-parts of the
model can be further expanded if necessary to understand the
dynamics of the whole industry or specific parts of interest. How-
ever, in order to launch an initial system to support identification



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204 199

Offshore Helicopter Transportaon System

Helicopter 
operators Aircra/OEM Airports ATM Customers Regulatory 

framework Environment Workers' unions

Aircra & 
Corporate Flight operations systems Ground 

maintenance operaons Flight safety Design Infrastructure Ground-based Contractual Offshore 
ATM requirements desnaon Airworthiness Lighng

Flight crew Maintenance 
engineers Dispatchers Manufacturing Handling Airborne ATM Airworthiness Helideck Licensing Atmospheric

Cabin crew Maintenance Technical  Rescue & 
supervisors assistance firefighng Licensing Metalwork Mission 

requirements Marime

Training Quality assurance Mission 
requirements Procedures

Country of operaon
Procedures Flight safety

International regulaons

HFDM

Fig. 4. The Offshore Helicopter Transportation System Model.
of hazards and analysis of risks, the proposed granularity is
sufficient.

3.7. Validation of results

Kirwan and Ainsworth (1992) establish that using different
experts whilst developing and rechecking a task analysis is a useful
approach to ensure that it is reliable and valid. Additionally, it is
usually better to ask SMEs to review part of the analysis than
require them to review it in its entirety. These guidelines were
taken into account during the validation exercise conducted.

Validation was achieved by observation and recording of the
tasks undertaken by the pilots during over 50 h of flight simulation
training, followed by a replay of a sample of the recordings to five
very senior offshore helicopter instructors (with over 5000 flying
hours in their careers each and in leadership positions, e.g., chief
pilot) and an open group discussion on the correctness of the tasks
captured by the researchers.

A total of 159 videos were recorded, corresponding to various
parts of the training of 16 pilots from three different companies
and three nationalities (i.e., British, Dutch and Brazilian), under-
taken in three different helicopter types widely used in offshore
operations (EC225, EC155 and AS365N2).
Offshore Hel

Helicopter 
operators Aircra/OEM Airports

Aircra & 
Corporate Flight operaons systems Ground 

operaons Flight safety Infrastructur
maintenance

Maintenance 
engineers Dispatchers Manufacturing Handling

Cabin crew Maintenance Technical  Rescue & 
supervisors assistance firefighng

Training Quality assurance

Procedures

HFDM

Fig. 5. The Offshore Helicopter Transportation System Model updated fo
The flight instructors were asked to review the tasks captured
during the task analysis exercise for each phase proposed and
use the video samples if needed to assure a common understand-
ing about the phases of flight to be reviewed. A sample of 14 video
recordings was used, corresponding to the phases of flight of Fig. 2,
except for pre-flight, taxi out and taxi in. The tasks of the pre-flight
phase are only executable in the actual aircraft and the other two
phases are of lesser importance to offshore operations (see Appen-
dix A). The senior pilots agreed that the tasks captured in the task
analysis reflected both real flight experience and the dynamics of
the simulator training exercises.

3.8. Use of the system model in hazard analysis

As mentioned in Section 2.2, between 1997 and 2011 world-
wide offshore helicopter accidents in the nighttime were found
to be associated with pilot performance (i.e., flight crew), MT air-
craft (potentially attributable to design) and region (i.e., country
of operation) (Nascimento et al., 2014a, 2013). The representation
of these associations overlaid onto the industry’s system model is
presented in Fig. 5 below, which generates a straightforward visu-
alisation of where the main problems leading to nighttime acci-
dents may lie.
icopter Transportaon Industry

ATM Customers Regulatory 
framework Environment Workers' unions

e Ground-based Contractual Offshore 
ATM requirements desnaon Airworthiness

Airborne ATM Airworthiness Helideck Licensing Atmospheric

Licensing Metalwork Mission 
requirements Marime

Mission 
requirements Procedures

Flight safety
International regulations

r the nighttime accident scenario (Nascimento et al., 2013, 2014a).



200 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204
By referring to the visualisation produced, stakeholders
involved with offshore helicopter safety management may priori-
tise interventions on pilot training, operational deployment of
mid-twin turbine helicopters, operational control and supervision
policies in specific countries, or consider restricting nighttime
operations to a greater extent. It also enables required further in-
depth hazard identification efforts to be noticed and targeted at
specific issues, such as elements of cockpit and automation rede-
sign that may be necessary (Nascimento et al., 2015).
4. Conclusions

This paper established that a novel process was required to
enable a holistic view of the safety-critical components of commer-
cial air operations to be established by means of a system model.
Furthermore, the absence of such view in the offshore helicopter
domain was identified. These gaps were addressed in this paper
by the meticulous development and careful implementation of a
novel process which generated a customised component-based
system model.

In order to ensure the necessary scientific rigour, the process
and the system model produced were subject to peer-reviews
and a final validation exercise. With assured validity, the novel
Appendix A

Tasks performed and the actors involved in the phases of a flight b

Flight Tasks performed Actors
phases

Online
Pre-flight Check aircraft maintenance records. Accept Flight cr

aircraft as airworthy. Execute walk-around engineer
inspection. Execute pre engine start checks. Environm
Communicate with Air Traffic Controller ATC
(ATC) for clearance to start engines (only if
in controlled aerodrome; otherwise decide
and transmit in blind)

Engine start Check if the area is clear of obstacles. Flight cr
Execute engine start checks. Execute post available
engine start checks. Monitor passengers Environm
boarding the aircraft Airport

Taxi out Communicate with ATC for clearance to taxi Flight cr
and assignment of next stopping point (only Airport,
if in controlled aerodrome; otherwise
decide and transmit in blind). Check if the
aircraft is ready to move on the ground.
Check if the area is clear of obstacles and
other traffic. Command aircraft movement.
Monitor and maintain within power
margins. Monitor and maintain clearance
from obstacles and other traffic

Hover out Communicate with ATC for clearance to Flight cr
hover (only if in controlled aerodrome; Airport,
otherwise decide and transmit in blind).
Check if the aircraft is ready for hover.
Check if the area is clear of obstacles and
other traffic. Command aircraft to hover.
Monitor and maintain within power
margins. Monitor and maintain clearance
from obstacles and other traffic
system model was used to describe how the components related
to each other with respect to a statistical analysis of accident
reports. This enabled a swift look at the industry for which compo-
nent connections should receive prioritised safety interventions
with regards to nighttime offshore helicopter operations.

The novel process is recommended for describing system mod-
els in other areas of aviation. Furthermore, for the first time the
Offshore Helicopter Transportation System Model was outlined
and used to guide safety management, hazard identification and
risks analysis in this domain. The system model may remain as a
reference for holistic safety management in the future.

However, it is important to use the system model flexibly and
remain open to the need to update it as more knowledge in the
field is accrued, more data are collected, operations change, or
specific problems require that parts of the system model are fur-
ther developed and understood. In all such cases, the systemmodel
supports safety interventions by anchoring the main concepts
related to the operation of offshore helicopters holistically.

Acknowledgement

The authors are grateful to The Lloyd’s Register Foundation
(LRF), which fully sponsored this investigation, and the reviewers
for their knowledgeable and constructive comments.
etween an onshore airport and an offshore fixed platform

Offline
ew, Maintenance Helicopter company administrative support
s, Aircraft, Airport, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
ent, Procedures, Regulatory framework, Customer

requirements, Original Equipment
Manufacturer (OEM)

ew, Cabin crew (if Maintenance engineers, Helicopter
), Aircraft, company support personnel, Helicopter
ent, Procedures, company policies, Regulatory framework,

Customer requirements, OEM, ATC
ew, ATC, Aircraft, Maintenance engineers, Helicopter
Environment company administrative support personnel,

Helicopter company policies, Regulatory
framework, Customer requirements, OEM

ew, ATC, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
Environment personnel, Helicopter company policies,

Regulatory framework, Customer
requirements, OEM



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204 201

Appendix A (continued)

Flight Tasks performed Actors
phases

Online Offline
Air taxi out Communicate with ATC for clearance to air Flight crew, ATC, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support

taxi and assignment of next stopping point Airport, Environment personnel, Helicopter company policies,
(only if in controlled aerodrome; otherwise Regulatory framework, Customer
decide and transmit in blind). Check if the requirements, OEM
aircraft is ready for air taxiing. Check if the
area is clear of obstacles and other traffic.
Command aircraft movement. Monitor and
maintain within power margins. Monitor
and maintain clearance from obstacles and
other traffic

Takeoff Communicate with ATC for clearance to Flight crew, ATC, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
takeoff (only if in controlled aerodrome; Airport, Environment personnel, Helicopter company policies,
otherwise follow flight plan and transmit in Regulatory framework, Customer
blind). Execute takeoff checks. Check if the requirements, OEM
area is clear of obstacles and other traffic.
Command takeoff. Monitor and maintain
within power margins. Monitor and
maintain clearance from obstacles and
other traffic. Monitor speed increase. Adjust
flight profile accordingly

Climb Communicate with ATC for climbing Flight crew, ATC, Aircraft, Airport, Helicopter company administrative
instructions (only if in controlled airspace; Procedures, Environment support personnel, Helicopter company
otherwise follow flight plan and transmit in policies, Regulatory framework, Customer
blind). Execute post-takeoff checks. Adjust requirements, OEM
speed as required. Decide when to turn on
the autopilot’s upper modes. Monitor and
maintain within power margins. Monitor
and maintain clearance from other traffic.
Monitor if flight profile is being executed as
instructed/planned. Adjust flight profile
accordingly

Cruise Communicate with ATC for instructions to Flight crew, ATC, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
level off at cruise altitude/height (only if in Procedures, Environment personnel, Helicopter company policies,
controlled airspace; otherwise follow flight Regulatory framework, Customer
plan and transmit in blind). Execute cruise requirements, OEM
checks. Adjust altitude and speed as
required. Monitor and maintain clearance
from other traffic. Monitor altitude
maintenance as instructed or planned.
Adjust flight profile accordingly

Descent Communicate with ATC for clearance to Flight crew, ATC, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
initiate descent (only if in controlled Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
airspace; otherwise follow flight plan and Procedures, Environment Regulatory framework, Customer
transmit in blind). Identify the destination requirements, OEM
installation. Communicate with
meteorological observer based on the
installation for updated meteorological
conditions, or received automated weather
briefing from the installation (if available).
Decide on approach procedure and
approach direction to be executed. Execute
the descent checks. Check if the approach
direction chosen is clear of obstacles (e.g.,
boats and platforms). Re-plan approach if
required. Execute chosen approach
procedure in chosen approach direction.
Adjust altitude and speed as required for
finals. Monitor and maintain clearance from
obstacles and other traffic. Assess visual
acquisition of the landing site. Decide
whether or not to proceed to landing

(continued on next page)



202 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204

Appendix A (continued)

Flight Tasks performed Actors
phases

Online Offline
Final Decide when to switch off the autopilot’s Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support

approach upper modes. Steer the aircraft towards the Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
landing site. Monitor the continuous Environment Regulatory framework, Customer
availability of visual cues in support of a requirements, OEM
visually-guided flight manoeuvre. Decide
whether to continue or abort the
manoeuvre. Take manual control of the
aircraft. Approach destination. Monitor and
maintain clearance from obstacles and
other traffic. Monitor and maintain
approach stability. Decide technique for
entering helideck area, e.g., lateral or angled
approach. Commit to landing on the
helideck

Go around Command aircraft climb and turn away Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
manoeuvre. Retract landing gear if lowered Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
and appropriate. Monitor and maintain Environment, ATC Regulatory framework, Customer
clearance from obstacles and other traffic. requirements, OEM
Communicate with destination to inform
the go around decision (if installation
operates a manned radio station; otherwise,
transmit in blind). Decide whether to
attempt another approach or divert to
alternate. Decide if and when to re-engage
the autopilot upper modes (if they were
disengaged). Manage the flight path
accordingly

Air taxi in Execute entrance technique decided during Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
the final approach. Monitor and maintain Offshore installation personnel, Helicopter company policies,
clearance from obstacles. Monitor and (includes HLO), Regulatory framework, Customer
maintain within power margins. Follow Environment requirements, OEM
marshalling of Helideck Landing Officer
(HLO) if available. NB: this phase of flight is
unlikely to occur in an offshore installation

Hover in Monitor and maintain within power Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
margins. Monitor and maintain clearance Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
from obstacles Environment Regulatory framework, Customer

requirements, OEM
Landing Command landing (i.e., lower collective Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support

lever whilst maintaining the helicopter in a Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
stable attitude). Execute post-landing Environment Regulatory framework, Customer
checks. Reduce engine power. Reduce blade requirements, OEM
rotation. Execute pre engine cut checks

Touch and Command aircraft climb and turn away Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
go manoeuvre. Retract landing gear if lowered Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,

and appropriate. Communicate with Environment, ATC Regulatory framework, Customer
destination to inform the touch-and-go requirements, OEM
decision (if installation operates a manned
radio station; otherwise, transmit in blind).
Decide whether to attempt another
approach or divert to alternate. Decide if
and when to re-engage the autopilot upper
modes (if they were disengaged). Manage
flight path accordingly. NB: this phase of
flight is unlikely to occur in an offshore
installation



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204 203

Appendix A (continued)

Flight Tasks performed Actors
phases

Online Offline
Taxi in Check if the aircraft is ready to move on the Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support

ground. Check if the area is clear of Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
obstacles. Command aircraft movement. Environment Regulatory framework, Customer
Monitor and maintain within power requirements, OEM
margins. Monitor and maintain clearance
from obstacles. Follow marshalling of
Helideck Landing Officer (HLO) if available.
NB: this phase of flight is unlikely to occur
in an offshore installation

Engine stop Check if the area is clear of obstacles. Check Flight crew, Aircraft, Helicopter company administrative support
the wind speed limitations for stopping Offshore installation, personnel, Helicopter company policies,
rotors. Cut the engines off. Execute post Environment, Regulatory framework, Customer
engine cut checks. Alight passengers. Maintenance engineers requirements, OEM
Execute aircraft walk-around. Report any
aircraft malfunction to maintenance team
References

Ainsworth, L., Marshall, E., 2000. Issues of quality and practicability in task analysis:
preliminary results from two surveys. In: Annett, J., Stanton, N.A. (Eds.), Task
Analysis. Taylor & Francis, London.

Annett, J., Duncan, K.D., 1967. Task analysis and training design. Occup. Psychol. 41,
211–221.

Annett, J., Stanton, N., 2000a. Research and developments in task analysis. In:
Annett, J., Stanton, N.A. (Eds.), Task Analysis. Taylor & Francis, London, UK.

Annett, J., Stanton, N.A., 2000b. Task Analysis. Taylor and Francis, London, UK.
Apostolakis, G.E., 2004. How useful is quantitative risk assessment? Risk Anal. 24,

515–520.
Arendt, D., Adamski, A., 2011. System and task analysis. In: Stolzer, A.J., Halford, C.

D., Goglia, J.J. (Eds.), Implementing Safety Management Systems in Aviation.
Ashgate, Farnham, UK.

Borys, D., 2000. Seeing the wood from the trees – a systems approach to OH&S
management. In: Pearse, W., Gallagher, C., Bluff, L. (Eds.), The First National
Conference on Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems. Crown
Content, Sydney, Australia.

CAA, 2010. Hazard Analysis of the Use of GPS in Offshore Helicopter Operations.
CAA, Gatwick, UK.

CAA, 2014. CAP 1145 – Safety Review of Offshore Public Transport Helicopter
Operations in Support of the Exploitation of Oil and Gas. UK Civil Aviation
Authority, London.

Carvalho, P.V.R.D., Gomes, J.O., Huber, G.J., Vidal, M.C., 2009. Normal people working
in normal organizations with normal equipment: system safety and cognition
in a mid-air collision. Appl. Ergon. 40, 325–340.

CAST/ICAO, 2011. Phase of Flight – Definition and Usage Notes (Online). Available:
<http://www.intlaviationstandards.org/Documents/PhaseofFlightDefinitions.
pdf> (accessed 10/06 2012).

Chipman, S.F., Schraagen, J.M., Shalin, V.L., 2000. Introduction to cognitive task
analysis. In: Schraagen, J.M., Chipman, S.F., Shalin, V.L. (Eds.), Cognitive Task
Analysis. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.

Deming, W., 2000. The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Dougherty, E.M., 1990. Human reliability analysis – where shouldst thou turn?
Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 29, 283–299.

Drury, C.G., 1983. Task analysis methods in industry. Appl. Ergon. 14, 19–28.
Endsley, M.R., 1995. Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic systems.

Hum. Factors 37, 32–64.
FAA, 2006. Advisory Circular 120-92 – Introduction to Safety Management Systems

for Air Operators. Federal Aviation Administration, London.
FAA Air Traffic Organization, 2008. Air Traffic Organization Safety Management

System Manual, 2.1 ed. Federal Aviation Administration, Washington DC.
Gibb, R., Gray, R., Scharff, L., 2010. Aviation Visual Perception: Research,

Misperception and Mishaps. Ashgate.
Greenberg, R., Cook, S.C., Harris, D., 2005. A civil aviation safety assessment model

using a Bayesian belief network (BBN). Aeronaut. J. 109, 557–568.
Harris, D., 2006. The influence of human factors on operational efficiency. Aircr. Eng.

Aerosp. Technol. 78, 20–25.
Harris, D., 2008. System Safety and Accident Investigation. Cranfield University,

Cranfield, Lecture at Cranfield University.
Harris, D., Smith, F.J., 1997. What can be done versus what should be done: a critical

evaluation of the transfer of human engineering solutions between application
domains. In: Harris, D. (Ed.), Engineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics,
Transportation Systems. Ashgate, Aldershot.

Harris, D., Stanton, N.A., Marshall, A., Young, M.S., Demagalski, J., Salmon, P., 2005.
Using SHERPA to predict design-induced error on the flight deck. Aerosp. Sci.
Technol. 9, 525–532.

Helmreich, R., Merritt, A., 1998. Culture at Work in Aviation and Medicine: National,
Cultural and Professional Influences. Ashgate, Aldershot.

Herrera, I.A., Håbrekke, S., Kråkenes, T., Hokstad, P.R., Forseth, U., 2010. Helicopter
Safety Study 3, Main Report. SINTEF, Trondheim.

Herrera, I.A., Nordskag, A.O., Myhre, G., Halvorsen, K., 2009. Aviation safety and
maintenance under major organizational changes, investigating non-existing
accidents. Accid. Anal. Prev. 41, 1155–1163.

Hokstad, P., Jersin, E., Sten, T., 2001. A risk influence model applied to North Sea
helicopter transport. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 74, 311–322.

Hollnagel, E., 2004. Barriers and Accident Prevention. Ashgate, Aldershot.
Hollnagel, E., 2009. The ETTO Principle: Efficiency-Thoroughness Trade-Off.

Ashgate, Farnham, UK.
Hollnagel, E., 2012. FRAM: the functional resonance analysis method - modelling

complex socio-technical systems. Ashgate, Farnham, UK.
Hudson, P.T.W., Reason, J.T., Bentley, P.D., 1994. Tripod delta: proactive approach to

enhanced safety. J. Petrol. Technol. 46, 58–62.
ICA, 2008. AIRAC AIP Supplement N092-099/08. Serviço de Informações

Aeronáuticas, Rio de Janeiro.
ICAO, 2012. Safety Management Manual (SMM), third ed. ICAO, Montréal.
Jarvis, S., Harris, D., 2008. Investigation into accident initiation events by flight

phase, for highly inexperienced glider pilots. Int. J. Appl. Aviat. Stud. 8, 211–224.
Kirwan, B., Ainsworth, L.K., 1992. A Guide to Task Analysis. Taylor and Francis,

London.
Kjellén, U., 2000. Prevention of Accidents Through Experience Feedback. Taylor &

Francis, London, UK.
Kontogiannis, T., Malakis, S., 2011. A systemic analysis of patterns of organizational

breakdowns in accidents: a case from Helicopter Emergency Medical Service
(HEMS) operations. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 99, 193–208.

Leveson, N., 2004. A new accident model for engineering safer systems. Saf. Sci. 42,
237–270.

Li, W.C., Harris, D., Chen, A., 2007. Eastern minds in western cockpits: meta-analysis
of human factors in mishaps from three nations. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 78,
420–425.

Lundberg, J., Rollenhagen, C., Hollnagel, E., 2009. What-You-Look-For-Is-What-You-
Find – the consequences of underlying accident models in eight accident
investigation manuals. Saf. Sci. 47, 1297–1311.

Marti, P., 2000. Structured task analysis in complex domains. In: Annett, J., Stanton,
N.A. (Eds.), Task Analysis. Taylor and Francis, London.

Militello, L.G., Hutton, R.J.B., 2000. Applied cognitive task analysis (ACTA): a
practitioner’s toolkit for understanding cognitive task demands. In: Annett, J.,
Stanton, N.A. (Eds.), Task Analysis. Taylor & Francis, London.

Mitchell, S.J., Braithwaite, G.R., 2008. Perceptions of safety and offshore helicopter
travel. Int. J. Energy Sect. Manage. 2, 479–498.

NASA, 2013. NASA General Safety Program Requirements. National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, Washington, D.C.

Nascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W., Schuster, W., 2015. Nighttime
offshore helicopter operations: a survey of risk levels per phase of flight,
recency requirements and visual approach technique. Aeronaut. J. 119, 1475–
1498.



204 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Safety Science 85 (2016) 194–204
Nascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W.Y., 2013. A 15-year multivariate
analysis of worldwide offshore helicopter accidents. AHS 69th Annual Forum
and Technology Display. AHS, Phoenix.

Nascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W.Y., 2014a. Helicopter accident
analysis. J. Navig. 67, 145–161.

Nascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W.Y., Jarvis, S.R., 2012. A multistage
multinational triangulation approach to hazard identification in night-time
offshore helicopter operations. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 108, 142–153.

Nascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W.Y., Schuster, W., 2014b. Initial
evidence-based analysis of risk levels per phases of flight, recency requirements
and visual approach design in nighttime offshore helicopter operations. 40th
European Rotorcraft Forum. Royal Aeronautical Society, Southampton, UK.

OGP, 2010. Aviation Transport Accident Statistics. International Association of Oil &
Gas Producers.

Oil & Gas UK, 2011. UK Offshore Commercial Air Transport Helicopter Safety Record
(1981–2010). Oil & Gas UK, London.

Quintão, V.B., 2010. Viability of Nighttime Offshore Operations in Brazil. University
of Brasilia, Postgraduate Diploma Dissertation.

Rasmussen, J., 1997. Risk management in a dynamic society: a modelling problem.
Saf. Sci. 27, 183–213.

Rasmussen, J., Svedung, I., 2000. Proactive Risk Management in a Dynamic Society.
Swedish Rescue Services Agency.

Reason, J., 1997. Managing the Risks of Organisational Accidents. Ashgate,
Aldershot.

Reason, J., 2008. The Human Contribution: Unsafe Acts, Accidents and Heroic
Recoveries. Ashgate, Aldershot.

Roland, H.E., Moriarty, B., 1990. System Safety Engineering and Management. John
Wiley and Sons, Mississauga, Ontario.

Rollenhagen, C., Westerlund, J., Lundberg, J., Hollnagel, E., 2010. The context and
habits of accident investigation practices: a study of 108 Swedish investigators.
Saf. Sci. 48, 859–867.

Saleh, J.H., Marais, K.B., Bakolas, E., Cowlagi, R.V., 2010. Highlights from the
literature on accident causation and system safety: review of major ideas,
recent contributions, and challenges. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 95, 1105–1116.
Salmon, P.M., Stanton, N.A., Lenné, M., Jenkins, D.P., Rafferty, L., Walker, G.H., 2011.
Human Factors Methods and Accident Analysis – Practical Guidance and Case
Study Applications. Ashgate, Farnham, UK.

Shepherd, A., 2000. HTA as a framework for task analysis. In: Annett, J., Stanton, N.A.
(Eds.), Task Analysis. Taylor & Francis, London.

Shryane, N.M., Westerman, S.J., Crawshaw, C.M., Hockey, G.R.J., Saur, J., 2000. Task
analysis for the investigation of human error in safety-critical software design:
a convergent methods approach. In: Annett, J., Stanton, N.A. (Eds.), Task
Analysis. Taylor and Francis, London.

Sklet, S., 2004. Comparison of some selected methods for accident investigation. J.
Hazard. Mater. 111, 29–37.

Stanton, N.A., Annett, J., 2000. Future directions in task analysis. In: Annett, J.,
Stanton, N.A. (Eds.), Task Analysis. Taylor and Francis, London.

Stevens, M., 2013. Aviation Safety in the Oil & Gas Business. CHC Safety and Quality
Summit, Vancouver, Canada.

Stolzer, A.J., Halford, C.D., Goglia, J.J., 2008. Safety Management Systems in Aviation.
Ashgate, Aldershot.

Subotic, B., Ochieng, W., Majumdar, A., 2005. Equipment failure in ATC: finding an
appropriate safety target. Aeronaut. J. 109, 277–284.

Subotic, B., Ochieng, W.Y., Straeter, O., 2007. Recovery from equipment failures in
ATC: determination of contextual factors. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 92, 858–870.

Svedung, I., Rasmussen, J., 2002. Graphic representation of accident scenarios:
mapping system structure and the causation of accidents. Saf. Sci. 40, 397–417.

Teixeira, S. 2006. Helicopter Flight Operational Quality Assurance (HFOQA):
Development of HFOQA Analysis Software. M.Sc. Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University.

Wiegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 2003. A Human Error Approach to Aviation Accident
Analysis: the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System. Ashgate,
Aldershot.

Wilke, S., Majumdar, A., Ochieng, W.Y., 2014. Airport surface operations: a holistic
framework for operations modeling and risk management. Saf. Sci. 63, 18–33.

Woo, D.M., Vicente, K.J., 2003. Sociotechnical systems, risk management, and public
health: comparing the North Battleford and Walkerton outbreaks. Reliab. Eng.
Syst. Saf. 80, 253–269.



N
e
F
a

b

a

A
R
R
A

K
O
N
T
S
H

1

a
c
m
l
p
d
i

(
c
w
C
h
F
T
i
t
a
U
e

f
a

0
d

Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Accident  Analysis  and  Prevention

journa l homepage: www.e lsev ier .com/ locate /aap

ighttime  approaches  to  offshore  installations  in  Brazil:  Safety  shortcomings
xperienced  by  helicopter  pilots
elipe  A.C.  Nascimentoa,∗,  Arnab  Majumdara, Steve  Jarvisb

Imperial College London, The Lloyd’s Register Educational Trust Transport Risk Management Centre, United Kingdom
Cranfield University, Systems Engineering and Human Factors Department, United Kingdom

 r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t

rticle history: Accident  rates  for  night  sorties  by helicopters  traveling  to  offshore  oil and  gas  platforms  are  at  least  five
eceived 28 January 2011 times  higher  than  those  during  the  daytime.  Because  pilots  need  to transition  from  automated  flight  to  a
eceived in revised form 2 January 2012 manually  flown  night  visual  segment  during  arrival,  the  approach  and  landing  phases  cause  great  concern.
ccepted 12 January 2012 Despite  this,  in  Brazil,  regulatory  changes  have  been  sought  to allow  for  the  execution  of  offshore  night
flights  because  of  the  rapid expansion  of  the  petroleum  industry.  This  study  explores  the  factors  that
eywords: affect  safety  during  night  visual  segments  in  Brazil  using  28  semi-structured  interviews  with  offshore
ffshore helicopter operations helicopter  pilots,  followed  by a template  analysis  of  the narratives.  The  relationships  among  the  factors
ighttime flying
emplate analysis suggest  that  flawed  safety  oversights,  caused  by a combination  of lack of  infrastructure  for  night  flights
patial disorientation offshore  and declining  training,  currently  favor spatial  disorientation  on the  approach  and  near  misses

tion.
elideck design when close  to  the destina

. Introduction

Helicopters are essential for supporting offshore oil and gas
ctivities around the world. According to the International Asso-
iation of Oil and Gas Producers (OGP, 2009b),  there were 2.7
illion flights over the seas in 2007, accounting for over 9 mil-

ion passengers. Because the majority of operations involve ferrying
ersonnel, disruptions can lead to discontinuities in oil and gas pro-
uction flows, with potentially severe economic, political and social

mpacts (Mitchell and Braithwaite, 2008).
With over 85% of its production coming from offshore fields

Petrobras News Agency, 2010), Brazil is heavily reliant on heli-
opters for oil and gas activities. In 2008, nearly half a million people
ere transported in over 100 thousand flights, serving mainly the
ampos Basin (Gomes et al., 2009). Macaé is the main operations
ub, with fewer movements to this basin also occurring from Cabo
rio, Campos dos Goytacazes, São Tomé, Vitória and Rio de Janeiro.
here are over 80 fixed platforms in the Campos basin, employ-
ng more than 25,000 workers. Based on the volume of passangers
ransported, it is one of the largest non-military helicopter oper-

tions in the world (Menezes et al., 2010), ranking third after the
SA and the UK yet in 2000 (Williams, 2000). Future demands are
xpected; since 2007, oil and gas activities have been boosted by

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 207 594 2705.
E-mail addresses: f.a.c.nascimento@imperial.ac.uk,

.nascimento09@imperial.ac.uk, facnas@bol.com.br (F.A.C. Nascimento),
.majumdar@imperial.ac.uk (A. Majumdar), s.r.jarvis@cranfield.ac.uk (S. Jarvis).

001-4575/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
oi:10.1016/j.aap.2012.01.014
 Safety  initiatives  can  be derived  on  the  basis  of  these  results.
© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

the discovery of major underwater reserves (Hawkes, 2010; Leahy,
2011; Sosa, 2010; Wheatley, 2010; Yapp, 2010). As a consequence,
rotary aviation has rapidly expanded in the Brazilian oil and gas
industry (Flores, 2010; Moody, 2009).

Regulatory changes have recently occurred in Brazil in order
to enable more intense flight schedules offshore, including greater
flexibility in the execution of nighttime operations. Until October
2008, such missions were restricted to flights that were related to
search and rescue (SAR) and the transportation of severe casualties,
a rule that was subsequently relaxed to allow for their training (ICA,
2008).

Worldwide, nighttime offshore helicopter operations have been
a cause of considerable concern to both operators and regulators.
Ross and Gibb (2008) estimated that the average accident rate
between 1995 and 2007 was as high as 8.4 per 100,000 flight hours,
which is over five times greater than that for daytime operations
during the same period. Fig. 1 shows the annual numbers of night-
time accidents and their five-year rolling average, as investigated
by the authors.

The increase in accidents observed in the 2003–2006 period
occurred as the worldwide annual hours flown by offshore heli-
copter remained fairly level, between 853,000 and 895,000 (OGP,
1999, 2001, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009b). In 2004, the least
hours were flown and the greatest number of nighttime accidents
occurred (Ross and Gibb, 2008).
A further analysis undertaken by Nascimento et al. (2011)
showed that the worldwide fatal accident rate during 1997–2007
was 15 times greater for the nighttime than that for daytime. Addi-
tionally, the number of people who were fatally injured was  also



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analy

S

s
a
a
B

t
c
N
n
o
v
i
l
(
2

w
h
h
I
h
2
2
e
l
d
d
d
n
P
fl
e

s
t
2
h
i
b
o

a
e
b
c
t
d
h
i

Fig. 1. Night offshore accidents by year, with a 5-year rolling average.
ource:  Ross and Gibb (2008).

ignificantly greater at night. Between 2008 and 2009, at least
nother five accidents have lent support to Ross and Gibb’s (2008)
nd Nascimento et al.’s (2011, 2012) analyses (AAIB, 2008a, 2009;
arnett, 2009; GCAA, 2010; OGP, 2009a).

A major area of concern for offshore helicopter flights involves
he approach and landing phases, especially under degraded visual
onditions (CAA, 2010a,c; Herrera et al., 2010; Nascimento, 2009;
ascimento et al., 2011, 2012). Because current technologies can-
ot offer auto-land capabilities to helicopters, the operation relies
n the pilot’s ability to fly the aircraft with reference to external
isual cues. As such, the pilots are ultimately responsible for provid-
ng a separation from obstacles and other aircraft. This scenario has
ed to numerous accidents during night or low visibility approaches
e.g., AAIB, 1988, 1996, 2003, 2008a,b, 2009; BASI, 1993; NTSB,
006, 2008; OGP, 2009a; RVTV, 2000).

Faced with the reduced availability of daylight hours in the
intertime, helicopter companies based at high latitude locations
ave accumulated a wealth of experience in such operations and
ave also adopted a variety of approaches to risk management.

n the North Sea, for example, safety-related research projects
ave been ongoing for many years, especially in the UK (e.g., CAA,
010c; Howson, 2006; Nascimento, 2009; Nascimento et al., 2011,
012; Talbot and Webber, 1988) and in Norway (e.g., Herrera
t al., 2009, 2010; Hokstad et al., 1999, 2001). This situation has
ed to major changes in many areas, including approach proce-
ures, aeronautical infrastructure, aircraft equipment, and helideck
esign and lighting. Despite this effort, safety concerns remain, as
emonstrated by Canada’s recent severe restrictions on offshore
ight operations (Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore
etroleum Board, 2010) and by the recommendation that such
ights should be minimized in Norway, especially to ships (Herrera
t al., 2010).

In contrast to this strategy, the regulator in Brazil has been
tudying the viability of increasing regular night operations, given
he increasing demand from the oil and gas industry (Quintão,
010). Whereas in 2007, the worldwide average monthly flight
ours for offshore helicopters were about 70 (OGP, 2009b), Brazil-

an helicopters flew approximately 120 h per month, limited only
y the regulatory framework that bans night flying for the ferrying
f passengers (Quintão, 2010).

A comparative analysis between the risks of nighttime oper-
tions in Brazil versus other regions of the world cannot be
stablished based solely on accident rates. This limitation is caused
y the small number of such accidents coupled with a lack of
ountry-specific information, which is required for such a calcula-
ion to be made in the public domain. For example, the OGP reports

o not present flying hours on a country basis, and some offshore
elicopter accident reports were still unavailable in the Brazil-

an National Accident Prevention Centre’s (CENIPA) online search
sis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74 65

engine when this investigation was undertaken. However, a qual-
itative analysis of relevant normative documents in Brazil against
those from countries renowned for their benchmarking role in the
development of safety for offshore helicopter transportation, i.e.,
those operating in the North Sea (Herrera et al., 2010; Howson,
2006; Humphries, 2009), highlights a series of shortcomings that
may  increase risk should Brazil opt for such operations more rou-
tinely. This argument is further expanded in the literature review
section.

As Brazil rapidly expands its offshore oil and gas activities, it
is important for the country to develop helicopter operations in
a sustainable manner (Sosa, 2010). Consequently, because it is
well established that night operations are of considerable con-
cern worldwide, the identification of potential safety shortcomings
in relation to offshore night flying is a priority in Brazil, thereby
enabling lessons from other offshore scenarios to be incorporated
and applicable risk management strategies to be devised.

This research was commissioned by The Lloyd’s Register Educa-
tional Trust Transport Risk Management Centre at Imperial College
London, in collaboration with six offshore helicopter operators in
Brazil. The objectives were as follows:

• Identify the major factors that affect safety during night opera-
tions offshore at Campos Basin, Brazil, as experienced by pilots.

• Assess how these factors may  interact to breach safety barriers.
• Relate such relationships to current knowledge state.
• Recommend safety mitigation methods for future nighttime off-

shore operations in Brazil.

2. Literature review

Nighttime visual approach segments offshore, particularly
those following airborne radar approach (ARA) procedures, have
previously been investigated. Using cognitive task analysis, talk-
through-based interviews (Kirwan and Ainsworth, 1992) and
Grounded Theory analysis (Strauss and Corbin, 1990), Nascimento
et al. (2012) utilized the expertise of thirty-three Northern North
Sea (NNS) helicopter pilots based in Aberdeen, Scotland and high-
lighted their concerns in three major areas:

• Decision-making conflicts (for example, pilots staying on instru-
ment flight rules (IFR) after the missed approach point (MAP), in
anticipation of reaching visual meteorological conditions (VMC)).

• Unexpected events caused by factors encountered at the desti-
nation (for example, near collisions with the platform metalwork
resulting from unknowingly misplaced obstacles close to the air-
craft’s flight path).

• The potential for visual spatial disorientation resulting from fac-
tors such as a lack of visual cues for depth and surface texture
perception during the deceleration maneuver prior to landing
(this was  perceived by crews to be related to the interplay
of seven factors: perceptual problems, attentional problems,
human–aircraft interface problems, Crew Resource Management
(CRM) issues, training problems, procedures and environmental
aggravators).

Numerous authors have also commented on the aforemen-
tioned areas of concern, and the major findings are highlighted
below.

2.1. Decision making
Pilot decision making in degraded visual environments has
been previously discussed: Stokes et al. (1997) and O’Hare and
Smitheram (1995) related the decision-making process to inner



6  Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

s
m SME consultation  
O
d
m
F
c SOP evaluation 

J
e
i Interview questions 
s
i
p
s

Data collection  
2

S
w
t Data analysis  
t
s
t 2/3 of interviews
o (68% of statements)

Line-by-line analysis Interview fidelity & 
( extraction checks 
s

• 75% of statements 
Template analysis Categorisation checks

•
Story development  SME appraisal 

t
t
f
2
s

2

a
o
e
1
2
Y
b
C
2
1
c
o
a
p
n
t
c
c

6 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident

tates caused by the perception of either losses or gains, leading to
ore risk-taking or risk-averting behavior, respectively. Gibb and
lson (2008) and Helmreich and Khatwa (1998) identified flawed
ecisions in a series of approach-and-landing accidents, for com-
ercial airplanes and for the United States Air Force, respectively.

ocused on helicopters, the reports produced by the European Heli-
opter Safety Team (Masson et al., 2009) and the United States
oint Helicopter Safety Analysis Team (U.S. JHSAT, 2007, 2009) all
mphasized the need for better decision making in the presence of
nclement weather. Specifically related to the trade-offs between
afety and production needs in the Brazilian offshore helicopter
ndustry, Mata et al. (2006) identified that the earnings system for
ilots, which is partially based on wage-by-the-flight-hour, could
trongly motivate them to fly under adverse conditions.

.2. Unexpected events at the destination

Morrison (2001) investigated offshore helidecks in the North
ea and highlighted that the process of thermal effects, loose items,
rongly positioned cranes, obstructions and turbulence caused by

he layout of topside structures are all critical to helicopter opera-
ions. In this regard, Quintão (2010) mentioned that the Brazilian
tandard for helideck design in force when this research was under-
aken (Marinha do Brasil, 2009) was in need of major changes in
rder to comply with ICAO guidance and industry best practice
e.g., ICAO, 2009; CAA, 2010b). Comparative analysis between such
tandards revealed further need for change, for example:

The absence of turbulence criteria for aircraft controllability
around helidecks in Brazil, whereas research in this field has been
ongoing in the British sector of the North Sea for over 10 years.
A disregard for the ICAO-mandated helideck design standards
within the Brazilian regulations. Until recently, the Brazilian
indigenous lighting and marking schemes still followed the stan-
dards that were progressively changed in the North Sea since
1995 (for a historical perspective in helideck lighting schemes,
refer to Howson, 2006).

Moreover, Mata et al. (2006) and Gomes et al. (2009) identified
hat unclear flight maps that were used to reach offshore destina-
ions off Macaé airport, Brazil, were a cause of increased workload
or the pilots. In the USA, Hart (2006) noted that, between 1998 and
003, there were five helicopter accidents resulting from obstacle
trikes at offshore installations.

.3. Potential for visual spatial disorientation

In relation to the approach and landing phases, many authors
gree that the transition from instrument to visual rules, and its
pposite transition, are especially prone to misperceptions and
rrors (e.g., Braithwaite et al., 1998; Cheung, 2004; Cheung et al.,
995; Dunford et al., 1995; Gibb and Olson, 2008; Gibb et al.,
008, 2010; Kern, 2002; Schmidt, 1999; Tormes and Guedry, 1975;
oung, 2003). In helicopter operations, such concerns have also
een mentioned (e.g., Berbaum et al., 1991; CAA, 2002a,b,c, 2007;
heung et al., 1995; Masson et al., 2009; Nascimento et al., 2011,
012; Schmidt, 1999; Smith and Foster, 1995; Tormes and Guedry,
975; U.S. JHSAT, 2007, 2009). Indeed, the standard rule that
ategorizes flying conditions into either VMC  or instrument mete-
rological conditions (IMC) has previously been criticized, because

 range of perceptual states exists in-between, in which, while the
rescribed limits for VFR flights might have been met, there are

onetheless insufficient visual cues in the external environment
o allow for human spatial orientation. These conditions are often
alled degraded visual environments (DVE), and they render heli-
opter pilots to be especially susceptible to spatial disorientation
Fig. 2. Research methodology.

(CAA, 2007). Example conditions are blackouts (such as while fly-
ing over the sea at night) and whiteouts (flying over icy or snowy
terrain).

Previous research supports the expectation that offshore heli-
copter pilots flying night sorties in the Campos Basin will be
exposed to conditions that can lead to visual spatial disorientation,
that unexpected encounters could cause safety concerns close to
their destinations, mainly if aggravated by substandard platform
designs, and that decision-making problems may arise.

In summary, nighttime flights pose considerable challenges to
offshore operators, and the phase of flight that causes the greatest
concern is the visual segment of the approach. Several studies have
indicated that human factor issues are a key concern. Thus far, how-
ever, very few studies have attempted to collect data from current
operational pilots (e.g., Nascimento et al., 2011, 2012). In Brazil, this
concern seems especially relevant at present, because the oil and
gas industry are undergoing considerable expansion and nighttime
helicopter operations are considered for ameliorating production
bottlenecks. Therefore, in order to understand the elements that
cause the greatest difficulties to pilots in this specific operational
flight phase, a methodology was  proposed, as outlined below.

3. Methodology

The general methodology followed by this study is shown in

Fig. 2 and is based, in part, on the UK Civil Aviation Authority’s
(CAA) safety assessment methodology (CAA, 2010c),  in which the
identification of hazards and conflict scenarios should initiate any
attempt at safety assessment.



 Analy

p
s
m
t
e
m
w
p
a
b
a
f
d

3

(
o
w
o
e
d
d
i
b
t
a
l
n
t
c
F
t
a
s

a
t
o
t
c
a
2

d
t
d
v
i

a
c
a
w
p

3

a
J
n

F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident

Because the accidents in Brazil were too few to allow a com-
rehensive understanding of the situation to be drawn, the social
ciences’ principle of triangulation was used. This method deter-
ines that findings and conclusions should be based on different

ypes of sources or inputs. As such, interviews were found to be nec-
ssary, to compliment the studies based on the accident reports
entioned on the previous section. This triangulation approach
as previously applied in the offshore context to surmount the
roblems of limited and uncertain datasets by Vinnem (2010, 2011)
nd Herrera et al. (2010), for example. Because the literature has
een scarce on the subject, knowledge elicitation from profession-
ls in the domain, currently employed as such, was  necessary. The
ollowing sections outline each step of the methodology that was
evised.

.1. Subject matter expert (SME) consultation

In Brazil, in line with the Law of the Air in other countries
e.g., JAA, 2007), the responsibility for ensuring self-separation from
ther aircraft and obstacles during night visual flight segments lies
ith the pilot-in-command (ICA, 2008). With no procedures laid

ut by the regulator for this specific phase, there may  be consid-
rable variability in the techniques that are used by pilots across
ifferent helicopter operators. To address this variability, a stan-
ard operating procedure (SOP) evaluation sub-step was  devised

n order to determine whether a single research approach could
e undertaken across different companies and to determine which
ask description would then generate comparable data. Having
nalyzed the existing procedures that were laid out by the col-
aborating companies for nighttime approaches offshore, the last
autical mile to the helideck was deemed sufficiently similar across
he operators to smooth out eventual differences in pilots’ per-
eptions caused by their dissimilar instrument descent techniques.
ive experienced offshore helicopter pilots, who were also char-
ered air accident investigators (each with over 5000 flying hours
ccrued in Brazil), agreed that the final mile to the helideck would
uffice for the purposes of this research.

Subsequently, an individual semi-structured interview
pproach was chosen to ensure both participant privacy and
o optimize the time that was available. However, because of
perational constraints that were imposed on the participants,
wo interview sessions were conducted collectively, in which
ase participants were individually consulted beforehand for their
greement. In total, there were 22 individual interviews, one with

 and another one with 4 participants.
Demographic and open-ended interview questions were

evised. The open-ended questions used cognitive task analysis
alk-through principles (Kirwan and Ainsworth, 1992) and were
iscussed and refined with the same five SMEs referred to pre-
iously, before the main data collection commenced. The final
nterview questions are outlined in Appendix A.

Additionally, to challenge the document-analysis derived
ssumption that risk would be greater in nighttime offshore heli-
opter operations in Brazil rather than in the North Sea, for example,

 specific SME  consultation step was undertaken, whereby experts
ith operational experience in both scenarios were invited to com-
are them.

.2. Data collection
Pilots from five offshore helicopter operators, which were based
t the Macaé, Cabo Frio and Rio de Janeiro airports (all in Rio de
aneiro state), participated in this research. They were selected by
on-probability convenience sampling, given various constraints,
sis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74 67

including availability and individual circumstances. All of the inter-
views were recorded and transcribed prior to the analysis.

3.3. Data analysis

3.3.1. Line-by-line analysis
From the contents of the interviews, relevant sections of text

were extracted for further analysis. Based on Flanagan’s (1954)
technique, which has been applied by a number of authors (e.g.,
Butterfield et al., 2005; Jarvis, 2009; Schluter et al., 2008; Urquharta
et al., 2003), a criterion was laid out whereby the statements that
directly referred to factors that affect safety in offshore nighttime
approaches were to be extracted. Given this scenario, the line-by-
line analysis technique that was introduced by Strauss and Corbin
(1990) and applied by many authors (e.g., Huddlestone and Harris,
2006; Jarvis, 2009, 2010; Nascimento, 2009; Nascimento et al.,
2011, 2012; Partington, 2002) was  employed. Because this process
generated the dataset for analysis, there was  a need to ensure that
this extraction had been reliable.

3.3.2. Interview fidelity and extraction checks
To check the reliability of the extraction process, 19 interview

transcripts (over two-thirds of the total number of interviews
undertaken, accounting for more than 68% of all of the statements
that were extracted) were sent to a qualified individual to perform a
rating and a critique (a “rater”). This rater was  an aeronautical engi-
neer with a master’s level education in aviation safety, a holder of a
commercial pilot’s license and was experienced in helicopter oper-
ations. Although prescribed rules do not seem to exist for such a
check, Butterfield et al. (2005) suggested that, typically, a quarter
of the interviews would suffice. Other authors, though, were satis-
fied with smaller samples sizes (e.g., Bradley, 1992; Oldenburguer
et al., 2007; Schluter et al., 2008). This procedure also contributed
to ensuring interview fidelity, as checks were made for both leading
questions and for consistency.

3.3.3. Template analysis
The extracted statements were analyzed according to sug-

gestions by King (1998),  who defined a template analysis as an
approach to qualitative research that produces a list of codes (a
‘template’) that represent themes identified in textual data. It is
common practice to have some of the codes defined a priori, but
“they will be modified and added to as the researcher reads and inter-
prets the texts” (pp. 118). The template that was  developed by
Nascimento (2009) and Nascimento et al. (2012) was subsequently
used and modified accordingly, and the final version is presented
in the results section.

3.3.4. Categorization checks
To ensure that the new version of the template was reliable, it

was sent to another qualified rater for the independent categoriza-
tion of 75% of the statements, which were randomly selected. In
qualitative research, 25% would normally suffice (Butterfield et al.,
2005; Jarvis, 2009). This process led to changes in the labels and
definitions of some categories and to the assignment of some state-
ments into different categories. The process was  stopped when
agreement, as measured by Cohen’s Kappa, was either good or
excellent, according to the criteria laid out by Fleiss et al. (2003).
The second rater was a Brazilian helicopter pilot with experience
in offshore nighttime operations and a master’s degree in aviation
safety.
3.3.5. Story development and SME appraisal
The integration of categories in a meaningful manner was con-

ducted using the methods of both King (1998) and Strauss and
Corbin (1998), to whom the production of a coherent story assists



68 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

Table 1 Table 2
Major demographic characteristics of the helicopter pilots. Aircraft flown by participants.

Characteristic Mean Standard Aircraft make and model Number of
deviation participantsa

Age, years 45.5 11.2 Sikorsky S76A 11
Experience flying helicopters, h 8859.1 6262.8 Sikorsky S76C++ 9
Experience flying instrument flight rules (IFR), h 1298.3 1123.8 Eurocopter AS365N3 5

Eurocopter EC135 4
Sikorsky S76C+ 4
AgustaWestland AW139 4
Eurocopter EC155 1

i Bell 222 1
Bell 412 1

t Eurocopter AS332L1 1
r
e
m
a
d
t
t

4

4
n
S

p
r
i
c
w
w
w
c
e
w
a
r
o
b
t
n
h

4

fi
m
s
w
t

p
b
t
c
t
a
o
v
c

r

Experience of night flying, h 940.3 1208.0
Number of night deck landings 152.1 242.6

n presenting the phenomena under investigation. This story was
hen sent to three other SMEs for critique, all of whom were expe-
ienced offshore helicopter pilots working in Campos Basin, with
ach having over 5 years of experience as flight safety officers. As
entioned by Strauss and Corbin (1998, pp. 159), “They should be

ble to perceive it as a reasonable explanation [. . .]  even if not every
etail quite fits their cases”. Upon positive feedback from all three of
he SMEs, the story was considered to be a credible expression of
he current status for offshore nighttime operations in Brazil.

. Results

.1. Comparative analysis of the risks that are associated with
ighttime offshore helicopter operations in Brazil and the North
ea, by SMEs with experience in both scenarios

Specific legal frameworks determine that Brazilian and Euro-
ean licensed pilots shall only fly in their respective regions. This
ule prevented establishing a comparative risk analysis across fly-
ng regions based on pilot experiences. However, because some
ompanies operate integrated safety and operations departments
ith jurisdiction in both Brazil and the North Sea, some SMEs
ho are knowledgeable in both scenarios could be consulted. They
ere a former offshore helicopter pilot and a senior safety offi-

er involved in helideck certification in Norway and in the UK, an
xperimental test pilot based in the Aberdeen–Scotland area who
as previously hired for test flights in Brazilian offshore platforms,

 helicopter safety research professional employed by a British
egulator, four safety officers employed by offshore helicopter
perators in Brazil and two aeronautical consultants employed
y the largest Brazilian oil and gas company, all of whom agreed
hat the aeronautical infrastructure and regulations in Brazil would
eed considerable changes for ensuring safe nighttime offshore
elicopter operations.

.2. Demographics

Twenty-eight pilots (27 male and 1 female, 20 captains and 8
rst officers) were interviewed, representing over 10% of the esti-
ated 270 helicopter pilots who were eligible to fly nighttime

orties out to the Campos Basin at any one time. The interviews
ere on average 18 min  long. The major demographic features of

he participants are recorded in Table 1.
The likelihood of having to perform the role of the handling

ilot (HP) on the approach phase offshore is mainly determined
y which pilot has a clearer view when landing, while facing into
he wind as much as possible. According to the SMEs who were
onsulted, the prevailing wind conditions and the platform orien-
ations should provide equal chances for each pilot to execute the
pproach task. Therefore, comments by all of the pilots, regardless
f the differences in their operational experience, were deemed

aluable for the research. Nevertheless, differences in perception
aused by different levels of experience were not found in the data.

The aircraft on which the participants were type-rated and cur-
ent are shown in Table 2.
Sikorsky S92 1
a Some pilots were rated on more than one model of aircraft.

4.3. Template analysis results

The line-by-line analysis extracted 700 statements, which were
initially grouped into 72 categories and subsequently regrouped
into 13 higher order categories. The final template is presented
in Table 3 , with a comment on the higher order code in order to
enhance the understanding of the phenomena referenced.

The links between the higher order categories that are identified
through the iterative categorization process are shown in Table 4.
Such links led to the conceptual integration of categories in the
story presented next. The numbers in Table 4 correspond to specific
phrases highlighted in superscript brackets ‘[]’ in the story, which
typify the links that are identified.

4.4. Story

Pilots perceive that the problems that they face while flying
offshore nighttime approaches in southeastern Brazil result from
three main issues: visual spatial disorientation, destination issues
and flawed safety oversights.

4.4.1. Visual spatial disorientation
Because of illusory, absent or insufficient visual cues at the

missed approach point (MAP) of their descent procedures, pilots
could find that flying strictly using external visual references is
not truly feasible after that point. These perceptual constraints can
be aggravated by specific environmental conditions, such as rain,
drizzle, patchy low level clouds or a lack of celestial illumination.[1]

Against such perceptual limitations, pilots often employ two
strategies: ‘adequate attention allocation’ and/or an ‘extended
usage of aircraft capabilities’. The latter refers to the continued
use of IFR instrumentation and automation (the auto-pilot’s ‘upper
modes’) beyond the missed approach point.

‘Adequate attention allocation’ means that if external visual cues
are still deemed insufficient for a visually referenced flight after
it reaches the MAP, pilots may engage in a process of switching
between visual and instrument scan techniques while assessing
how supportive the external environment is for visual flying. This
practice, however, is perceived by pilots as requiring a wealth of
mental resources,[2] and, as such, there are concerns over its poten-
tial to contribute to flaws in the task execution.

An effective attention allocation strategy requires, in turn, ade-
quate CRM practices. Ideally, the non-handling pilot monitors the
aircraft flight instruments and calls out the parameters that deserve
immediate attention/intervention. When this task is completed, the
handling pilot can then, presumably, focus his/her visual scan at the

external environment for a longer period than at the cockpit instru-
mentation. This practice, however, requires a set of finely tuned
crew interaction procedures, the absence of which could result in
an increased attentional burden to the handling pilot,[3] as he/she



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74 69

Table 3
Categories derived from template analysis, with numbers and percentages of commentators and an example per higher order category.

A – Perceptual problems 24 (86%)
1  Lack of depth and texture cues 12 (43%)
2  Lack of general (unspecific) visual cues 10 (36%)
3 Impaired vision by excessive lighting 7 (25%)
4 Moving  references due to vessel movement 6 (21%)
5  Visual illusions 5 (18%)
6  Misidentification of the helideck 5 (18%)
7  Interpretative descent technique based on the ovality of the aiming circle 5 (18%)
8  Non-handling pilot blocked vision on transition across helideck 4 (14%)
9 Seeing  small rigs 3 (11%)
10 Circling to the far side of the platform 2 (7%)
11 Noticing own errors 2 (7%)
12  Destination lighting levels variability (unequal approaching pictures) 2 (7%)
13  Late loss of visual references 1 (4%)
14  Fewness of visual references in bow decks 1 (4%)
15 Vestibular illusions 1 (4%)

“This  depth perception is completely deficient. You tend to be mistaken in relation to what your height is, as well as to the distance to the point where you are going to land on.
This  is the biggest [problem].”
B – Attentional problems 16 (57%)

16  Switching between visual and instrument scans 14 (50%)
17 Double monitoring breakdown 3 (11%)
18  Cognitive overload 3 (11%)
19  Mental computation required 2 (7%)
20  “Complacency” due to exposure (habituation) 1 (4%)
21  Distractions 1 (4%)

“You  have to do the ‘visu-ment’a all the time. When we say ‘visu-ment’ people think we are pushing it on [. . .], being unprofessional. But, in offshore flying, it has to be both. You
have  to always be checking your instruments.”
C – Decision problems 1 (4%)

22  Deciding at the missed approach point (MAP) 1 (4%)
“Also,  many people press it on. You get there, and it is nighttime bad weather, some rain and all that. . .,  it is difficult to make a decision. It is difficult to say ‘I am already here; I
can  see there; I am about to land; the guy is sick in there; the guy. . . I am going for the deck!’ The decision to say ‘I am going around and heading back. I will come back later or
tomorrow’ is difficult to make.”
D – Handling problems (consequences) 14 (50%)

23  Height control 12 (43%)
24 Speed control 9 (32%)
25  Overcontrolling 3 (11%)
26  Upset recovery 1 (4%)

“What’s  your normal tendency? You perform a tighter maneuver and raise the [aircraft’s] nose up. This is a dangerous situation, because you lose height.  . .”
E  – Adverse operator state 14 (50%)

27 Dread 8 (29%)
28  Stress and fatigue 6 (21%)
29  Self-induced pressure 5 (18%)
30  Pressure by unpreparedness 3 (11%)
31  Self-confidence 3 (11%)
32 Inaptitude to fly at night 2 (7%)
33  Anxiety 1 (4%)

“I  got to the platform tired. I was aware of the fact that I was feeling tired. When I got on top of it I thought ‘Oh my  gosh, what is going to happen now?”’
F  – CRM issues 11 (39%)

34  Lacking communication standards (call-outs) 6 (21%)
35  Dealing with/being a junior pilot 4 (14%)
36  Communication breakdown 2 (7%)

“The  calling out frequency is sometimes really troublesome. . . The guy [referring to the non-handling pilot] sometimes speaks too often, other times too seldom. Then, you think
he  is feeding you information, but he is not.”
G – Human–aircraft interface problems 17 (61%)

37  Automation limitations 10 (36%)
38  Aircraft limitations 8 (29%)
39  Not using aircraft’s external light 3 (11%)
40  Wind-caused handling qualities variability 2 (7%)
41  Standards for automation usage 1 (4%)
42  Cockpit limitations 1 (4%)
43  Engines limitations 1 (4%)

“Commercially [referring to commercial airplanes], you fly at high altitudes, on instruments. . ., you’re not over water at night. You are going to land on a runway; you have a city,
right?  Anyway, you may  come in coupled up for descent. At the platform, you have no such chance. At some point, you will have to come in completely uncoupled.”
H  – Procedures 4 (14%)

44  Writing and following operating procedures 2 (7%)
45  Appropriateness of instrument flight profile 2 (7%)

“10  to 15 degrees [referring to the offset angle at the end of the instrument approach procedure], I reckon is enough. All of us used this procedure here, but our tradition was 30
degrees,  which I believe is excessive.”
I  – Interface with the destination 17 (61%)

46  Destination obstacles 13 (46%)
47  Turbulence 3 (11%)
48 Clustered/isolated rigs 3 (11%)
49  Process thermal effects 3 (11%)
50  Helideck illumination 3 (11%)
51 Water surface obstacles 2 (7%)
52  Deck height 2 (7%)
53 Inaccurate weather reports 1 (4%)
54 Aids conspicuity 1 (4%)



70 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

Table 3 (Continued )

“In order to accomplish flights to some platforms, you must approach flying almost backwards. There is a specific platform, for instance, where the deck is here, the flare boom is
somewhere in here [to the sides]. . .,  so that in the presence of any wind breeze you have to approach to it sideways, almost rearwards. So, I believe problems most often stem from
bad  helideck design.”
J  – Environmental aggravators 10 (36%)

55  Illusive weather conditions 8 (29%)
56  Crosswinds 2 (7%)

“The  intensity of the night exerts a strong influence. Bright star nights, cloudy nights, dark nights, moonlit nights, moonless nights.  . .,  every condition is really different.”
K  – Training problems 23 (82%)

57 Currency of training 18 (64%)
58 Experience required 15 (54%)
59  Quality of training 9 (32%)
60  Experience not a guarantee for success 4 (14%)
61  Make and model transfer training 3 (11%)
62 Sponsorship cuts/unavailability for training-only sorties 3 (11%)
63 Under usage of simulators 2 (7%)
64 Wrong use of simulators (surrogate to in-flight training) 2 (7%)
65  Inadequacy of simulators 1 (4%)

“I  would like to have proper training; I miss it; I really do [. . .]  How safe is it in case there will be a night flight to be done?”
L  – External pressure 7 (25%)

66  Flight program 3 (11%)
67  Pressure for not going around 2 (7%)
68  Corporate mindset 2 (7%)
69  Commercial pressure 1 (4%)

“We  were called on night duty after having flown for the whole day. We  were called at 8 pm to go there and land at night.”
M  – Oversight tolerance 10 (36%)

70 Lacking resources for night flying 8 (29%)
71  Too stringent/bureaucratic legislation 2 (7%)
72  Low limits 1 (4%)

a certa

nt sca

m
a

a
f
a
p

u
t
w
l
v
t
r
t
d
a
o
m
p
a
i
t

h
s
a

4

p
b company-provided photographs or past experience to know their
l
t

t

“When we have flights to Albacorab, we have to fill in a Yankee flight plan: you go to
a ‘Visu-ment’ – a cynical nickname for the practice of mixing visual and instrume
b Albacora is one of the fields within Campos Basin.

ust continue with internal and external cockpit scan techniques
t higher rates.

Some adverse operator states have been assessed as negatively
ffecting attentional capabilities[4] and CRM practices.[5] Stress,
atigue and dread could decrease pilots’ concentration for adequate
ttention allocation, whereas any excessive self-confidence on the
art of the pilots could impede proper CRM practices onboard.

The exploration of aircraft capabilities mainly concerns the
se of automation for as long as possible on the approach, such
hat the stabilization and tracking tasks do not add to the pilot
orkload. By keeping the autopilot’s upper modes engaged for a

onger time period, pilots can put more resources into monitoring
isual cues rather than actively flying the aircraft. Once closer to
heir destinations, visual cues should be sufficient for pilots to
evert to manual flying. This strategy, however, is constrained by
he autopilots’ capabilities,[6] given the speed that is required to
isengage its upper modes. A manually controlled flight phase is

 necessity because current technologies do not provide auto-land
r auto-hover for either passenger ferrying or for emergency
edical services (EMS) offshore helicopters. Other perceptual

roblems could also occur from high nose-up rotorcraft attitudes
t low approach speeds, obscuring the view ahead,[6] and from
neffective windscreen wipers,[6] which cause external visual cues
o degrade further.

In any case, unconstrained perceptual sets could translate into
andling difficulties,[7] often in the form of flawed height and/or
peed control, which pilots perceive as capable of leading to an
ccident.

.4.2. Destination issues
The destinations themselves pose additional problems to pilots,

rimarily because of misplaced unlit obstacles that they may  not
e aware of, improper helideck illumination that blends with other
ights on the structure, and/or by excessively lit platforms, poten-
ially causing visual impairment.[8]

Unknown obstacles and unclear helidecks consume addi-
ional attentional resources,[9] because pilots must maintain extra
in point, after which you have to be in visual conditions.”

n techniques.

vigilance while flying their aircraft. There are concerns about near
misses with obstacles that could have led to accidents.

In addition, some platforms offer few approach path options that
are free from turbulent airflow or obstacles, potentially leading to
aircraft controllability issues[10] and an extra attentional burden[11]

in terms of the search for obstacles.

4.4.3. Flawed safety oversight
The operational problems that are mentioned above are per-

ceived by pilots to stem from flawed safety provisions and
enforcement, emanating from a combination of insufficient infras-
tructure for properly supporting night flights together with
shortcomings in training.

4.4.3.1. Lack of infrastructure for night flying. Only two  certified
non-directional beacon (NDB) instrument approach procedures
exist to serve more than 80 platforms within the Campos basin.
Therefore, whenever pilots need to reach one of the remaining
78 or so platforms that are not fitted with an NDB, they are sup-
posed to execute an instrument descent procedure at either of
these two NDB-equipped platforms, reach their MAP  under VMC
and then proceed under visual flight rules (VFR) to their final des-
tination. However, the distances involved often preclude such a
procedure at night, because, in effect, the pilots are faced with
external black-out conditions.[12] Hence, pilots must blend instru-
ment and visual scan techniques during the navigation task toward
their intended destination[13] or revert to instrument flying with
no formal procedures outlined by the regulator.[14] Procedures for
this scenario are often developed at a company level or on the
basis of experience, with practical techniques passed on by senior
colleagues.[15]

Because there are no formal platform charts, pilots rely on
destinations’ layouts, their helideck location and obstacles to the
approach.[16] This procedure is believed to contribute to ‘close calls’
as well as to add to the attentional burden of having to maintain an
active external search for obstacles.[17]



F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

  

  

 

  

  

Table 4
Links between higher order codes that formed the story.

Rows contributing A – Perceptual B – Attentional C – Decision D – Handling E – Adverse F – CRM G – H – Procedures I – Interface J – Environ- K – Training L – External M – Oversight
to columns problems problems problems problems operator issues Human-aircraft with the mental problems pressure tolerance

state interface destination aggravators
problems

A – Perceptual 7
problems

B – Attentional 2
problems

C – Decision problems

D – Handling problems

E – Adverse operator 4 5
state

F – CRM issues 3

G – Human-aircraft 6
interface problems

H – Procedures 14

I – Interface with the 8 9/11 10
destination

J – Environmental 1
aggravators

K – Training problems 18 19 20

L – External pressure

M – Oversight 12 13/17 15 16 21/22
tolerance
sis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74 71

4.4.3.2. Training shortcomings. Training is deemed to be funda-
mental to both the attentional allocation strategy and the crew
interaction procedures that are mentioned in Section 4.4.1. How-
ever, training was  assessed by the pilots as being too infrequent for
developing the attentional[18] and crew interaction[19] skills that
are required by the task. This result arises from on-demand EMS
sorties as well as from service contractual clauses, both of which
imply that there are few opportunities for training and practicing
the approach task at offshore installations.

Training is also deemed to be an important element in devel-
oping the awareness of the various platform layouts, helideck and
obstacle locations. Again, it is assessed as too infrequent for such
purposes.[20]

Although deemed to be of paramount importance for both
avoiding spatial disorientation and for recognizing platform lay-
out, in-flight training is perceived as having declined in recent
years in favor of simulator-based training. This result however,
relies on allocating financial resources for hiring simulators abroad
and requires appropriate simulators to be available. As a conse-
quence, scenario-based training for offshore installations appears
to be kept to a minimum (annual line checks),[21] and even then, it is
often unreflective of the environment found in the Campos basin,
because few foreign platforms are replicated by existing simula-
tor databases. Additionally, unrealistic handling qualities appear
in some aircraft simulation models in low altitude–low airspeed
flying regimes.

Finally, from a managerial viewpoint, planning for training-only
sorties over the Campos Basin is a bureaucratic ordeal, because the
different stakeholders (e.g., the air traffic control services, the oil
companies that run the destinations, and the airports from which
the aircraft will operate) must be engaged and coordinated before
any such sorties can occur.[22]

5. Discussion

In common with Nascimento’s et al. (2012) findings for the
UK Northern North Sea scenario, pilots flying offshore nighttime
missions in Brazil also felt prone to spatial disorientation in the
visual portion of the task, because of a similar interplay of influ-
encing factors. This observation is also in accord with the wider
helicopter accident-based research (CAA, 2007; Masson et al., 2009;
Smith and Foster, 1995; Talbot and Webber, 1988; U.S. JHSAT, 2007,
2009), which emphasizes the hazards of the IFR-VFR transition in
degraded visual environments. Additionally, there has been prior
mention of the problems at the interface with the destination (Hart,
2006; Morrison, 2001; Nascimento, 2009; Nascimento et al., 2011,
2012).

While decision making was  mentioned as one of the emerging
higher order codes (Table 3), it was populated solely by a comment
from a single participant, and hence, it was not mentioned in the
story. Further discussions with the collaborating SMEs indicated
the possibility that few pilots would experience decision-making
conflicts under such circumstances, because they would tend to
opt for safer behavior by quitting approach attempts in such cases.
This result also led to filtering out the ‘external pressure’ code of the
template, because pilots seemed to ignore it, as shown by the low
frequency of comments and SME  input. Alternatively, it was specu-
lated that pilots may  not have felt keen on disclosing the existence
of decision-making conflicts during the course of the research. In
any case, exploring the differences in pilots’ decision-making atti-
tudes was  not part of the objectives of the present work.
The issues encompassed by the ‘flawed safety oversight’ heading
(‘training shortcomings’ and ‘lack of infrastructure for night fly-
ing’) seem to have been the focus of the participants’ concerns.
Indeed, inadequacies of the Brazilian helideck design standards



72 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

en pil

(
i
S
m
fl
w
W
t
t
o
o
2
o
t

r
n
n
F
f
o
t
w
n
c

s
a
p
t

Fig. 3. Relationships betwe

Marinha do Brasil, 2009) that were in force during the course of this
nvestigation have previously been highlighted (Quintão, 2010).
uch inadequacies established a link between participants’ com-
ents on ‘destination issues’ and ‘lack of infrastructure for night

ying’. More recently, however, updated helideck design standards
ere published by the Brazilian regulator (Marinha do Brasil, 2011).
hereas such standards are expected to improve safety in night-

ime offshore helicopter operations, it is important to realize that
hey can only address a small subset of the areas that are in need
f intervention. As identified in the British and Norwegian sectors
f the North Sea, as well as in the Irish Sea (Nascimento et al.,
011, 2012), tackling human limitations to flying at night in the
ffshore environment requires a number of concerted initiatives
hat go beyond updated helideck design standards.

With regard to training, although the Brazilian regulation has
ecently been changed to account for the rehearsal of offshore
ighttime EMS missions (ICA, 2008), in practice, this scenario does
ot seem to be encouraged, given the interplay of two  conditions.
irst, pilots’ nighttime flying readiness can be achieved by per-
orming three approaches and take-offs within a 90-day period to
nshore installations (ANAC, 2010). Second, operators are required
o request the regulator’s permission 15 days in advance if they
ant to train offshore at night (ICA, 2008). As a consequence, plan-
ing for offshore nighttime training could prove to be an ordeal, as
ommented upon by the participants:

“You have to ‘leave no stone unturned’ to do some training. They
[the regulator and oil companies] won’t admit it, but this is the
truth. You need authorization from the regulator. You need autho-
rization from the airport authority. You have to arrange it with the
person on duty at the airdrome flight information service, because
this person will have to stay for longer than normal working hours
and might have already gone home. There is the team on the plat-
form for helicopter operations, which also has other assignments
and might not be on their rest times. [. . .]  In summary, you have
to arrange so many things that it becomes a really difficult thing. It
should be easier.”

Ultimately, scenario-based training may  be relegated to annual

imulator flights, with the drawbacks mentioned in Section 4.4.3.2
bove, together with the additional load of check rides where pilot
erformance is under evaluation, as opposed to skill-development
raining-only sorties.
ots’ major areas of concern.

Participants apparently perceive training and infrastructure as
latent conditions that set the stage for both visual spatial disori-
entation and issues with the destination. Although some problems
were previously mapped by other authors (e.g., Gomes et al., 2009;
Hart, 2006; Mata et al., 2006; Morrison, 2001), papers uncover-
ing the interplay between these factors seem absent, despite its
importance for effective safety promotion.

6. Conclusions

It  is well documented that offshore nighttime operations are a
cause of great concern and that, specifically, the approach phase has
been linked to many accidents. Few studies, however, have focused
on eliciting its hazards and subsequently proposing targeted inter-
ventions to enhance the safety of this flight phase.

Because offshore helicopter activities are expanding rapidly in
Brazil, this research aimed to critically investigate safety shortcom-
ings, to guide initiatives for the public benefit prior to the onset of
major problems.

This research raises the awareness of existing flaws in terms
of the infrastructure for nighttime flights. Specifically, these con-
cerns have the potential to lead to both spatial disorientation on the
approach and undesirable near misses when closer to the destina-
tion. Both of these scenarios increase the need for training, and it
is, therefore, of concern that training was perceived by crews to be
in decline. Flawed infrastructure and training shortcomings appar-
ently stem from inadequate safety oversight mechanisms. These
relationships are summarized in Fig. 3.

These conclusions have also been further endorsed by the pilots’
suggestions on how to improve safety, as queried during the inter-
views. Suggestions concentrated on providing more training and
fitting platforms with glide path indicators. The former would
tackle ‘training shortcomings’, whereas the latter, if proved fea-
sible, could improve the ‘lack of infrastructure for night flights’ to
some extent.

While such mitigation measures undoubtedly have cost impli-
cations, this research suggests that, unless investment in both

infrastructure development and training provision occurs, safety
could be in jeopardy for nighttime offshore operations in Brazil.
This strategy could be undertaken, for example, by improving the
safety regulations that govern offshore flight activity, with a view



 Analy

t
i
t
b
b
a
b
f
s
a
h
i

A

f
B
y
f
w
p
f
p

A

m
s
fi

A

A

A

A
A

A

R

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

B

B

F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident

oward smoothing the bureaucracy that is needed when arrang-
ng for training flights. Additionally, regulations should also ensure
hat the minimum infrastructure for night flying is put into place
oth en-route (e.g., by the installation of NDBs to a wider num-
er of platforms or by differentiating stations for DGPS-based
pproaches with vertical guidance) and at the destinations (e.g.,
y extrapolation of the ICAO guidance and industry best practices
or helideck design). Such an enhanced role again requires con-
iderable commitment and resources from the relevant authorities
nd stakeholders. However, given the expected increase in offshore
elicopter operations, this set of actions definitely appears to be an

mperative for Brazil.

cknowledgements

The authors are grateful to the Lloyd’s Register Educational Trust
or sponsoring this project. Additionally, Mr.  Marcelo Leão and Lt.
runo Tadeu Villela provided invaluable contributions for the anal-
ses of reliability. To the aviation safety officers who faithfully
acilitated the data collection for this project, your contributions
ere much appreciated. The authors are also thankful to all of the
ilots who voluntarily invested their time to share their expertise
or this research. Finally, the authors also thank the referees of this
aper for their valuable suggestions.

ppendix A. Open-ended interview questions

For this research, I am especially interested in the visual seg-
ent of offshore approaches at night. You should consider such a

egment as starting at a distance of 1.0 NM from the helideck and
nishing on the helideck landing.

1. Considering such a scenario, how would you conduct the visual
approach? Describe it please.

2. Considering your description, what difficulties might be expe-
rienced while flying this segment?

3. Can you recall cases in which you experienced difficulties or
saw difficult scenarios happening to other pilots? What hap-
pened?

4. Can you recall any other specific episode?
5. If you could do anything to make night visual approaches safer,

with no budget limits or time constraints, would you do some-
thing? What would it be?

6. Do you have anything that you would like to add, such as com-
ments or suggestions, before we finish?

eferences

AIB, 1988. Accident report, registration G-BHYB. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
cms  resources.cfm?file=/5-1988%20G-BHYB.pdf (accessed 13.11.10).

AIB, 1996. Accident report, registration G-AYOM. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
cms  resources.cfm?file=/Sikorsky%20S61N%20Sea%20King,%20G-
AYOM%2003-96.pdf (accessed 05.03.10).

AIB, 2003. Accident report, registration G-BMAL. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
cms  resources.cfm?file=/dft avsafety pdf 507889.pdf (accessed 04.03.10).

AIB, 2008a. Accident report, registration G-BKXD. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
publications/bulletins/july 2008/aerospatiale sa365n dauphin g bkxd.cfm
(accessed 29.04.10).

AIB, 2008b. Accident report, registration G-BLUN. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
publications/formal reports/7 2008 g blun/g blun report sections.cfm
(accessed 04.04.10).

AIB, 2009. AAIB Bulletin S4/2009 Special. URL: http://www.aaib.gov.uk/
cms  resources.cfm?file=/S4-2009%20G-REDU.pdf (accessed 23.11.10).

NAC, 2010. Regulamento Brasileiro de Aviação Civil RBAC no 135 Emenda no 00.
ANAC, Brasilia (in Portuguese).
arnett, R.D., 2009. Middle East-(GCC)-JHSAT Safety Team Overview Briefing.
URL: http://www.ihst.org/portals/54/montreal/GULFOPERATION.pdf (accessed
13.10.10).

ASI, 1993. Accident report, registration VH-WOF. URL: http://www.atsb.gov.au/
media/24791/199100126.pdf (accessed 05.05.10).
sis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74 73

Berbaum, K.S., Kennedy, R.S., Hettinger, L.J., 1991. Visual tasks in helicopter ship-
board landing. Applied Ergonomics 22 (4), 231–239.

Bradley, C.P., 1992. Turning anecdotes into data – the critical incident technique.
Family Practice 9 (1), 98–103.

Braithwaite, M.G., Dunford, S.J., Crowley, J.S., Rosado, N.R., Albano, J.P., 1998. Spa-
tial  disorientation in U.S. Army rotary-wing operations. Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine 69 (11), 1031–1037.

Butterfield, L.D., Borgen, W.A., Amundson, N.E., Maglio, A.T., 2005. Fifty years of the
critical incident technique: 1954–2004 and beyond. Qualitative Research 5 (4),
475–497.

CAA, 2002a. Accidents to Small Helicopters 1997–2001. Helicopter General Aviation
Safety Information Leaflet. CAA, Gatwick.

CAA, 2002b. Disorientation in Bad Weather. Helicopter General Aviation Safety Infor-
mation Leaflet. CAA, Gatwick.

CAA, 2002c. Night Flying Helicopter General Aviation Safety Information Leaflet.
CAA, Gatwick.

CAA, 2007. Helicopter Flight in Degraded Visual Conditions, CAA Paper 2007/03.
CAA, London.

CAA, 2010a. CAA Paper 2010/01 – The SBAS Offshore Approach Procedure (SOAP).
CAA, Gatwick.

CAA, 2010b. CAP 437 – Offshore Helicopter Landing Areas – Guidance on Standards.
CAA, Gatwick.

CAA, 2010c. Hazard Analysis of the Use of GPS in Offshore Helicopter Operations.
CAA, Gatwick.

Canada-Newfoundland and Labrador Offshore Petroleum Board, 2010. Off-
shore Helicopter Safety Enquiry. St John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador,
p. 324.

Cheung, B., 2004. Nonvisual spatial orientation mechanisms. In: Previc, F.H., Ercoline,
W.R. (Eds.), Spatial Disorientation in Aviation. AIAA, Reston, VA, pp. 37–94.

Cheung, B., Money, K., Wright, H., Bateman, W.,  1995. Spatial disorientation-
implicated accidents in Canadian Forces, 1982–92. Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine 66 (6), 579–585.

Dunford, S.J., Crowley, J.S., Rosado, N.R., Harper, J., Deroche, S., 1995. Spatial Disori-
entation: A Survey of US Army Helicopter Accidents 1987–1992, Report number
95-25. USAARL, Fort Hucker, Alabama.

Flanagan, J.C., 1954. The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin 51 (4),
327–358.

Fleiss, J.L., Levin, B., Paik, M.C., 2003. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions.
John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.

Flores, J., 2010. TAM and PHI negotiate offshore joint venture. FlightGlobal,
URL: http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2010/08/02/345640/tam-and-phi-
negotiate-offshore-joint-venture.html (accessed 13.11.10).

GCAA, 2010. Aircraft Accident Report 02/2008. GCAA, Dubai, UAE, URL: http://www.
gcaa.ae/en/ePublication/admin/iradmin/Lists/Incidents%20Investigation%
20Reports/Attachments/6/2008-Final%20Report%20Bell%20212%20-%20A6-
ALV.pdf (accessed 09.05.11).

Gibb, R., Gray, R., Scharff, L., 2010. Aviation Visual Perception: Research, Mispercep-
tion and Mishaps. Ashgate.

Gibb, R., Schvaneveldt, R., Gray, R., 2008. Visual misperception in aviation: glide path
performance in a black hole environment. Human Factors 501 (4), 699–711.

Gibb, R.W., Olson, W.,  2008. Classification of air force aviation accidents: mishap
trends and prevention. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology 18 (4),
305–325.

Gomes, J.O., Woods, D.D., Carvalho, P.V.R., Huber, G.J., Borges, M.R.S., 2009. Resilience
and brittleness in the offshore helicopter transportation systems: the identifica-
tion  of constraints and sacrifice decisions in pilots’ work. Reliability Engineering
and System Safety 94 (2), 311–319.

Hart, J., 2006. Human Factors in Offshore Aviation, URL: http://www.hartaviation.
com.au/content.php?region=200 (accessed 30.08.09).

Hawkes, A., 2010. BG Group upgrades Brazil oil field estimates. Guardian. URL:
http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/nov/02/bg-group-upgrades-brazil-
oil-fields (accessed 13.11.10).

Helmreich, R.L., Khatwa, R., 1998. Analysis of critical factors during approach and
landing in accidents and incidents and normal flight. Flight Safety Digest 18
(1–2), 1–77.

Herrera, I.A., Håbrekke, S., Kråkenes, T., Hokstad, P.R., Forseth, U.,  2010. Helicopter
Safety Study 3, Main Report. SINTEF, Trondheim.

Herrera, I.A., Nordskaga, A.O., Myhreb, G., Halvorsenb, K., 2009. Aviation safety and
maintenance under major organizational changes, investigating non-existing
accidents. Accident Analysis & Prevention 41 (6), 1155–1163.

Hokstad, P., Jersin, E., Hansen, G.K., Sneltvedt, J., Sten, T., 1999. Helicopter Safety
Study 2. SINTEF, Trondheim.

Hokstad, P., Jersin, E., Sten, T., 2001. A risk influence model applied to North Sea
helicopter transport. Reliability Engineering & System Safety 74 (3), 311–322.

Howson, D.A., 2006. Research initiatives for improving the safety of offshore heli-
copter operations. The Aeronautical Journal 110 (1113), 14.

Huddlestone, J., Harris, D., 2006. Using grounded theory techniques to develop mod-
els of aviation student performance. Human Factors and Aerospace Safety 6 (4),
371–382.

Humphries, B., 2009. IS-BAO, International Standard for Business Aircraft Opera-
tions. The Ready-made Solution for Improving Helo Safety. 3rd EASA Rotorcraft

Forum. EASA, Cologne, Germany.

ICA, 2008. AIRAC AIP Supplement N092-099/08. Serviç o de Informações Aeronáuti-
cas, Rio de Janeiro.

ICAO, 2009. The Convention on International Civil Aviation. Annex 14 – Aerodromes.
ICAO, Montreal.



7  Analy

J

J

J

K
K

K

L

M

M

M

M

M

M

M
/

M

N

N

N

N

N

O

O

O

O

O

O

O

4 F.A.C. Nascimento et al. / Accident

AA,  2007. JAR-OPS 3: Commercial Air Transportation (Helicopters). JAA,
Netherlands.

arvis, S., 2009. Misjudged Approach to a High Accident Rate: Exploration of Accident
Causes and Instructor Decisions Relating to Inexperienced Glider Pilots. Ph.D.,
Cranfield University.

arvis, S., 2010. Development of a bespoke human factors taxonomy for gliding acci-
dent analysis and its revelations about highly inexperienced UK glider pilots.
Ergonomics 53 (2), 9.

ern, T., 2002. Approach and Landing. MacGraw-Hill, New York.
ing, N., 1998. Template Analysis. In: Symon, G., Cassell, C. (Eds.), Qualitative Meth-

ods  and Analysis in Organizational Research – A Practical Guide. Sage, London.
irwan, B., Ainsworth, L.K., 1992. A Guide to Task Analysis. Taylor and Francis, Lon-

don.
eahy, J., 2011. US and China compete for Brazil’s oil. Financial Times,

URL: http://blogs.ft.com/beyond-brics/2011/04/16/us-and-china-compete-for-
brazils-oil/(accessed 20.04.11).

arinha do Brasil, 2009. Normas da Autoridade Marítima para Embarcações Empre-
gadas na Navegação de Mar  Aberto – NORMAN-01/DPC Mod8. Marinha do Brasil,
Rio de Janeiro (in Portuguese).

arinha do Brasil, 2011. Normas da Autoridade Marítima para Homologação de
Helipontos Instalados em Embarcações e em Plataformas Marítimas – NORMAN-
27/DPC. Marinha do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro (in Portuguese).

asson, M.,  Hijum, M.V., Bernandersson, M., Evans, A.,2009. The European
Helicopter Safety Team (EHEST): 2008/2009 achievements. In: International
Helicopter Safety Symposium. EASA, Hamburg, Germany.

ata, T.F., Gajewski, D.W., Hall, C.K., Lacerda, M.C., Santos, A.G., Gomes, J.O., Woods,
D.D., 2006. Application of resilience engineering on safety in offshore helicopter
transportation. In: IEEE Systems and Information Engineering Design Sympo-
sium, Charlottesville.

enezes, F., Porto, O., Reis, M.L., Moreno, L., Poggi de Aragão, M., Uchoa, E., Abeledo,
H.,  Carvalho do Nascimento, N., 2010. Optimizing helicopter transport of oil rig
crews at petrobras. Interfaces 40 (5), 408–416.

itchell, S.J., Braithwaite, G.R., 2008. Perceptions of safety and offshore heli-
copter travel. International Journal of Energy Sector Management 2 (4),
479–498.

oody, E., 2009. Bristow Buys Into Brazil’s Lider. Aviation Week. URL: http://
www.aviationweek.com/aw/generic/story channel.jsp?channel=mro&id=news
brist5289.xml (accessed 13.11.10).

orrison, G., 2001. Helicopter Safety Offshore, 2000/089. Health and Safety Execu-
tive, Aberdeen.

ascimento, F.A.C., 2009. An Initial Exploration into Factors Affecting Safety During
Visual Night Approaches for Offshore Helicopters, as Perceived by Pilots. M.Sc.,
Cranfield University.

ascimento, F.A.C., Majumdar, A., Jarvis, S., Ochieng, W.Y., 2011. Safety hazards in
nighttime offshore helicopter operations. In: 37th European Rotorcraft Forum
2011, Ticino Park, Italy.

ascimento, F.A.C., Jarvis, S., Majumdar, A., 2012. Factors affecting safety during
night visual approaches for offshore helicopters. The Aeronautical Journal, in
press.

TSB, 2006. Accident report, registration N22342. URL: http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/
brief.asp?ev id=20061101X01599&key=1 (accessed 05.05.10).

TSB, 2008. Accident report, registration N343AA. URL: http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/
brief.asp?ev id=20080711X01019&key=1 (accessed 05.05.10).

’Hare, D., Smitheram, T., 1995. Pressing on into deteriorating weather conditions:
an application of behavioural decision theory to pilot decision making. Interna-
tional Journal of Aviation Psychology 5, 351–370.

GP, 1999. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –
1998 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

GP, 2001. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –
2000 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

GP, 2003. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –
2002 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

GP, 2004. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –

2003 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

GP, 2005. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –
2004 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

GP, 2006. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry –
2005 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.
sis and Prevention 47 (2012) 64–74

OGP, 2007. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil  & Gas Industry –
2006 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

OGP, 2009a. Safety Performance Indicators – 2008 Data. International Association
of  Oil & Gas Producers, London.

OGP, 2009b. Safety Performance of Helicopter Operations in the Oil & Gas Industry
–  2007 Data. International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.

Oldenburguer, K., Lehto, X., Feinberg, R., Lehto, M.,  Salvendy, G., 2007. Critical pur-
chasing incidents in e-business. Behaviour & Information Technology 27 (1),
63–77.

Partington, D., 2002. Essential Skills for Management Research. Sage, London.
Petrobras News Agency, 2010. Petrobras Sets New Production Record.

Brazil Oil & Gas. URL: http://www.braziloilandgas.com/index.php?
option=com content&view=article&id=51%3Apetrobras-sets-new-production-
records-issue-16&catid=42%3Aprevious-issues&Itemid=56 (accessed 13.11.10).

Quintão, V.B., 2010. Viability of Nighttime Offshore Operations in Brazil. Postgrad-
uate Diploma Dissertation, University of Brasilia (in Portuguese, abstract in
English).

Ross, C., Gibb, G., 2008. A Risk Management Approach to Helicopter Night Off-
shore Operations. URL: http://asasi.org/papers/2008/Risk%20Approach%20to
%20Night%20Offshore%20Operations%20Presented%20by%20Gerry%20Gibb%
20&%20Cameron%20Ross.pdf (accessed 15.10.10).

RVTV, 2000. Accident report, registration PH-KHB. URL:
http://www.onderzoeksraad.nl/docs/rapporten/017e LV 1997-74-A-25 PH-
KHB Sikorsky S-76B bij Den Helder.pdf (accessed 05.05.10).

Schluter, J., Seaton, P., Chaboyer, W.,  2008. Critical incident technique: a user’s guide
for  nurse researchers. Journal of Advanced Nursing 61 (1), 107–114.

Schmidt, R.T., 1999. Reduce risk of inducing spatial disorientation using physiolog-
ical compatible ground lighting. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine
70  (6), 598–603.

Smith, A.J., Foster, H.J., 1995. Helicopter Pilot View, CAA Paper 95014. CAA, London.
Sosa,  L.A.C., 2010. Implementation of Helicopter Regular Air Transport at Santos

Basin: Consequences for the Rio – Sao Paulo Terminal Area. Conexão SIPAer,
1(2), 146–158 (in Portuguese, abstract in English).

Stokes, A.F., Kemper, K., Kite, K., 1997. In: Zsambok, C.E., Klein, G.A. (Eds.), Naturalistic
Decision Making. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 183–196.

Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Pro-
cedures and Techniques. Sage, London.

Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Proce-
dures for Developing Grounded Theory. Sage, London.

Talbot, N., Webber, M.L., 1988. Helicopter Fog Flying Trials. CAA, Gatwick.
Tormes, F.R., Guedry, F.E., 1975. Disorientation phenomena in naval helicopter pilots.

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 46, 387–393.
U.S. JHSAT, 2007. Calendar Year 2000 Report to the International Helicopter Safety

Team. U.S. Joint Helicopter Safety Analysis Team, USA.
U.S. JHSAT, 2009. Calendar Year 2001 Report to the International Helicopter Safety

Team. U.S. Joint Helicopter Safety Analysis Team, USA.
Urquharta, C., Lightb, A., Thomasa, R., Barkera, A., Yeomana, A., Coopera, J., Arm-

strongc, C., Fentonc, R., Lonsdalea, R., Spinka, S., 2003. Critical incident technique
and  explicitation interviewing in studies of information behavior. Library &
Information Science Research 25, 63–88.

Vinnem, J.E., 2010. Risk indicators for major hazards on offshore installations. Safety
Science 48 (6), 770–787.

Vinnem, J.E., 2011. Evaluation of offshore emergency preparedness in view of rare
accidents. Safety Science 49 (2), 178–191.

Wheatley, J., 2010. Brazil Deepwater Well Hits Huge Oil  Reserve. Financial
Times, URL: http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e7c87f66-e390-11df-8ad3-
00144feabdc0.html (accessed 13.11.10).

Williams, R., 2000. Worldwide Oil Industry Helicopter Operations and Safety Review.
SPE  International Conference on Health, Safety and the Environment in Oil and
Gas  Exploration and Production. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Stavanger,
Norway.

Yapp, R., 2010. Brazil’s Libra Oil Field may  be Biggest in Americas Since 1976.
The Telegraph, URL: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/energy/oil/8098841/

Brazils-Libra-oil-field-may-be-biggest-in-Americas-since-1976.html (accessed
13.11.10).

Young, L.R., 2003. Spatial orientation. In: Tsang, P.S., Vidulich, M.A. (Eds.), Princi-
ples  and Practice of Aviation Psychology. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, pp.
69–114.



Reliability Engineering and System Safety 61 (1998) 127-137 
© 1998 Elsevier Science Limited 

All rights reserved. Printed in Northern Ireland 
P I I : S 0 9 5 1 - 8 3 2 0 ( 9 7 ) 0 0 0 6 8 - 9  0951-8320/98/$17.00 

E L S E V I E R  

Utilisation of principles from structural 
reliability in quantitative risk analysis: 

example from an offshore transport problem 

T h o m a s  Nilsen a'*, Ove T. G u d m e s t a d  a, Jan  I. Dalane  a, W e n c h e  K. Rettedal  a & Terje Aven  b 
aStatoil, N-4035 Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway 

bStavanger University College, Ullandhaug, N-4004 Stavanger, Norway 

The objective of this paper is to discuss the use of methods developed for calculation 
of the reliability of structures as a general tool for calculating probabilities within the 
context of quantitative risk analysis. By applying these methods the analyst is enabled 
to model the system, the uncertainties and the parameter correlations separately and 
systematically. This is ensured by flexible event and system modelling by logical 
combination of limit state functions and suitable uncertainty modelling by assigning 
marginal probability distributions and correlation measures. These properties might 
enable the analyst to include more knowledge in the analysis, compared to models 
traditionally applied in quantitative risk analysis. The subjectivistic theory of 
probability, which consistently allows subjective considerations to be included in 
the analysis, is adopted and provides the framework for the discussions. The paper 
concludes that methods of structural reliability represent a useful tool for calculating 
probabilities in a great number of situations in quantitative risk analysis. An example 
from an offshore towing operation sketches how these methods can open for stochastic 
modelling more in line with the characteristics of the actual system, compared to a 
typical event tree approach. © 1998 Elsevier Science Limited. 

Abbreviations: CoV = Coefficient of variation, ETA = Event tree analysis, FORM = 
First order reliability method, FI'A = Fault tree analysis, MSR = Methods of 
structural reliability, PLS ----- Progressive collapse limit state, QRA = Quantitative 
risk analysis, SORM = Second order reliability method. 

1 I N T R O D U C T I O N  to bring about more information about the risks involved in 
the activity. It is usual to distinguish between risks threaten- 

This paper discusses how and to what extent principles and ing human lives and health, the environment, and assets and 
methods of structural reliability can be utilised in quantita- financial interests. 
tive risk analysis (QRA). First a short introduction to QRA In quantitative risk analysis the likelihoods of the relevant 
and methods of structural reliability is given. undesirable consequences are described by quantitative 

measures. Usual measures of likelihood are probabilities 
1.1 Quantitative risk analysis and frequencies. The frequencies of the typical rare events 

treated in risk analysis are often small, i.e. less than 0.1. 
The purpose of executing a risk analysis is to identify the Thus it may be compared to the probability for the event 
accidental events that could occur during the activity that is to occur in the period of time that is considered. To avoid 
analysed, and to assess to what extent these events can be unnecessary repetitions, probability will be the only 
expected to happen. The aim of the analysis is to present measure of likelihood to be referred to in this paper. 
results that are suitable as support to decision-makers in Essential subactivities in a typical QRA methodology are: 
choices between different solutions and actions, or simply 

• Identification of undesirable events 

*Author to whom correspondence should be sent. Current address: • Cause analysis 
RF - -  Rogaland Research, P.O. Box 2503, Ullandhaug, N-4004 • Consequence analysis 
Stavanger, Norway. • Presentation of results 

127 



128 T. Nilsen et al. 

The undesirable events are essential in a QRA. They can where fx (x )  denotes the joint probability density function of 
lead to undesirable consequences directly, or they may bring the basic variables X. The failure probability of a system 
the system to a state in which undesirable consequences are consisting of  this unit and a redundant unit, failing under 
more likely to occur. First, these events must be identified, the condition g ' (X)<-0 ,  is likewise found by integrating 
using e.g. failure mode, effect and criticality analysis over the failure domain defined by g(X) -< 0 N g'(X) -< 0. 
(FMECA). The possible causes to the undesirable events However, due to complex integrals, this analytical 
and the associated probabilities are then assessed in a approach is feasible only in few cases. Monte-Carlo simula- 
cause analysis, by using e.g. the failure tree analysis tion can be used, but this is a very time consuming technique 
methodology. The possible scenarios that may follow in cases of  very small probabilities, i.e. less than l0 3 
from the undesirable events and the associated likelihoods which are usual in QRA. By utilising the approximate 
are found in the consequence analysis. A common tech- methods FORM and SORM, on the other hand, sufficiently 
nique for this purpose is event tree analysis. Combining accurate results are normally found, still avoiding the time 
the results from these three activities yields the results of consumption associated with Monte-Carlo simulation. 
the total analysis. A clear formulation of the findings regard- These methods are described in textbooks, e.g. Madsen 
ing the risks that are involved is critical to the contribution et al. J 
in terms of  decision support. To discuss how methods of  structural reliability can be 

A crucial activity in QRA is to determine probabilities at utilised in QRA, a clear interpretation of  the concepts 
different levels, i.e. for the base events in failure trees and 'uncertainty',  'probability' and 'risk' is necessary. In 
for the branching points in the event trees. QRA, there is a typical lack of relevant experience data 

and hence subjective information in terms of expert 
1.2 Methods of structural reliability opinions and engineering judgement is required. In this con- 

text the classical, 'objective' theory of probability seems 
The methods of  structural reliability (MSR) represent a tool inadequate since it defines probability as a deterministic 
for calculating probabilities of  events that satisfy certain property of the system. Due to the poor data, the estimates 
frame conditions. To make use of  MSR, the occurrence of  of  this 'true' probability are subjected to large statistical 
the event must be fully dependent on the outcome of a set of  uncertainty, and a consistent evaluation of the contribution 
random variables, the basic variables X.  Further, it must be from modelling uncertainty is impossible. In the subjecti- 
possible to describe the conditions under which the event vistic (Bayesian) theory of probability, on the other hand, 
occurs, the event space, using a set of limit state funct ions,  the probability is interpreted as the analyst's degree of belief 
gi (X), logically connected as unions and intersections. concerning the occurrence of  the event, and is hence condi- 

First, one has to determine the basic variables, the random tioned on the amount of  information applied in the analysis. 
variables that have significant impact on the probability. Thus the probability figure comprises a total measure of 
The limit state functions are then established in terms of uncertainty. This theory consistently allows subjective con- 
deterministic relations between basic variables representing siderations to be included in the analysis. The subjectivistic 
causal mechanisms in different modes of  the system, that theory of probability is hereby adopted and will be used as a 
can give rise to the event. The full event space is defined by platform for the discussions in the remaining sections. For a 
a logic combination of  conditions based on the limit state further discussion on this subject it is refen'ed to Aven and 
functions. Finally, the uncertainty related to the event is POrn 2 
described in terms of a probability distribution or density The main subject of the paper, utilisation of MSR in 
for each of the basic variables. If correlation effects QRA, is discussed in section 2. To illustrate the generic 
exist between the variables, these are described by use of discussions in this section, an example from an offshore 
correlation measures like the covariance or the correlation transport problem is presented in section 3 to exemplify 
coefficient. alternative modelling by MSR. By transforming a discrete 

Consider for example a system unit with capacity X~ event tree model into a basic continuous model for analysis 
which is exposed to a load X2. A mode for the unit to fail by MSR, a comparison is made between the two approaches. 
would then be an outcome of  the basic variables implying Finally, conclusions are summarised in section 4. 
that X2 exceeds X~. A quantity appropriate to describe the 
unit state in this mode, is the rest capacity. This leads to the 
limit state function g(X) = Xj - X 2 .  The event 'Unit failure' 2 USE OF METHODS OF STRUCTURAL 
occurs if the condition g(X) <-- 0 is satisfied. At this point the RELIABILITY IN QUANTITATIVE RISK 
model is completed, and the probability of the event, Pe, can ANALYSIS 
be calculated. The analytical solution to the problem is 
given by: Reviewing safety studies from the past, several examples 

can be found where structural reliability theory has been 
utilised in parts of overall risk assessments, see e.g. Soares 

Pe = y...fJx_(x_)dx__ (1-1) 
et al. 3. However, in most cases where MSR is applied the 

gcx) --<0 objects of  analysis are various types of structures exposed to 



Example from an offshore transport problem 129 

different kinds of  loading or wear down mechanisms, and A special feature of  MSR is, however, that the influence 
the analysis is carried out by scientists and engineers with from several random variables and failure modes may be 
background from structural design and the structural taken into account in a single analysis. Thus, using MSR, 
reliability tradition. Without setting aside the value of  the splitting of  events into detailed subevents is often not 
receiving inputs about the reliability of  these systems, we necessary to the same extent as in FTA and ETA. This 
are now to assess to what extent this flexible theory is fit to makes it possible for a whole section of  a fault or event 
model other systems appearing in the context of  QRA. tree to be replaced by a single analysis based on MSR. 

The expression 'structural reliability' certainly indicates Fig. 1 illustrates the principle of  such replacement of  a 
that the technique is restricted to analyses concerning struc- part of  a fault tree. The main branch to the right in the 
tures, where load and capacity parameters are essential. This fault tree in Fig. l(a), representing event 'C ' ,  is converted 
is however not the case, even though the theory behind the to a corresponding set of  limit state functions to be analysed 
technique is developed for systems of  this kind. The condi- by MSR in Fig. 1(b). This set of  limit state functions is given 
tion on which MSR can be used to calculate probability, is: by: 
It must be appropriate to describe the occurrence of  the 
event in a set of  limit state functions. [gH(X) --< 0 U g~(X) --< 0] N [ga(X) --< 01 (2.1) 

Major advantages of  MSR are the efficient handling of  
several stochastic variables, and the modelling of  how they An advantage of  using MSR in fault trees like this, is that 
affect the occurrence of  the event by interaction in the limit it allows a more efficient handling of  correlation 
state functions. Hence, to utilise this property, there should between subevents, in the modelling as well as in the 
be at least two basic variables apparent in at least one of  the analysis. 
limit state functions. In ETA the analyst is sometimes forced to discretize the 

In the following subsections we discuss issues like prac- probability distribution of  a continuous random variable to 
tical integration of  MSR in traditional QRA techniques, make the quantification of  the event tree possible. This 
advantages that are obtained compared to other methods, approach is often chosen if the further sequence of events 
and the establishment of  probability distributions, which is in a branch is dependent on the outcome of  this variable. If  
a main activity using MSR. at least one more random variable is influencing the further 

events, MSR may be the tool best fit to cope with this part of  
2.1 Integrating methods of structural reliability in the analysis. Fig. 2 sketches how this can be arranged. In the 
practical QRA methodologies upper main branch of  the event tree in Fig. 2(a), the first 

branching point splits the branch into three discrete out- 
Should MSR be considered as independent forms of analy- comes (intervals) of  a continuous quantity. Assume that 
sis or more as techniques to be used within the frame of  for each of  these intervals the probabilities of  the final out- 
other tools in QRA, like fault tree analysis (FTA) and event comes 'B '  and 'C '  are assigned directly after an overall 
tree analysis (ETA)? How can they be implemented in consideration of at least one more uncertain quantity of  
practice? The intention of  this subsection is to discuss continuous nature. In Fig. 2(b) the whole main branch is 
these questions. alternatively analysed by MSR. 

MSR are tools for calculating probability. Thus the This problem is discussed in more detail and exemplified 
models used in this type of  analysis are standing in line in section 3, and a method to find a link between the branch- 
with other reliability models, like life time models for ing point probabilities of  the replaced section in Fig. 2(a) 
mechanic and electronic equipment, reliability models for and parameters of  the probability distributions in Fig. 2(b) is 
software, availability models for supply systems and models presented in the appendix. 
for calculating the reliability of  human actions. All models To give a more concrete picture of  the possibilities of  
of  this kind can be used to calculate single probabilities that utilising MSR in the context of  QRA, some simple examples 
are inputs in different methods used in QRA, like for the of events that in principle open for the use of  these methods, 
base events in FTA and the branching points in ETA. are given below. 

a) b) 

A A 

o +  o o + o  

I l i  l 1l 1 
Fig. 1. The principles of how MSR can be used to analyse a section of a fault tree. 



130 T. Nilsen et al. 

b) 
=B 

oC 

eB 

A= =C A ,  I 
o B  

e C  e C  

Fig. 2. Example of use of MSR in event tree analysis. 

2.1.1 Example 1 undesirable event. The analyst is interested in the prob- 
Consider an activity with random duration, D. This activity ability that one fails to take corrective action. Consider a 
is interrupted if  a given system fails. The lifetime of  this piece of equipment which by getting damaged, might 
system is described by the random variable T. Hence an initiate an undesirable event to develop over time. A crucial 
interruption of the activity is described by the limit state input parameter in a QRA would then be the conditional 
function: probabil i ty that the equipment or structure is not repaired 

g(D, T) : T - D (2.2) in time, given that it has been damaged. Assume that in case 
of  damage, the degree of damage could be described in a 

An occurrence of  the event is represented by an outcome of  quantity D, measured in the number of man-hours needed 
the function value less than or equal to zero. By establish- for repair. F represents working force available for the 
ing the distributions of  the basic variables T and D, the repair, and T is the time from the failure of the element to 
probabil i ty of  the event ' Interruption'  can be found by the occurrence of the undesirable event. Assume also that 
MSR. the maintenance team's  ability to repair the damage is 

depending on environmental conditions, summarised in E. 
2.1.2 Example 2 To take this into account, Tis  reduced with respect to E. The 
A similar model  as the one above might be used to calculate limit state function corresponding to the event 'Corrective 
the probabil i ty that a man-over-board situation leads to a action is not taken' is then: 
fatality. In that case the random variables T and D represent 

T D 
the time a person will stay alive in the sea, and the time it g(D, E, F, T) -- (2-4) 
takes the rescuers to find the person and pick him up from E F 

the water, respectively. These two basic variables could 
further be model led as functions of relevant random 
variables like water and air temperature, wave height, 2.2 The special features of  structural reliability 
falling height, daylight, etc. 

In the QRA techniques FTA and ETA, main events are 
2.1.3 Example 3 broken down to a set or a sequence of subevents, in order 
Now, an example concerning human reliability. Consider a to model  the interaction of  the different subevents, and to 
situation where a person is supposed to push an alarm button determine probabili t ies of  events at an appropriate level of 
if the displacement  of  some physical  item exceeds a given detail. Elementary rules for probabili ty calculation are used 
limit. The magnitude of  a random displacement that exceeds to derive the probabil i ty of  the main event, that is of interest 
the limit is described by the basic variable E. Assume that to the analyst, from the probabil i t ies of the subevents. 
the magnitude of  the displacement  that is reached by As mentioned in the former subsection, a range of 
detection is model led by a function, fiR, T,V) of variables different probabil i ty models are developed to enable the 
representing the time since guard relief, R, the room tem- analyst to model his/her uncertainty regarding the occur- 
perature, Tand  the general vigilance of the guarding person, rence of different categories of  events, in a great variety 
V. The event 'warning of  exceeding is not given'  is then of systems. Hence these are useful tools to calculate the 
represented by the limit state function: probabili t ies of the subevents in FTA and ETA. 

Problems occur, however, when the analyst 's  uncertainty 
g(E, R, T, V) = E - f ( R ,  T, V) (2.3) 

regarding an event, at any level, directly involves 
uncertainty related to several uncertain quantities, 

2.1.4 Example 4 especially if these have a continuous nature. It might then 
A category of  events often apparent in QRA, is related to the be hard to find a proper model that includes all these 
situation that an activity unfortunately is developing into an influencing quantities in a systematic manner. The usual 



Example from an offshore transport problem 131 

solution in such situations is to split the event into measures reflect the total uncertainty or knowledge related 
subevents, which can be analysed one by one, and to to the basic variables. Hence, a characteristic feature of this 
model the interaction by FTA or ETA. In some cases, how- approach is that the problem is disintegrated in order to 
ever, this is not possible in a way that is consistent with or allow a close and detailed modelling of the analyst's 
suitable to the nature of the system. Implicitly, such a model knowledge and uncertainties related to the event. 
will not correspond to the analyst's knowledge about the To summarise this comparison, it can be stated that the 
system, and it will be hard to find a model suitable to analyse approach that is based on a direct assignment of probability, 
the event. As a consequence of this lack of appropriate implies a comprehensive consideration of a complex 
models, the approach that is chosen often involves a direct amount of information, resulting directly in one probability 
probability judgement after a comprehensive consideration figure. The approach based on MSR, on the other hand, 
of all the influencing circumstances. allows a systematic treatment of information, building up 

It is this kind of problems, where several random a mathematical model part by part. It can handle uncertainty 
variables significantly influences the probability of the related to several quantities, and the knowledge about these 
event, that open for the use of MSR. Thus, in a discussion quantities is kept apart from system knowledge. The 
on the special features of MSR compared to properties of analysis of this model, usually carried out by a computer, 
other methods, a comparison with the direct assignment yields the required probability. 
approach described above would make an important part. Though MSR is more advanced and systematic than the 
Consequently, the discussion below only involves these two direct assignment method, this does not mean that it is 
approaches. favourable for solving any problem. Using MSR the analyst 

As a foundation for an analysis following any of these has to be able to define the terms of the event in a set of limit 
two approaches, a more or less detailed and systematic state functions, and to describe his/her uncertainty related to 
analysis of the information that is available about the system all the variables in probability distributions. Establishment 
is carried out. Using the direct assignment approach, the of a model like this can be a very resource consuming 
results of this system analysis are then summarised in a process. Important factors when evaluating alternative 
probability, resulting directly from the analyst's considera- approaches are the complexity of the problem and the 
tions or from a discussion in a group of experts. The con- form in which the analyst's uncertainty, knowledge and 
siderations have to take the possible outcomes of each experience related to the event is given. In the considera- 
uncertain quantity into account, as well as impacts from tions concerning choice of method, the analyst should also 
interaction among the quantities, including effects of give some thoughts to the importance of that specific 
dependency. Furthermore, one has to determine which com- probability in the context of the total analysis. After con- 
binations of the quantities that give significant contribution siderations like these, describing the uncertainty more 
to the probability. The considerations are finally summed up directly related to the event in some variant of the direct 
in a number between zero and one. These difficult con- assignment method, will turn out to be the most appropriate 
siderations or discussions give the analyst a hard time trying approach in many cases. 
to gain control of the full picture. Due to the complexity of 
the systems that are investigated, this approach often 2.3 Establishing probability distributions 
implies that the analyst still has to determine the prob- 
abilities on condition that important random variables Using MSR, the conditions that make the event happen are 
assume certain values. The lack of a systematic model can described deterministically by the limit state functions, 
also cause that important circumstances, which would which are based upon system knowledge. The analyst's 
impact the probability, are overlooked or misevaluated. uncertainty related to the event, is expressed by probability 
The approach could be interpreted as a 'black box model'; distributions for the parameters in the limit state functions, 
all available information is put in, and the output is a prob- the basic variables. The design of limit state functions is not 
ability. No exact description of the considerations that lead treated in further detail in this paper. Some essential matters 
to the probability, which are the contents of the black box, concerning the establishment of probability distributions 
can be given. are, however, discussed below. 

If MSR are used to calculate the probability, the system From a Bayesian point of view a probability distribution 
knowledge can be expressed systematically in a set of represents a complete description of the analyst's uncer- 
logically connected limit state functions, containing a set tainty regarding a quantity. Prior to a discussion on how 
of random variables. Furthermore, the technique allows to utilise available information in the establishment of 
the analyst to give a full probabilistic description of his/ these distributions, a closer investigation of the sources of 
her uncertainty regarding each of the quantities influencing the uncertainty is necessary. In the literature, e.g. in 2 and 
the occurrence of the event, i.e. the random variables Thoft-Christensen and Baker 4, it is distinguished between 
appearing in the limit state functions. Thus the analyst's aleatory (stochastic) and epistemic (state-of-knowledge) 
knowledge about the causal mechanisms of the event is uncertainty. Aleatory uncertainty is a fundamental property 
put into the design and the interconnecting of limit state of the quantity, due to an inherent randomness, like the 
functions, while distribution functions and correlation fluctuations of wind speed, amount of precipitation and 



132 T. Nilsen et al. 

properties of  materials such as concrete and steel. From combination with measures of  dispersion, like variance, 
these examples it is clear that this inherent type of  uncer- standard deviation or the coefficient of  variation (CoV). 
tainty can be divided into two categories, depending on Since different types of  distributions could have the same 
whether or not it can be influenced by human activities. In expected values and variances, this extra information is 
contrast to material properties, the mentioned environ- inherent in the shape of the special probability distribution 
mental conditions could hardly be affected by human function. Examples of  how information of this kind can be 
activities. included in the distributions are: 

The source of  epistemic uncertainty is the analyst 's lack 
• Some characteristics of random variables may sup- 

of  knowledge about the quantity. In some cases the knowl- 
port the use of  certain types of  distributions. Such 

edge can be improved by measurements or other kinds of  
characteristics are described in the literature, e.g. in 

research. The main source to the lack of  knowledge is the 
Benjamin and Cornell 6 

uncertain quantity being involved in future events. In that 
• Knowledge about the scatter can be expressed 

case the uncertainty can only be reduced within certain 
directly in the shape of  the distribution functions. 

limits. Examples of  quantities that can be related to these 
Such knowledge might indicate whether the density 

types of  uncertainties, are the weight of  a large and complex 
is to be symmetrical or skew, the total range of 

structure and the rest duration of  a project activity. 
outcomes and whether the density should be con- 

The analyst 's total uncertainty with respect to a specific 
cave, linear or convex in the different outcome 

quantity is often a mixture of  both these kinds of uncer- 
intervals. 

tainty. Hence, it could be an advantage for the analyst to 
• Special limitations like the geometry of  a structure, 

look more closely into the sources of  the uncertainties, both 
results from inspections or regulatory requirements, 

in order to reduce them, and to establish probability 
can result in sharply cut tails or intervals with zero 

distributions. 
value for the probability density. In general, and if it 

The difficulties related to the establishment of  probability 
is allowed by the amount of  information, most 

distributions could vary within a wide range, depending on 
weight should be attached to the knowledge related 

the type of random variable. Dealing with a well known 
to the part of  the distribution that has the largest 

quantity, one might be supported by large amounts of 
influence on the results. Since QRA is usually deal- 

relevant data. In other cases the interesting quantity could 
ing with extreme events, this often implies that one 

be the result of  complicated sequences of  operations, during 
should be specially concerned about the shape of  

which crucial decisions are to be taken. It could also simply 
the tails of  the distributions. 

be a phenomenon about which the analyst only has a vague 
intuitive knowledge. In QRA the latter category is the rule Modelling of the tails of the distributions is often an 
rather than the exception; often the main challenge is to essential subject in discussions of  how far one should 
determine input parameters on the basis of  a rather limited have confidence in an analysis based on MSR. The subject 
set of  relevant experience data, if any at all, to supplement is, however, not treated any further in this paper. More 
expert judgement. research should be carried out in this area by comparing 

To establish distributions in practice, there are several the problems in this field and the problems related to bias 
possible approaches. Examples are: in the judgement of  extreme probabilities in alternative 

forms of  analysis. 
• A distribution can be assigned directly, reflecting 

the analyst 's uncertainty related to the value of  
the quantity. 

3 CALCULATING THE PROBABILITY OF TOTAL 
• A standard type of  distribution, where the para- 

LOSS OF A DECK STRUCTURE DUE TO HIGH 
meters are assigned on the basis of  experience or 

WAVES, DURING OFFSHORE TRANSPORT ON A 
judgement, is chosen. Special handbooks, like 

BARGE 
Skjong 5, provide support for making these choices. 

• With enough data, these can be plotted on prob- 
The case studied in this example, is from the QRA carried 

ability paper. The distribution that fits the plot 
out for a subphase of a major offshore construction project. 

best is chosen. The parameters are derived from 
This subphase includes the transport of the deck structure on 

the data. 
a barge, see Fig. 3, towed by four tugs. 

• Monte-Carlo simulation can be a useful tool in 
The towing route is partly inshore, including a part 

situations characterised by interaction of  several 
through narrow waters, and partly offshore. It will be 

random variables. 
focused on loss of the deck structure as a consequence of  

The use of  probability distributions in MSR, enables the the undesirable event 'Towing failure'. By definition, 
analyst to give a detailed description of  his/her knowledge 'Towing failure' includes all situations that could result in 
about the uncertain quantities. This is not possible to the loss of the deck due to bad weather, towing line failure, tug 
same extent if the description is solely restricted to terms of  failure and combinations of  these. Connected to this 
central measures like expectation or median, or even in undesirable event, the operation involves risks related to 



Example from an offshore transport problem 133 

b 

Fig. 3. Deck structure placed on the transport barge used in the towing operation. 

grounding and collisions during the inshore part of  the regarding W, would then be using a continuous probability 
towing, and exposition to high waves during the offshore distribution function. The discrete probability distribution 
leg. The event tree in Fig. 4 gives a further description of  in the event tree, i.e. the probabilities of  the main branches, 
these risks. This example will focus on loss initiated by high is in this case derived from such a continuous distribution, 
waves alone, which is represented by the two upper main Fw(w), a Weibull distribution given by: 
branches of  the event tree, dealing with waves higher than Fw(w) ---- 1 - exp[ - (0.65) 22] (3.2) 
3-5 m (significant wave height, Hs). As it appears from the 
event tree, loss of  the deck in the two lower main branches, To assign the two probabilities of  loss, conditioned on the 
which represent lower waves, is conditioned on exposition significant wave height intervals (marked with arrows in 
to one or more of  the hazards mentioned above. These Fig. 4), complex considerations have to be made. In this 
scenarios are, however, not considered in this example. analysis, results from structural controls of  the deck-barge 

From the event tree, the probability of  loss of  the deck unit in the progressive collapse limit state (PLS) and the 
due to high waves, Phw, c a n  easily be calculated adding the ultimate limit state (ULS) at load levels corresponding to 
probabilities of  the branch ends 'a '  and 'c ' :  Hs = 3.5 m and Hs = 5.0 m, respectively, were essential 

arguments in the judgement of  these probabilities. The 
Phw=2.88 X 10-6- t -2 .80 X 1 0 - 5 = 3 - 1  X 10 -5  probabilities reflect that the analyst has degrees of  beliefs 

(3.1) in whether or not the deck-barge unit will resist different 
sea states, corresponding to different levels of  wave load. 

Mathematically, there is nothing wrong about the event tree These degrees of  belief can be summarised in a probability 
approach to calculate the probability. However, as distribution of  the capacity, Fc(c), of the deck-barge unit, 
discussed in section 3, it implies discretizing the significant measured in a unit corresponding to significant wave 
wave height (W), which is a continuous quantity. A more height. 
suitable way for the analyst to describe his uncertainty Based on the two uncertain quantities W and C, models 



134 T. N i l s en  et al. 

Phase: 7.Iv. Tow t o  Vo~s 
Event : 7. Towing fallum 

I 1 1 i l I I i I i I t ] 7 I i I I I 19 I II t I I  I 13 
i l o  Tow I r~  E n ~  io,~. ann~ cai*o~,v C ~ l o n  

c ~  ok~ tow Ine tov~e~Iso  
~om a ~tondby loaure 

0.9 
32C'*-06 

~ l a r  7 Io c~c~ OA% 

I,',.- ot  ~ 
DI 

2 eE-(~ Pi  
v , ~  .l, 1 t m  ~ ~ lo l:lm¢t 10D'i 

pt 
1,101.O Ok 

q.l 
1 

O,l l pl 
Z,Oil.CI O i  

,.__, [':= L O i  

1,3dll.ll 
I1] 

l l l i i .01 o l  
~, ~'n I19,~X'-O1 

i l l i . . l l l  Ok 

Ok 

99~ I.Dli.,01 I . l l l  of a ~ t  111% 
I IO,l ~  Pl 

I.gli-CI Ok 

Ok 

#Alt-Ol 9(~  i llTi,.ll]l *"~  ~' ~ 1% 
pl 
Oi 

@k 

'Alii.OI @k 
Ii,,omI n l l y  

o l ' le¢ l l .  D I I i l l  i'411 

i Mnal  -'l- -..,.~l~ Io  I Dll I .  IgJI-CQ 

Fig. 4. Event tree describing 'Towing failure' from the QRA executed for the deck transport phase of the construction project. 

that allow the probability of loss to be calculated by MSR deck due to high waves. Loss will occur if W exceeds C, i.e. 
can be established. Below, two such models, are described. if: 
In Model 1, the density of C f c ( c ) ,  is established by a direct 

g(C,  W )  = C - W <-- 0 (3.3) 
transformation of the event tree into a basic load-capacity 
model. The intention is to assess what continuous distri- The variable W is distributed as in (3.2) and a general 
butional properties of C that are inherent in the applied normal density function is assumed for C: 
event tree model. The aim of Model 2 is to present a 
rough proposal of how to proceed if MSR were chosen as f ( c ) =  c r .V' /~  • exp E-  ~ (3.4) 
the tool from the start, independently of the event tree. In 
both models a normal distribution is chosen to describe the To complete the model, the parameters o and # have to be 
uncertainty related to C. determined. Using the method described in the appendix, 

this is done by solving a set of two equations, both having a 
3 . 1  M o d e l  1 shape like (A.1), in the unknowns ~ and ~. The equations 

are derived from the conditional probabilities marked with 
As mentioned above, the intention is to establish a connec- arrows in Fig. 4: 
tion and make a comparison between the discrete event tree 
model and a continuous model. P(C  <~ W13-5 <_ W --< 5-0) =0-01 (3-5) 

Based on the strength parameter C and the load parameter and 
W, a limit state function in the shape of a basic load-  
capacity model, may be established to describe loss of the P ( C  <-- W I W  > 5.0) = 0 . 9  (3.6) 



Example from an offshore transport problem 135 

Solving the set of  equations, by using numerical  integration • Large motions could result in damage to the derrick. 
and appropriate software, e.g. 'Mathcad ' ,  yields the • Fall ing objects, e.g. from the derrick could give 
solution k~ = 4.74 m and cr = 0.29 m. The model  is now serious damage to the barge and impact buoyancy 
complete,  including a limit state function and probabil i ty and stabili ty.These features make it reasonable to 
distributions for the two basic variables involved. An model  the structural properties of  the towing unit as 
analysis performed by the software program 'Proban '  7 a serial system, where the elements in the system 
yields: correspond to the different failure modes. Under the 

P(Loss) = 3.5 × 10 -5  (3-7) assumption that not all of  the failure modes that are 
listed above give a significant contribution to the 

The deviation from the result found by analysis of  the event 
risk of  PLS failure, the system reliabil i ty 0.80 is 

tree, (3.1), is small, approximately 13%, and hence a con- 
assigned at Hs ~-- 5.0 m. This corresponds to a 

nection between the event tree model  and an elementary 
serial system consisting of  four elements, each 

load -capac i ty  model  is established. Sources to the devia- 
having a reliabil i ty equal to 0.95. 

tion might be the approximations done by the use of  
FORM, and a small contribution to the probabil i ty from Skjong 5 recommends a CoV within the interval 0 .05 -  
outcomes of  Hs below 3-5 m. 0.08 for yield stress. Dealing with a serial system, the 

uncertainty related to the system capacity will be larger 
3.2 Model 2 than the uncertainty related to each of  the element 

capacities. A CoV = 0.10 is chosen. Employing this 
This model  is established with the aim to demonstrate how figure and the system reliabil i ty of 0-80 at Hs = 5.0 m, 
one could proceed if  MSR are used directly, independently yields a normal distribution of  C with the parameters # = 
of  the event tree. Thus the connection to the event tree is not 5.46 m and ~ = 0-55 m. 
as close for Model  2 as it is for Model  1. Below, it will be This distribution now reflects our uncertainty regarding 
focused on the reasoning in the establishment of  the model,  the capacity of  the towing unit, under the assumption that a 
more than the choice of  quantitative figures. The distribu- failure will be initiated by yielding. The Weibul l  distribu- 
tion of  C will be derived prior to the establishment of  the tion of  W given by (3.2) reflects our uncertainty about the 
model  itself. roughest sea state that will occur during the operation. How- 

As mentioned above, the d e c k - b a r g e  unit was controlled ever, the derivation of  these distributions is based on several 
in the PLS at Hs = 5.0 m. It was found that the PLS capacity models. Examples  are physical  and mathematical  models  
was almost fully utilised. If  it is assumed that a PLS failure used to carry out the PLS control for C and to determine 
is caused by yielding in the material,  it is the characteristic the parameters in the Weibull  distribution of  W. These mod- 
yielding l imit  that is used in the control. If  the 5% fractile is els, like all models, are simplifications of  the real world, and 
used as the characteristic value, it implies that 5% of  a high thus we do not have full confidence in the results derived 
number of  material  samples are expected to yield before the from them. Using a limit state function like the one used in 
characteristic l imit  is passed. Hence it can be stated that at Model  1 (3.3) model  uncertainty is not taken into account. 
Hs ---- 5.0 m, all critical members  in the structure have a To include this uncertainty in the analysis, loss is defined as 
rel iabil i ty of  0.95. Critical members  are defined as the event: 
members,  which by failing will initiate a progressive 

C'Mc <-- W'Mw (3-8) 
collapse of  the total structure. 

Furthermore, the structural principles of  the deck -ba rge  where Mc and Mw are the model  uncertainty factors asso- 
unit must be taken into account. Does it work like a serial ciated with C and W respectively. Normal distributions are 
system, a parallel  system or more like a combinat ion of chosen for both these variables. Since there is no particular 
these? For the towing unit a variety of  events might lead reason to believe that there is a systematic bias connected 
to serious consequences: with any of  the models,  the expected value, /~ = 1.0 is 

chosen for both variables. CoV's  in the interval 0 .15-  
• Heavy wave loads could damage the outer 0-30 are considered reasonable for wave models, while 

chambers of  the barge and lead to reduced the corresponding interval for capacity models  is 0 -10-  
buoyancy and stability. 0-20. CoV = 0.2 is chosen for Mw. CoV = 0.2 is also 

• Relat ively small damage to the grillage between the assigned for Mc, since the structure of  the towing unit is 
barge and the deck could lead to progressive very complicated,  and even experts are doubtful about 
collapse, induced by movements  in rough sea states. which failure mechanisms that can be expected. To 

• The main load carrying structure of  the deck, which summarise, W is still Weibul l  distributed like in (3.2), 
is a huge frame structure, would suffer great while the three other basic variables are normal distributed, 
damage if  critical elements in the structure are N(/~, or): 
brought to yielding. 

• Local  deformations in the deck structure, could • K--N(5"46, 0"55) 
cause damage to equipment and tubing systems to • Mc--N(I'O, 0"20) 
an extent that could be associated with total loss. • Mw--N(I'O, 0"20) 



136 T. Nilsen et al. 

With these inputs, and the limit state function of (3.8), a different factors that are affecting the probability, one by 
FORM analysis performed in 'Proban'  yields: one. This systematic procedure makes the analyst able to 

include detailed knowledge about the variables in a con- 
P(Loss) = 2-0 × 10-4  (3-9) 

sistent manner. According to the Bayesian way of thinking, 
More uncertainty, specially on the capacity side, compared the goodness of  the results of  a QRA is closely related to the 
to Model 1 leads to a much higher probability of  loss. amount of  information and knowledge on which the analysis 

is founded. Hence, if the analyst is able to make use of  more 
3.3 Final remarks to the models information and knowledge by use of  this technique, the 

decision-makers would probably have more confidence in 
The upper part of  the event tree model in Fig. 4, which deals the results. 
with loss of  the deck due to high waves only, implies An alternative method to MSR is often to express the 
discretizing of a continuous situation. In subsection 3-1, the uncertainty regarding the occurrence of  the event directly 
event tree was transformed to a corresponding continuous in a probability figure. This approach might easily lead to 
model, Model 1. In this way it is demonstrated which con- results, that inherently correspond to unrealistic properties 
tinuous properties that are given implicitly in the event tree. of the factors influencing the probability. By the use of 

During the establishment of the event tree model, the MSR, the analyst is in position to make accurate descrip- 
analysts had to assign the two conditional probabilities tions of these properties, corresponding to his/her 
given in (3.5) and (3.6). This was done on the basis of  results uncertainty related to them, assigning probability 
from structural analyses corresponding to the lower limits of distributions and correlation measures. 
the two intervals. In this case such an approach can be In analyses based on MSR, the results are often sensitive to 
defended to a certain degree, since the probability density the shape of the tails of the probability distributions. A subject 
of  W is strongly decreasing for increasing values of  the wave which needs to be studied in further detail, is a comparison of 
height. Hence the contributions from the upper parts of  the this sensitivity to sensitivities in alternative approaches. 
interval will be small. However, the distribution of 
probability across the interval should be considered more 
thoroughly when the conditional probabilities are assigned. 

A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S  
In this complicated scenario it is very hard to do this con- 
sistently when the total uncertainty regarding the outcome is 

Thomas Nilsen gratefully acknowledges the financial 
to be described through one probability figure directly. 

support by Statoil, COWI and Rogaland Research. Terje 
From the standard deviation in the normal distribution 

Aven gratefully acknowledges the financial support by the 
derived for C in Model 1, it is also clear that the two con- 

Norwegian Research Council and Wessmann Foundation. 
ditional probabilities resulted in a very small uncertainty for 

Furthermore, the authors are grateful for valuable comments 
the capacity, i.e. a resulting CoV = 0-06. 

by Carlos Guedes Soares. 
The establishment of  Model 2 demonstrates how one, by 

the use of  MSR, can put knowledge about the system into 
descriptions of  the uncertain quantities one by one, apart 

APPENDIX A A M E T H O D  F O R  T R A N S F O R M I N G  
from the model itself. Sometimes, such a disintegration of  AN E V E N T  T R E E  M O D E L  OF A C O N T I N U O U S  
the problem enables the analyst to make use of  experience 

S I T U A T I O N  I N T O  A C O N T I N U O U S  D E S C R I P T I O N  
during the consideration of  each single quantity, even in 
analysis of  rare activities. This example was based on 

Below, representation of  continuous load-capacity situa- 
rough considerations in the intention to demonstrate these 

tions in event tree models will be studied. A method will 
properties of  the technique. To carry out a full comparison 
of  the two approaches, they both have to be based upon the p4 
same amount of  information. e F  

a<-L<-'t " P ~  ps 
--S 

4 C O N C L U S I O N S  p6 
*F 

• b<-L<-c p2 I 
p7 + S  

MSR are useful tools to calculate probabilities. The technique 
p+ 

is suitable for problems where the probability is dependent on e F  

the outcome of more than one stochastic variable, and where c~L~ m IP' L,C 
_-S 

the event will occur when given functions of these variables 
assume values within certain intervals. 

First of  all, MSR is useful within the frames of  QRA Fig. 5. Illustration of the transformation of an event tree model of 
a load-capacity problem into a model that can be analysed by 

techniques like the well established FTA and ETA, more MSR, failing when the load exceeds the capacity. In the figure L 
than as an independent form of analysis. and C represent the load and the capacity while F and S represent 

Using MSR, the analyst 's attention is concentrated on the the outcomes 'failure' and 'safe'. 



Example from an offshore transport problem 137 

general interval, the conditional event space of  F, is 
C described in Fig. 6. 

The conditional probability of  F equals the integral of  the 
joint probability density of  L and C, fCL(C,1), within the 
constraints corresponding to the hatched area in Fig. 6: 

P[(C <- L) Cl (i <- L --<j)] 
P(C <-- Lli <-- L <--j) = 

/ P(i <- L <--j) 
/ 

f ~  fcL(e,l) dcdl 
i j L c<l, i<_l<j 

Fig. 6. Failure domain, given that L is higher than i, but less thanj. 

- 1 

be developed to transform this event tree model into a model FL(j) -- FL(i) J J  
c~l,i<_l<_j 

based on probability distribution functions, that allows 
analysis by MSR. (assuming C and L to be independent) 

= FL( j ) -  FL(i)" ofc(C ) X cfL(l ) × d l d c -  ofc(c ) × fL(1) × dldc 

= FL( j ) -  FLU)" - Jc(C) X [FLO')-  FL(c)]dc-  ofC(C) X [FL( i ) -  FL(c)]dc (A.1) 

Consider an event tree or a part of  an event tree, like the Result A. 1 makes it possible to establish a set of  equations 
one illustrated to the left in Fig. 5. The first branching point corresponding to the main branches of  the event tree. Sol- 
splits the outcome into main branches corresponding to ving these equations yields the parameters of  the density of 
different intervals of  a quantity representing some kind of  C. An example of  use of  the method is given in section 3, 
a load, L on the system. The probabilities of  these branches Model 1. 
are in principle found by discretizing the probability 
distribution of  this load. The next branching points split 
each of  these main branches into the events 'Failure',  F, R E F E R E N C E S  
or 'Safe ' ,  S. By the assignment of  the probabilities attached 
to these branching points, the ability of  the system to resist 1. Madsen, H.O., Krenk, S. and Lind, N.C., Methods of 
the load in the specific interval has to be taken into consid- Structural Safety. Prentice Hall, 1986. 

2. Aven, T. and P6rn, K., How should we express and interpret 
eration. The aim is to transform this model into a model the results of quantitative risk analysis?, Reliability 
containing the random variables ' load' ,  L, and 'capacity ' ,  Engineering and System Safety - -  Special issue on offshore 
C, as it is illustrated to the right in Fig. 5. In this model, safety, 1997. 
system failure occurs if L exceeds C. By carrying out a 3. Soares, C.G., Vinnem, J.E. and Faber, M., On the integration 
transformation of  this kind, an evaluation of  the prob- of Quantified Risk Assessment and Structural Reliability in 

the Offshore Industry. Proceedings of the Esrel Conference, 
abilities in the event tree can be carried out by considering 1995. 
whether the resulting probability distribution of  the random 4. Thoft-Christensen, P. and Baker, M.J., Structural Reliability 
variable C seems to be appropriate. Theory and Its Applications. Springer-Verlag, 1982. 

The method is feasible under the conditions that the prob- 5. Skjong, R., Guideline for Use of Reliability Methods for 
ability distribution of  the random variable L is known, and Marine Structures. DNV, 1991. 

6. Benjamin, J.R. and Cornell, C.A., Probability, Statistics and 
that the event tree is complete, including probabilities at Decision for Civil Engineers. McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
every branching point. 1970. 

In Fig. 5 the probabilities 'P4', 'P6' and 'Ps'  are the con- 7. Proban Version 4 Theory Manual, DNV Report No. 92-2056, 
ditional probabilities that the event F will occur, given that Det Norske Veritas Research AS, 1993. 
the load is within the interval attached to the respective main 
branch. If  i and j are the lower and upper constraints of  a 



Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Ocean Engineering

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/oceaneng

Determination of environmental load factors for ISO 19902 code in
offshore Malaysia using FORM structural reliability method
Z. Nizamani a,n, V.J. Kurian b, M.S. Liew b

a Environmental Engineering Department, Faculty of Engineering and Green Technology, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), Kampar,
31900 Perak Darul Ridzwan, Malaysia
b Civil Engineering Department, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Bandar Seri Iskandar, 31750 Tronoh, Perak Darul Ridzwan, Malaysia

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: Environmental load factor, used for the design of Jacket platform design in Malaysia, are based on
Received 21 May 2013 calibration of platforms located in Gulf of Mexico and North Sea. This load factor is assumed to be high
Accepted 27 September 2014 for locations where moderate climate governs i.e. regions lying near equator like Malaysia which is at 71

north of the equator. For Jacket platforms, safety can be achieved by taking into consideration of hazards
Keywords: produced by rare events of wave, wind and current. Environmental loads are not like live loads acting on
Jacket platform land-based structure but are more severe due to unpredictable weather conditions. These environmental
Structural reliability loads can act with unexpected severity on offshore structures. Material strength of tubular components
Resistance and load uncertainty and joints plays significant role against risk. The resistance can also be reduced because of damage to
Probability distribution Jacket, continuous action of wave forces causing fatigue and corrosion. Four platforms from three
Environmental load factor different regions of Malaysia were selected for the reliability analysis. Probabilistic techniques were used

to evaluate and estimate the load and resistance uncertainty. FORM method of reliability was used for
structural reliability analysis of Jackets. Modified environmental load factor is proposed for offshore
Malaysia considering component, joint and system reliability analysis based on calibration.

& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction allowable stresses. The probabilistic codes for limit state design
take into proper account of the uncertainties of variables like

Civil engineering design codes are in the process of change material and load in shape of load and resistance factors.
from allowable/working stress design to limit state (load and ISO 19902 code specifies the environmental load and resistance
resistance factor) design. Working Stress Design (WSD) method factors for the component and joints using Gulf of Mexico (GOM)
uses safety factors without taking proper consideration for uncer- and North Sea (NS) calibrations. For other regions of the world, it is
tainties. It assumes that all load and resistance variables are necessary to develop local environmental load factors considering
deterministic. For allowable stress design, safety of a structure is their own geographical and local environment. This is the reason
achieved by specifying a safety factor against the uncertainties why the probabilistic evaluation of environmental load and
based on arbitrary experience and judgment like 1/3 decrease of resistance have been recently done in China and Indonesia (Jin

et al., 2009; Pradnyana et al., 2000). In China offshore, research on
developing environmental load factors has also been recently

Abbreviations: API, American Petroleum Institute; OPB, Out-Plane Bending; made by Duan et al. (2005) and Zhou et al. (2006). Two regions
CB, Compression and bending; PMO, Peninsular Malaysia Offshore; CBH, Com- of offshore Jawa and Makassar (Indonesia) have been explored in
pression, Bending and Hydrostatic Pressure; PTS, PETRONAS Technical Standards; this regard by Pradnyana. Design environment criteria for plat-
CDF, Cumulative Distribution Function; RSR, Reserve Strength Ratio; COV, Coeffi- forms in South East Asia is taken based on GOM criteria and thus
cient of Variance; SACS, Structural Analysis and Computer System software; there is an amplification of about 60% during platform design
FERUM, Compiler for FORM Analysis; SBO, Sabah Offshore; FORM, First Order
Reliability Method; SKO1, Sarawak Offshore Jacket no. 1; GOM, Gulf of Mexico; because of scarcity of data (French and Seeto et al., 1992). High
SKO2, Sarawak Offshore Jacket no. 2; IPB, In-Plane Bending; TB, Tension and environmental load factors used in this region, due to short lead
Bending; LRFD, Load and Resistance Factor Design; TBH, Tension Bending and time between discovery of hydrocarbon and platform design, can
Hydrostatic Pressure; MC, Mean Coefficient; VC, Variation Coefficient; MS, Malay- result in waste of economical resources. Hence, it is essential
sia; We/G, Environmental Load to Gravity load Ratio; NS, North Sea; WSD, Working
Stress Design that actual environmental load factors should be ascertained

n Corresponding author. Tel.: þ600122331590 for this region using component, joint and system reliability.
E-mail address: zafarullah.nizamani@gmail.com (Z. Nizamani). Currently, there are about 250 Jacket platforms operating in

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2014.09.046
0029-8018/& 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.



32 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

offshore Malaysia and any research on the reliability of Jacket Table 1
platforms will Environmental load factor (Moses and Stahl, 2000; Pradnyana et al., 2000;

be very much useful for the oil and gas industry in this region. Theophanatos et al., 1992).

The main offshore regions in Malaysia have been classified as Region Load factor Region Load factor
Peninsular Malaysia Offshore (PMO), Sabah Offshore (SBO) and
Sarawak Offshore (SKO). Gulf of Mexico 1.35 NW Australia 1.36

Central & South North Sea 1.18 Indonesia 1.00
Northern North Sea 1.25 Mediterranean Sea 1.30

2. Back ground API and ISO codes. LRFD format can be represented by
n

Structural design codes provide a set of technical guideline for ∅R¼ ∑ γi Q i ð1Þ
satisfactory design. American Petroleum Institute (API) code has been i ¼ 1

frequently updated, and latest was an errata issued in 2008 whereas where ∅ is the resistance factor (stress uncertainty), R is the
ISO 19902 code published in 2007 and it is the latest updated LRFD characteristic/nominal resistance, n is the type of load (gravity and
code available for steel Jacket platform design. The oil and gas environmental loads), γi is the load factor (load uncertainty), and
companies like Shell and PETRONAS have developed their own Qi is the characteristic or nominal load.
technical standards with respect to geographically specific regions
for Malaysia (Sarawak-Shell, 2005; PTS, 2010). These standards refer
to API RP2AWSD for the detailed design and assessment. The target 3. Literature review
reliability for a probabilistic code depends on factors like reliability of
platforms designed by existing codes, personal judgment and safety The work for finding environmental load factor for different
requirement. Structural design is based on load and resistance offshore regions has made much progress recently such as North
variables which are random in nature. Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Canada, Australia, South China Sea, Bohai

In working stress design, resistance is divided by a factor of Sea and Gulf of Guinea as shown in Table 1. The effect of
safety based on experience but LRFD takes into consideration of environment load variables is significant depending on geography
the inherent natural uncertainties in applied action and resistance of different regions. For the regions near equator the climate is
of components (Ferguson, 1990). Bilal reports that uncertainty mild and there is less chance of extreme rare events occurring
using deterministic factors of safety could lead to inconsistent significantly. The application of environmental load factor which is
reliability producing conservative design. WSD does not provide optimised for GOM offshore region and materials, may be not be
insights into the effects of individual uncertainties and real safety reasonable for Malaysian waters (Thomas et al., 1976).
margin (Bilal, 2007). Uncertainties in capacity or member strength Theophanatos has suggested WSD/LRFD RP 2 A/ISO 19902, for
occur due to variability in material strength or geometric incon- the selection of target safety index and had asked for separate
sistencies. Effective utilisation of Jacket component is achieved by partial factors to be determined for each region (Theophanatos
taking the uncertainty of both i.e. material and load into con- and Cazzulo et al., 1992). The criterion for selection of load and
sideration. Material uncertainties are used to measure statistical resistance factors is the closeness to the target reliability level
spread and they are evaluated by using the data from fabrication (Nowak and Raymond, 1986; Nowak and Maria, 2000).
yard and mill test reports. This is due to the limitation of Jacket design using LRFD method is more reliable as compared
engineering theories to predict the component and system to WSD as it uses the load factor, based on local geographical
response and capacity. Factors of safety are used for these locations (ISO 19902, 2007; Graff et al., 1994; Theophanatos and
uncertainties and they provide the increased safety margins Cazzulo et al., 1992; Turner et al., 1992; Theophanatos and
against future structural damage, deterioration or an addition of Wickham, 1993; Turner, 1993). Such factors contribute for ISO
scope of work due to future expansion of project (Moses, 1981). 19901 (ISO19901-1, 2005) and 19902 regional annex in particular,
Component fails when it is not capable to resist the loads and the and offshore industry in general, for the efficient design of Jacket
failure occurs due to yielding, deflection or buckling. In case of platforms in offshore Malaysia. ISO code 19902 clause A.9.9.3.3
joints, the failure modes may be compression, tension, in-plane states that, “for structures with the same geometrical and struc-
bending or out-plane bending. tural properties, harmonisation in safety levels (as are in GOM),

The characteristics of structural design are also dependent on hence requires location dependent partial action factors”. Envir-
load uncertainties which are more specifically related to environ- onmental load factor has been determined for GOM, different
mental loads. The safety factors play a major role for avoiding parts of North Sea, China, Mediterranean Sea, Australia, Gulf of
failure of Jacket platform. Environmental load factors are proposed Guinea and are recommended to be determined for regional
after determining characteristic values of the random variables. environmental conditions (Snell and Wisch, 2008; Theophanatos
Jacket platforms are designed as per component and joint based and Cazzulo et al., 1992; Birades et al., 2003; BOMEL(a), 2003). The
design codes and the end product is structural system (Wisch, cost of Jacket could be saved by 15% if location dependent LRFD
1997). The metocean data bank in Malaysia is still in its infancy. load factor is applied i.e. in Java sea where Jackets are not
ISO 19901 calls for determination of variables of environmental dominated by wave loads but by gravity loads (Pradnyana et al.,
load parameters for different regions of world where they are not 2000). In the light of above facts, it becomes very essential to
available such as South China Sea. The code proposes that this data evaluate environmental load factors for Jacket platforms in off-
should be collected by each country itself and to be incorporated shore Malaysia region. Use of LRFD code results in uniform
in the appendix of ISO 19902 code. There is a great need for not component and joint load and resistance factors as compared to
only analysing the available wave, wind and current data but also WSD. This is for wide range of factors like water depths, loads and
for checking the environmental load factor using location specific platform configurations. It results in lighter Jackets when environ-
data. To evaluate the component and joint environmental load mental load to gravity load ratio is low i.e. (shallow water depths,
factors for Malaysia, we have to check against seven types of static loading). Heavier Jackets will result where environmental
component stresses and four types of joint stresses as specified by load to gravity load is higher and where load and resistance



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 33

uncertainties are high (deepwater and dynamic loadings) (Lloyd factors for ISO 19902 as shown in Eq. (2) (BOMEL(b), 2003); (BOMEL
and Karsan, 1988). (a), 2003), (Efthymiou et al., 1997).

Uncertainty modelling is the first important step for the
reliability analysis of the Jacket platforms. The reliability analysis W ¼ aH2

maxþbHmaxþcV2
c þdVcþe ð2Þ

is significantly dependent on and is very susceptible to uncertainty
modelling (Marley et al., 2001). Studies on material uncertainty where W is the load effects, Hmax is the variable annual maximum
have been made by many authors (Moses and Stahl, 2000; Moses, wave height, Vc is the variable current speed, coefficients of a, b, c, d
1995; Frieze et al., 1997a,1997b; Hess et al., 2002; Duan et al., and e are found from surface fit tool of MATLAB. Heidman suggested
2005; BOMEL(a), 2003). Eq. (3) for evaluating the load effects from environmental forces

Uncertainties are analysed with collection of data and this basic (Gerhard, 2005). This was used to find system based load factor using
information about that random variable leads to determination of system reliability analysis.
probabilistic parameter (Phani, 2006). Modelling uncertainties are W ¼ a1ðHmaxþa2v Þa3c ð3Þ
introduced by all the physical models used to predict the load and
structural response effects (Guenard et al., 1987). Uncertainty Coefficients of a1, a2 and a3 were found from surface fit tool of
reflects, lack of information on the load side and the resistance MATLAB, Hmax is the maximum wave height and vc is the
side (Anthony et al., 1977). Characteristic resistance should have current speed. Here a1 factor depends on the size of load area of
low probability of being exceeded at any specified design life of Jacket (Guenard, 1984).
Jacket. It is defined as that value below which not more than 5% of
the test results of large number of test would fall (Billington and
Tebbett, 1980). It can also be described as 0.05 fractile of a lower
end of normal distributions (ISO-2394, 1998; DNV, 2008). Char- 4.2. Load and resistance uncertainty
acteristic strength should be equal to guaranteed yield strength
but shall not exceed 0.8 times the guaranteed tensile strength Random nature of offshore environment can only be estimated
(Holland, 1977) or minimum of upper yield strength. Characteristic by taking into consideration the return period depending on
value of geometric quantity are the dimensions specified by the probabilistic models of environmental forces. Uncertainties deal
design engineer (ISO-2394, 1998). with how much load we shall consider for design (loading) and

Extreme value distributions i.e. Fretchet, Weibull and Gumbel, are how much load a structure can withstand (resistances). We do not
three theoretical distributions which are commonly applied to model know how huge are the largest waves the Jacket will be exposed to
environmental load uncertainty parameters (Kunda, 2005). These throughout the expected design life of the Jacket. This will depend
distributions are evaluated for the rarest event ever to arise in on the geographic location and the design life of Jacket. For
characteristic design period of 100 years through an infinite number instance, in GOM, chances of rare event occurring within expected
of small events. They represent the maximum load intensity to design life will be higher than in Malaysia due to frequency of
capture the tail characteristics of these distributions. Many research- hurricanes in GOM. This extreme and rare wave height for Jacket
ers have selected Weibull distribution for environmental load uncer- design is assumed to occur once every 100 years and thus it has a
tainty (Sorensen and Sterndorff, 2001; Petrauskas and Aagaard, 1971; probability of 0.01 of occurrence in a given year. Structure can fail
Bitner-Gregersen and Cramer, 1995). Primary environmental load if the characteristic value of load exceeds the characteristic load
uncertainty parameter for fixed Jackets include wave, wind and carrying capability. Generally load tends to increase with time
current among these wave is the dominating load (Holland, 1977; whereas resistance tends to decrease with time. Thus uncertainty
Tromans and Forristall, 1998). of load and resistance increases with time (Melchers, 2002).

The data collected from fabrication yard in Malaysia was
statistically analysed for uncertainty of resistance parameters for

4. Methodology material and geometric variables (Kurian et al., 2013). After basic
variables were statistically defined, modelling uncertainty was

Structural reliability is based on the theory of probability which predicted for ISO 19902 code equations for component and joint
considers different uncertainties whose role may be dominant as far stresses. This model uncertainty depends on the statistical para-
as behaviour of structure is concerned. These uncertainties, if not meters for basic variables i.e. diameter, thickness, yield strength,
treated properly, may cause failure, collapse or damage to structure modulus of elasticity. Monte Carlo simulation was used to generate
which may become unserviceable and thus a threat to environment. simulated data using a code in MATLAB. Data generated by this
These problems can only be solved by introducing the probability to simulation was used to find distribution and its parameters. The
account for the risks involved in the uncertain design of offshore basic uncertainty variables were used to find model uncertainty
Jacket platforms. Uncertainties are dealt with by taking random Xm for nine different types of stresses for components of Jacket
variable parameters of load and resistance into consideration. platforms, and four types of stresses for K, T/Y and X joints. The

uncertainty model for resistance (Xm) is shown by
4.1. Environmental load modelling

Xm ¼ Actual value ð4Þ
Predicted value

Total wave force on platform is proportional to square of wave
height (Bea, 1974). The environmental load model is necessary for the
development of load factor using reliability index. Here the responses
of Jacket (strength of components) are modelled in terms of basic

4.3. Case study: axial tension model uncertainty
applied loads which govern its behaviour. This can be represented by
stochastic processes or random variables. Different methods for

ISO axial stress of tension can be found using
finding the response of offshore Jackets, subjected to random ocean
forces have been widely published (Birades et al., 2003; Moses, 1995; σt ¼ f t A ð5Þ
Frieze et al., 1997a,1997b; Renolds et al., 2007; Stahl et al., 1998). The
method adopted in this study for component and joint reliability where σt is the tensile stress, f t is the tensile strength, and A is the
index is based on the SHELL method used for development of load area of tubular member. Two main steps were used to find the



34 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

simulated statistical parameters of stress for components under Table 3
axial tension. Current at surface (maximum/critical directions).

Location
(i) De Current at surface with return period of 100 years

fine the nominal values which are used by actual stress
model, i.e. f yn, Dn, Tn as shown by Minimum (m/s) Maximum (m/s) Platform specific (m/s)

σtn ¼ f tn An ð6Þ PMO 0.68 1.50 1.47
where σ SBO

tn is the nominal tensile stress, f 0.66 2.23 0.94
tn is the nominal

tensile strength, and A SKO1 0.40 1.80 1.05
n is the nominal area of tubular member.

SKO2 0.40 1.80 1.2
(ii) Define the variable f yi, Di, Ti which are used by member or

joint stress model, i.e. The biases of mean and standard
deviations were defined as variables along with their prob- 4.5. Weibull distribution
ability distributions as shown in Eq. (7). The output was also
variable, changing each time when analysed. Weibull 2-parameter distribution is an extreme value distribution.

σ It is used to capture the variability of rare event which may occur
ti ¼ f ti Ai ð7Þ

once during the re
where σ turn per variable x, has the CDF as follows:

ti is the variable tensile stress, f ti is the variable tensile   iod. The
b

strength, and Ai is the variable area of tubular member. The limit Fðx; a; bÞ ¼ 1exp  x ð9Þ
a

state equation for resistance bias using Monte Carlo simulation is
shown by where a is the scale and b is the shape, Fðx; a;bÞ is the cumulative

distribution function (CDF) of variables a and b. Their linear form can
Resistance Bias ðR tn

iÞ ¼
σ ð8Þ be shown by taking the natural logs twice of CDF of Eq. (9) as shown
σti by

where σ 
x(i), in Eq.(10)	(Bury, 1999),
tn is the nominal stress and σti is the varying stress. ln  ln 1F xðiÞ ¼ b lnðaÞþ  

b ln x
The resistance biases changes each time analysis is made, due to 
  	ðiÞ

ð10Þ
variable denominator in Eq. (8) which gives mean bias of axial The plotting of ln  

ln 1F xðiÞ against the data x(i) results
tension. There were 105 simulations which produced as many in a straight line, if the data came from Weibull distribution. The
resistance values due to different variable strengths and these were extrapolation was made up to 10,000 years for wave and current
further statistically analysed using Easy Fit software. All variables in using Weibull distribution for finding the system reliability.
this study are assumed to be independently distributed. The data was
analysed by using three Goodness of fit test, i.e. Kolmogrov–Smirnov, 4.6. Structural reliability
Anderson–Darling and Chi-Square test and the best fit is reported.

The structural reliability was evaluated using First Order
Reliability Method (FORM). For the FORM analysis, it is necessary

4.4. Environmental load uncertainty to use random variable formulations (Baker and Ramachandran,
1981). When randomness of material or load is low, a determinis-

Omni-directional wave, wind and current are used for this tic model can be used but in case of high randomness, probabilistic
study Like API WSD and API LRFD as reported by Ferguson (1990). models are used. In cases when random uncertainty is high,
100-year load return period for environmental load was consid- stochastic models containing statistical properties should be used
ered for calibration of Jackets as per guidelines used by API and ISO (Choi et al., 2007). Safety margin between load and resistance is
for extreme conditions. Stoke's 5th order wave theory was used for indicated by limit state equation as follows:
the analysis in SACS model. Statistical parameters for environ- g ¼ RQr0 ð11Þ
mental load i.e. wind, wave and current were also evaluated.
Table 2 shows the relationship between maximum wave height where g is the limit state function, R is the resistance and Q is the
and signi load.

ficant wave height for the platforms considerd. Ratio lies
in between 1.86 and 2.05 and in GOM the ratio was 1.93, but ISO g¼ R=Qr1 ð12Þ
gave 1.76 with water depth of 300 m (Bea, 1975).

Stronger currents Probability of failure is given by
flow in December and in August near

peninsular Malaysia but they are not as strong as they are near Pf ¼ PðgoQ Þ ð13Þ
Sabah and Sarawak during the same period (Yiquan et al., 2010).

Here (go0) indicates failure region, g40 safe region and g¼0
1/7 power law was used to find current at different depths as

failure surface.
reported by Tromans and Vanderschuren (1995) and Tromans

Mean of limit state function is shown by
(2001). Table 3 shows the comparison between three regions for
minimum and maximum currents at critical directions. μg ¼ μRμQ ð14Þ

where μR is the mean resistance and μQ is the mean load.
The platform will fail if the load effect (Q) exceeds the

Table 2 resistance of the member (R). The reliability index can be found by
Ratio of Hmax/Hs for Platforms in offshore Malaysia and GOM.

β¼Φ1ðPf Þ ð15Þ
Area Hs (m) Hmax (m) Hmax/Hs where Φ1 is the inverse standard normal distribution and
PMO 5.3 10.9 2.05 probability of failure (Pf) can be found by
SBO 4.3 7.7 1.79
SKO1 5.2 9.9 1.90 Pf ¼ 1ΦðβÞ ð16Þ
SKO2 6.3 11.7 1.86
GOM (300 m water depth) 14.6 25.8 1.76 (ISO) where Φ is the cumulative distribution function for the standar-

dized normal variable



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 35

4.7. Environmental load for SACS type ratios (dead to live to environmental). Load capacities were
calculated for the components, joints and overall system.

Table 4 shows the basic parameters used for conversion into
random input for load used in SACS analysis. Using these parameters 4.9. Single stresses case study: axial tension
along with Weibull distribution, 50 random load variables were
generated for wave, current and time period through MATLAB. These Code equation for axial tension provided by ISO and API WSD
50 random load variables were used to get 50 stresses from SACS are shown by Eqs. (17) and (18) respectively.
output file for each component and joint using Morrison equation.

σtr
f

For statistics of environmental load it is necessary to make compo- t ð17Þ
γ

nent and joint stresses dimensionless, which is acquired by dividing R;t

it by 100-year characteristic values (Tromans, 2001). Therefore the where σt is the tensile stress, f t is the tensile strength, and γR;t is
output of applied stresses from SACS were normalised before being the resistance factor
used for curve fitting tool of MATLAB. The curve fitting included 50 Ft ¼ 0:6Fy ð18Þ
normalised stress, wave and current values and the custom equations
(2) and (3) was used to find coefficients of equation. R¼ f yiAi Xm ð19Þ

where Ft is the allowable tensile stress and Fy is the yield strength.
Reliability analysis provides strength of component using ISO code

4.8. Selection of jacket platforms for reliability analysis equation (19), where f yi is the random yield strength, Ai is the
random area of tubular member, and Xm is the model uncertainty.

These platforms were designed as per API RP2A-WSD 21st To find the applied stress, reliability analysis for loading purpose
edition. SACS software was used for static linear analyses. Table 5 will include Eqs. (20) and (21) for API WSD and ISO respectively,
shows the details of the platforms selected for reliability analysis. S¼ f ynAn ð20Þ
These Jackets were checked for material and geometrical varia-
bility, load effect ratios (axial to bending to hydrostatic) and load where S is the strength given by code equation, f yn is the nominal

yield strength and An is the nominal tubular area
Table 4 S¼ 0:6 Fyn An ð21Þ
Platform-Weibull distribution parameters.

Application of load ratios for reliability analysis are given by
Parameter 10-year 100-year Scale Shape Lr ¼ dDþ lLþwW=Xw ð22Þ
PMO where d, l and w are the dead, live and environmental load ratios

Hmax (m/s) 9.6 10.8 8.33 5.89 as shown in Table 6. D, L, W are the variable uncertain random
Tp (s) 10.3 10.8 9.73 14.62
Current (m/s) 0.98 1.10 0.85 6.00 dead, live and environmental load and Xw is the environmental

SBO load uncertainty model and in this study it has been taken from
Hmax (m/s) 6.8 7.7 5.86 5.58 ISO (BOMEL(a), 2003). Normal distribution was considered with
Tp (s) 10.6 11.0 18.71 10.14 mean of 1.0 and standard deviation of 0.15. Parameters of random
Current (m/s) 0.78 0.94 0.62 3.71 variables are defined separately.

SKO1 FERUM, a compiler for FORM analysis was used to analyse the
Hmax (m/s) 5.5 9.2 2.96 1.35 reliability model. The main part of calibration requires that a
Tp (s) 9.7 11 8.34 5.51
Current (m/s) 0.96 1.05 0.86 7.73 component or joint should be fully utilised. We need to define

factor of safety as per the given code. Factor of safety in API WSD
SKO2

Hmax (m/s) 10.4 11.7 9.03 5.89
Tp (s) 10.9 11.4 10.33 15.46 Table 7
Current (m/s) 1.05 1.20 0.89 5.19 Return period and parameters of load random variables based on Weibull

distribution.

Parameter Platform Return period Distribution parameters
Table 5
Details of selected platforms for reliability analysis. 10 102 103 104 Scale Shape Mean SD COV

Platform Water Installation No. Design Wave A 4.90 5.30 5.53 5.70 4.46 8.83 4.22 0.57 0.14
location depth (m) year of legs wave B 3.80 4.30 4.59 4.80 3.27 5.61 3.03 0.62 0.21

height (m) C 4.00 5.20 5.90 6.40 2.92 2.64 2.59 1.06 0.41
D 5.60 6.30 6.71 7.00 4.86 5.88 4.50 0.89 0.20

PMO 61.00 2006 4 10.8 Current A 0.98 1.10 1.17 1.22 0.85 6.00 0.79 0.15 0.19
SBO 42.80 2007 6 7.7 B 0.78 0.94 1.03 1.10 3.71 0.62 0.56 0.17 0.30
SKO1 72.40 2003 4 9.9 C 0.96 1.05 1.10 1.14 0.86 7.73 0.81 0.12 0.15
SKO2 94.8 2008 4 11.7 D 1.05 1.20 1.29 1.35 0.89 5.19 0.82 0.18 0.22

Table 6
Dead, live and environmental load ratios.

We/G 0.1 0.25 0.5 1.0 2.5 5.0 10.0 25.0 50.0

Dead load (70% of G) 0.64 0.56 0.47 0.35 0.20 0.12 0.06 0.03 0.01
Live load (30% of G) 0.27 0.24 0.20 0.15 0.09 0.05 0.03 0.01 0.01
Environmental load (We) 0.09 0.20 0.33 0.50 0.71 0.83 0.91 0.96 0.98
Sum of all loads 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00



36 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

for extreme conditions is shown by Here a1,a2, a3 are taken from curve fitting and u is the surface
current. The limit state equation for load andresistance is shown by

FSð Þ ¼ 4
API WSD

3 ð23Þ
1:67 a1ðH a3

Load¼ RSRWSD DdþLlþ maxþa2uÞw ð34Þ
X

The factor of safety in ISO 19902 for extreme conditions is given by w

  The environmental load model uncertainty (Xw) was used in
FSðIS Þ ¼  1=1:05 DþLþ 

W=X
O w

1:1Dþ1:1Lþ
1:35  ð24Þ development of API LRFD and ISO codes. ISO and BOMEL take it as

W=Xw normal distribution with mean bias of 1.09 and COV of 0.18
where FS is the factor of safety, 1.05, 1.1, 1.35 are tensile resistance, (BOMEL(a), 2003).

 
gravity load and environmental load factors as per ISO 19902 code. Resistance¼ a1 HmaxðdesÞ þa2u

a3 MOS ISO  PdPwISO  RSŔ Xw ð35Þ
The actual load applied by API or ISO can be shown as

where HmaxðdesÞ is the design wave height.
L¼ S LrFS ð25Þ

Now the limit state equation becomes, as shown in 5. Result and discussion
g¼ RL ð26Þ

5.1. Load uncertainty
where R is given by Eq. (19). Same procedure was adopted for all
other types of stresses to find the reliability for that particular The reliability determination requires that distribution and its
stresses. The equation for relevant stress changed as per type of parameters should be used for uncertain random variables. There
stress. are three parameters of uncertainty for Jacket platforms i.e. wave,

wind and current. Extreme value distributions i.e. Gumbel,
Fretchet and Weibull are three theoretical distributions which

4.10. System reliability and environmental load factor
are commonly applied to model load uncertainty parameters
(Kunda, 2005). These distributions are formulated as asymptotic

Design capacity of component in ISO code is shown by

R   distributions for the maximum of an infinite number of events.

r It is easy to apply them as they represent the maximum load
γ

γ d PdþγwPw ð27Þ
c intensity to capture the tail characteristics of these distributions.

For extreme conditions, Gumbel distribution and Weibull distribu-
Here Pd, Pw are gravity and environmental load ratios γd,γw are the tion are the most important distributions, as these can capture the
gravity and environmental load factors i.e. 1.1 and 1.35, γc is the rare tail end events better. Based on Weibull and Gumbel dis-
resistance factor for compression i.e. 1.18 and R is resistance of tributions, load parameters were determined using 10- and 100-
material as per the ISO code. There is a relationship between API year values. The results showed that Gumbel gave low COV but
(WSD) RSR and ISO (LRFD) RSR. ISO RSR can be found from mean values of Gumbel were always higher than the Weibull.
Eqs. (28)–(31) given by (BOMEL(b), 2003) This was also reported by Panchang, Gumbel model overestimates
RSRISO ¼MOSISO MF  ICSF  SR PdPw ð28Þ the chance of large wave heights (Panchang and Li, 2006). There-

 fore Weibull-two parameter distribution was used for the relia-
bility analysis. Table 7 shows the statistical parameters of waves

MOS ISO ¼ γdPdþ


γwPw
Pdþ

γc ð29Þ
P for all three regions of Malaysia and respective extrapolation up to
w

10,000 years.
ISO gravity and environmental load which were used in limit The model uncertainty for resistance parameters and their

state equation can be shown by
   distributions as well as statistical variation for tubular components

and joints for offshore Malaysia can be found in authors another
PdPwISO ¼ 1þ 1 1 Pd

ðMOSISO  MF  Þ ð30Þ
ICSF P published paper (Kurian et al., 2013).

w

Material factor (MF) is based on the yield strength and ISO code 5.2. Component reliability environmental load factor
recommends it as 1.15. System redundancy (SR) values are based
on platform specific given by SACS collapse analysis. Implicit code Reliability index for offshore Jacket platforms can be taken as
safety factor (ICSF) is the difference between applied stresses as minimum lower bound of safety levels acceptable to the public.
follows: Behaviour of structure can be measured by probability of failure or

reliability index. Target reliability of component and joint is found
ICSF ¼   RSRWSD

 ð31Þ
Pd=Pw SRMF MOS as per API RP2AWSD. The target reliability indices were chosen so

WSD
that it can give consistent and uniform safety margin for all

Safety margin MOSWSD are set as reported by code i.e. for components. Load factor was developed in such a way that the
extreme conditions there should be one-third increases in the reliability index of Jacket is at predefined target level. The
required stresses. In this study it has been fixed as 1.32 as also reliability indices of ISO LRFD design for a range of load factors
suggested by BOMEL(b) (2003), RSRWSD is the platform specific were determined. When ISO load factors were plotted against the
reserve strength ratio taken from SACS collapse analysis. The ISO corresponding API target reliabilities, the intersection point gave
RSR could be shown as Eq. (32), this will be used in limit state the proposed load factor. The Jacket reliability designed as per new
Equation (35) load factors will not only be higher than the target, but also will

ensure a safe Jacket.
RSŔ¼ ICSF MF  SR ð32Þ Load factor is multiplied with design/characteristic load with

Surface fit was made by Eq. (33) given by Heideman (Gerhard, an intention so that this new factored load will be higher than the
2005) actual load. The load factor must be based on the target reliability

which should be equal to or greater than the preselected target
W ¼ a1 ðHmaxþa2nuÞa3 ð33Þ reliability, in this case it was API WSD which has already proved to



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 37

Table 8 Table 9
Environmental load factors and target reliability for platforms. API (WSD) target reliability and ISO (LRFD) reliability.

Regions PMO SBO SKO1 SKO2 Average Code Reliability index Reliability index
Malaysia North Sea/GOM (BOMEL(a) 2003)

Horizontal periphery brace 1.20 1.25 1.15 1.25 1.21
Horizontal diagonal 1.27 1.25 1.25 1.20 1.24 API (WSD) 3.96 3.70
Vertical diagonal 1.15 1.25 1.25 1.2 1.21

ISO (LRFD)
Legs 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.15 1.23

γw¼1.10 3.78 –
Average 1.25 1.25 1.2 1.25 1.24

γw¼1.15 3.86 –
Average target reliability 3.59 4.30 3.17 5.08 4.04

γw¼1.20 3.95 3.70
γw¼1.25 4.03 3.80
γw¼1.30 4.11 3.88
γw¼1.35 4.19 3.97
γw¼1.40 4.27 4.10

Fig. 1. Load factor for components for jacket platforms in Malaysia.

be a reliable code. Here environmental load and resistance factors
were calibrated so that the one close to target reliability can be
selected. The point where ISO code overtakes the target reliability Fig. 2. Axial tension resistance factor for components.
can be taken as the load factor. The ISO LRFD-MS load factors were
evaluated at We/G ratio of 1.0. This method has been tried for code. It is reported that higher the reliability index is, the larger
finding the load factors using target reliability based on previous the structural safety margin will be and the more corresponding
code which has proved its robustness. This method was adopted cost will be and vice versa (Lind, 1994). Target reliability index was
by AISC and ACI 318 codes for conversion to LRFD. taken as 4.2 in China (Zhou et al., 2006) and 2.8 also from China

Table 8 shows the environmental load factor of Jacket Platform from other study (Jin et al., 2009) but later uses the Gumbel
components for offshore Malaysia for all regions. For PMO region distribution for environmental load. Table 9 shows the target
platform, target API WSD reliability index was 3.59 and horizontal reliability index for Malaysia and reliability index against increas-
diagonal members were the most stressed and the vertical ing load factors. These are compared with ISO LRFD code.
diagonals were least stressed. The highest target reliability for this
platform was 4.0 for leg members. The results from SBO were the 5.4. Resistance factor
most consistent among all platforms which shows members were
equally stressed, though the target reliability was different for all The characteristic resistance of tubular members is reduced by
members. The highest reliability for SBO was found for horizontal the resistance factors. Safety is ensured through common under-
diagonal member with target reliability of 6.1 and the lowest was standing that factored resistance is less than or equal to factored
for horizontal brace at periphery the average target reliability was environmental loads. Here environmental load factor of 1.25 was
3.59. For the platform at SKO1, the leg members were highly used to find the resistance factor of component. Two types of
stressed. The least stressed members were braces at horizontal stress conditions were considered i.e. axial tension and axial
periphery and vertical diagonals. Here the target reliability of compression. The ISO 19902 resistance factors for axial tension
3.6 was the highest for horizontal diagonal members and average and compression are 1.05 and 1.18, which are equal to API RP2A
target reliability was 3.17. For the platform at SKO2, the horizontal LRFD with a environmental load factor of 1.35 (API(LRFD), 2003).
members at periphery and vertical diagonals were highly stressed
and leg members were the least stressed. All members have high
target reliability and maximumwas found for horizontal members 5.5. Axial tension
with target reliability of 5.2 and the average target reliability
was 5.08. The resistance factor for axial tension in ISO code is 1.05. In this

study by using a load factor of 1.25 the resistance factor obtained
5.3. All regions and all components combined result was 1.05 which is same as provided by ISO and API. Therefore, for

axial tension, no change is proposed for offshore Malaysia as
When all stress conditions and regions were added and shown in Fig. 2.

averaged together the environmental load factor for Jacket plat-
form components in Malaysia was 1.25 as shown in Fig. 1. This 5.6. Axial compression
work establishes that the common load factor of 1.35 used by ISO
code is on the higher side. Even with reduced load factor the The resistance factor for axial tension in ISO code is 1.18. In this
reliability of Jacket will be higher as compared to API RP2A WSD study by using a load factor of 1.25 the resistance factor obtained



38 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

ISO LRFD (MS) stands for Malaysia with a load factor of 1.25. As the
ratio of We/G increases the reliability decreases. It can be seen that
with increase of We/G ratio, reliability decreases for all cases. ISO
(LRFD) code gave higher values as compared to API (WSD), which
shows the consistency of the ISO code.

The same trend was observed in case of axial compression as
shown in Fig. 5. Here also the ISO code gave higher reliability
index at different We/G ratios. It was found that metocean
parameters influenced this type of stresses more than the other
variables. Reliability for members under isolated bending stress
was not encountered during the Jacket analysis. Only those
members which showed high ratio of bending stresses as com-
pared to axial stress were selected. The results show the same
trend and ISO was again higher as compared to API. The ISO LRFD

Fig. 3. Axial compression resistance factor for components. (MS) came in between both codes for compression and bending
cases. During Jacket analysis, compression stress was the only
isolated stress present in components out of above three isolated
stresses.

5.8. Combined two stresses

Figs. 6 and 7 are based on reliability of combined two stresses
which were also found in actual member analysis. The code
equations were similar in API WSD and ISO LRFD but the only
difference was in safety factors. The ratio of axial to bending stress
used here was 0.5 based on actual values. The result show that the
ISO reliability was again higher, but in the case of compression and
bending both curves were close. At higher gravity load API gave
higher values. This study proposes a load factor of 1.25 which is in

Fig. 4. We/G ratio vs. reliability index – component in tension. between the curves. Combined stresses used for reliability analysis
was based on 50% for axial tension/compression and 50% for

Fig. 5. Reliability index – component in compression.
Fig. 6. Reliability index – component in Tens & Bend-SKO1.

was 1.18 which is same as provided by ISO and API. Therefore, no
change is proposed for offshore Malaysia as shown in Fig. 3.

5.7. Single stresses

Jacket members under pure axial tension were not found
during the analysis. For finding reliability against tensile stresses,
only members which were predominantly influenced by axial
tensile stresses and with minimum bending stresses, were
selected. The reliability was determined for the component, using
different environmental to gravity load ratios to find the effect of
API and ISO codes. The basic equations for API and ISO were found
to be similar i.e. depending on yield strength (Fy) except their
safety factors. Fig. 4 shows component reliability of member under
stress of axial tension. The ISO 19902 LRFD code, with a load factor
of 1.35 gave higher reliability index as compared to API WSD. Fig. 7. Reliability index – component in Comp & Bend in SKO1.



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 39

Table 10
Sensitivity analysis of random variables axial tension.

Basic variable Reliability index was achieved at these Sensitivity
values of random variables factor (α)

Yield strength 414.42 0.1028
Diameter 1855 0.0036
Thickness 52.15 0.0378
Significant wave height 4.7 0.8783
Current 0.85 0.1160
Environmental load 0.86 0.4325
uncertainty model

Dead load 1.0 0.000787
Live load 1.0 0.0013
Stress model 1.24 0.127
uncertainty

Fig. 8. Reliability index for component in Tens, Bend & Hydro-SKO1.

5.10. Effect of variation of environmental load factor

The effect of environmental load to gravity load variations for
ISO code equations is shown in Fig. 10. This shows variation in
reliability index with respect to change in environmental load
factor. With high We/G ratio the steepness reduced and thus
reliability decreased with high We/G ratio. Higher reliability was
achieved with increase in load factor as expected.

5.11. Sensitivity analysis

Sensitivity study indicated that environmental load para-
meters strongly influenced the reliability of Jacket (Gierlinski and
Yarmier, 1993) and the same trend was found in this study. All
random input variables do not have equal influence on reliability

Fig. 9. Reliability index for component – Comp, Bend & Hydrostatic.
index output. Sensitivity analysis can be used to quantify the
influence of each basic random variable (Chakrabarty and Bhar,
2006). Table 10 shows the sensitivity index for the variables used
in this research. The most important influence was made by
significant wave height, current, environmental load model uncer-
tainty, stress model uncertainty and yield strength. The same was
achieved for study in Mediterranean Sea (Theophanatos and
Wickham, 1993) and for ISO (BOMEL(a), 2003). ISO recommends
that most sensitive α values for resistance variables should have
value of 0.8 and for load variables 0.7 (ISO-2394, 1998). The
significant wave height of Malaysian regions is lower as compared
to GOM and NS which plays important role in reliability analysis as
shown in Table 10. This study was able to achieve the comparative
target reliability using a reduced load factor of 1.25.

Table 11 shows reliability index for this study compared with
ISO study. API WSD showed more consistency for all stresses. The
reliability index obtained in this study was comparable with ISO.

Fig. 10. Load factor effect with We/G.

bending. This was the ratio available from the Jacket and also used 5.12. Joint reliability and environmental load factor
for ISO code development (BOMEL(a), 2003).

Table 12 shows the load factors for Jacket platform joints in
5.9. Combined three stresses different regions of offshore Malaysia and their corresponding

target reliability. In PMO region, the X and K joints were most
The ratio for combined three stresses used in this study for stressed. The target reliability for X joint was 4.95, the highest

axial to bending stresses was 0.4 to 0.6. The result in Fig. 8 shows among other types. Nowadays, the codes prefer X joints for Jackets
the same trend as was found for ISO. Steepness reduced at higher due to their high ductility. In SBO region, it can be seen that
We/G ratio as compared to low ratios. The ISO LRFD gave higher X joints were the most stressed and the target reliability for the
reliability as compared to API WSD and this study proposes load X joint was 3.05 and for K-joint it was 3.4. It was the highest target
factor of 1.25. reliability among other types of joints at SBO platform. In SKO1

Fig. 9 shows reliability index for compression, bending and region X-joints were the most stressed and its target reliability
hydrostatic pressure combined stress ratio. The reliability analysis was 3.40. For K-joint, target reliability was 3.95, the highest among
was based on 40–60% for axial tension/compression and bending other types at this platform. In SKO2 region K and X joints were
stress ratios. This was the ratio available from the Jacket and also the most stressed and their target reliability was almost equal
used for ISO code development (BOMEL(a), 2003). to 5.0.



40 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

Table 11
Reliability Index for jacket members.

Offshore Malaysia (BOMEL 2001)

Load type ISO (LRFD) API (WSD) ISO (LRFD) API (WSD)

Compression & Bending 3.65 3.82 3.97 3.70
Tension & Bending 4.53 4.09 3.85 3.64
Compression, bending & Hydrostatic 4.25 3.93 4.09 3.80
Tension, bending & Hydrostatic 4.37 3.74 3.72 3.85

Average 4.20 3.90 3.94 3.70

Table 12
Environmental load factors and target reliability.

Regions PMO SBO SKO1 SKO2 Average

K-joint 1.30 1.25 1.25 1.30 1.27
T/Y joints 1.20 1.25 1.20 1.25 1.23
X-joint 1.30 1.35 1.30 1.25 1.30
Average offshore Malaysia 1.25 1.25 1.25 1.30 1.26
Average target reliability 3.92 3.11 3.64 4.73 3.85

Table 13
Target reliability from WSD and ISO (LRFD) reliability for joints.

Code Reliability index Malaysia Reliability Index
North Sea/GOM (BOMEL(a) 2003)

API (WSD) 3.96 3.42

ISO (LRFD)
γw¼1.10 3.66 –
γw¼1.15 3.75 –
γw¼1.20 3.85 3.74
γw¼1.25 3.94 3.83
γw¼1.30 4.0 3.92
γw¼1.35 4.12 4.0
γw¼1.40 4.20 4.1 Fig. 12. We/G ratio vs. reliability index-K-joint-tension/compression.

5.14. K-Joints

For axial stresses and in-plane bending ISO LRFD gave higher
reliability index as compared to API WSD. For OPB case, it was
API WSD which gave higher reliability index. With increase of
environmental load, the reliability decreased significantly. Fig. 12
shows the reliability index with respect to increasing We/G ratios,
for a typical tension/compression case of K-joint. The ISO LRFD
with a load factor of 1.35 gave higher reliability as compared to API
WSD. Here ISO LRFD was plotted with an environmental load
factor of 1.35 as shown by ISO 19902 code. ISO LRFD (MS) stands
for this region with a load factor of 1.25.

Table 14 shows the reliability index for K-joint. In this study,
Fig. 11. Load factor for joints for jacket platforms in Malaysia. reliability index was found out at environmental load factor of 1.25

and 1.35 i.e. offshore Malaysia values were compared with ISO
code values. The load factor of 1.25 gave good results as compared
to ISO code values.

5.13. All regions and all joints combined result
5.15. T/Y-Joints

The reliability index for API WSD was evaluated to be 3.96 and
it was 3.94 when load factor was 1.25 (offshore Malaysia) as For axial stresses and in-plane bending ISO LRFD gave higher
shown in Table 13 and Fig. 11. When all conditions and regions are reliability index as compared to API WSD. For OPB case, it was API
added and averaged together, the environmental load factor for WSD which gave higher reliability index. With increase of envir-
Jacket platform joints in Malaysia is proposed to be 1.25. The high onmental load the reliability decreased significantly as shown in
values of reliability indices show that members are oversized. This Fig. 13, for a typical T/Y joint under out-plane bending case. The
may be due to provisions to withstand transportation and installa- ISO LRFD gave higher reliability index as compared to API WSD
tion of Jacket (Birades et al., 2003). reliability index. This study propose load factor of 1.25.



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 41

Table 14
ISO reliability index for K-joints.

Type of stress Reliability index Malaysia offshore, γw¼1.25 Reliability index Malaysia offshore, γw¼1.35 Reliability index ISO, γw¼1.35 (BOMEL(a) 2003)

Axial tension 3.98 4.16 3.90
Axial Compression 3.98 4.16 3.90
IPB 2.79 3.01 4.10
OPB 3.03 3.25 3.79

Average 3.45 3.66 3.90

Fig. 13. We/G ratio vs. reliability index for T/Y-joint in OPB. Fig. 14. We/G ratio vs. reliability index for X-joint in tension.

Table 15 Table 16
ISO reliability index for T/Y-joints. ISO reliability index for X-joints.

Type of Reliability Index Reliability index Reliability index North Reliability index Reliability index Reliability index North
stress Malaysia offshore, Malaysia Offshore, Sea, γw¼1.35 (BOMEL Type of Malaysia Offshore, Malaysia Offshore, Sea, γw¼1.35 (BOMEL

γw¼1.25 γw¼1.35 (a) 2003) stress γw¼1.25 γw¼1.35 (a) 2003)

Axial 3.81 4.02 4.13 Axial
tension tension 4.28 4.45 4.07

Axial compression 3.58 3.78 Axial compression 4.38 4.52

4.04 3.98
IPB 3.37 3.58 4.04 IPB 4.61 4.75 4.20
OPB 3.94 4.12 4.11 OPB 4.29 4.45 4.00

Average 3.68 3.88 4.06 Average 4.39 4.54 4.03

Table 15 shows the reliability index for T/Y joint. In this study
reliability index was found out at environmental load factor of 1.25
and 1.35. Offshore Malaysia reliability was compared with ISO
LRFD code reliability. The load factor of 1.25 gave good results as
compared to ISO code.

5.16. X-Joints

For axial stresses and IPB, ISO LRFD gave higher reliability index
as compared to API WSD. For OPB case it was API which gave
higher reliability index. With increase in environmental load the
reliability decreased significantly as shown in Fig. 14 for a typical
X joint in tension. The ISO LRFD gave higher reliability as
compared to API WSD. This study proposes 1.25 as environmental
load factor.

Table 16 shows the reliability index for X joint. In this study
reliability index was found at environmental load factor of 1.25 Fig. 15. Effect of We/G on β against environmental load factors.
and 1.35 i.e. offshore Malaysia values were compared with ISO
code values. The environmental load factor of 1.25 gave good load factor proposed for all three regions of Malaysia was based on
results as compared to ISO code. minimum RSR of 2.0. The minimum RSR achieved from these

platforms was 2.20 in one case only and was higher than 2.5 in
5.17. System reliability and environmental load factor most cases. Minimum RSR selection was based on concept to build

maximum optimised structural system which was not only safe as
Reserve Strength Ratios (RSR) were evaluated from existing per API but also will be economical. It has been suggested that

platforms based on design of API WSD. Here the environmental minimum target probability of failure for system reliability should



42 Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43

increased with increasing percentage contribution of dead load
which were more predictable with less variability (Ingebrigtsen
et al., 1990).

Table 17 shows the reliability index with different We/G ratio.
The target probability of failure suggested by Efthymiou was
3.1105 with corresponding reliability index of 4.0 and prob-
ability of failure suggested by Melcher was 1103 with corre-
sponding reliability index of 3.58. Fig. 17 shows reliability index
with respect to varying We/G ratios for the environmental load
factor of 1.1. It is clear that load factor of 1.1 is well above the
notional target reliabilities. Thus any reliability above the accepted
reliable Jacket will be safe for the Jacket assessed for ductility.

Fig. 16. Effect of γw on β against We/G ratio of 0.5, 1, and 2.5.

6. Conclusion

The main conclusions are listed as below:
Table 17
Reliability index for joints for Jacket platforms in Offshore Malaysia.

(1) For components and joints of Jacket Platforms in Malaysian
We/G PMO SBO SKO1 SKO2 offshore regions, an environmental load factor of 1.25 is

recommended, as against 1.35 currently used by the codes.
0.1 8.32 8.72 8.50 8.54 This will result in significant cost savings.
0.25 5.34 5.57 5.60 5.49
0.5 4.84 5.19 5.06 5.07 (2) It was found that there was no effect on resistance factor using
1.0 4.19 4.65 4.32 4.49 the new environmental load factor and hence same ISO 19902
2.5 3.44 4.01 3.62 3.81 resistance factors should be used. Thus no changes are
5 3.06 3.67 3.31 3.46 recommended for resistance factors.

10 2.82 3.46 3.13 3.24
20 2.70 3.36 3.04 3.14 (3) For system, the target reliability index was 4.0 and 3.8 based

on notional system reliability index proposed by Efthymiou
and Melchers respectively. The load factors were determined
for We/G ratio of 1.0. The load factor of 1.1 achieved with a
target reliability of 4.0 is recommended for offshore Malaysia
based on system reliability.

References

Anthony, P.P., Paul, K.Y., Paul, R.C., 1977. Effect of design, fabrication and installation
on the structural reliability of offshore platforms. In: Proceedings of the
Offshore Technology Conference, Houston.

API(LRFD), 2003. API RP2A LRFD. American Petroleum Institute.
Baker, M.J., Ramachandran, K., 1981. Reliability Analysis as a tool in the design of

fixed offshore platforms. Integrity of Offshore Structures.
Bea, R., 1974. Selection of environmental criteria for offshore platform design. J. Pet.

Fig. 17. Environmental load factor of 1.10. Technol. SPE 4452.
Bea, R., 1975. Gulf of Mexico hurricane wave heights. J. Pet. Technol., SPE 5317.

be taken as 3105 (Ingebrigtsen et al., 1990; Efthymiou et al., Bilal, M.A., 2007. Development of Reliability-based load and resistance factor design
(LRFD) methods for piping. ASME, New York.

1997) with equivalent reliability index of 4.0. This reliability index Billington, C.J., Tebbett, I.F., 1980. The basis for new design formula of grouted Jacket
is related to ductile failure of system with reserve capacity and to pile connections. In: Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Conference,
dangerous failure implications for Jacket platforms. Melchers says OTC3788, Houston.

Birades, M., Cornell, C.A., Ledoigt, B., 2003. Load Factor Calibration for the Gulf of
that minimum system reliability index should be 3.58. Fig. 15 Guinea Adaptation of APIRP2A-LRFD. Behaviour of Offshore Structures, London.
shows reliability index determined with respect to different We/G BPP Tech Services Ltd., London.
ratios and with wide range of environmental load factors. For Bitner-Gregersen, E.M., Cramer, E.H., 1995. Uncertainties of load characteristics and

fatigue damage of ships structures. Mar. Struct. 8, 97–117.
platforms from three regions, reliability index was high when BOMEL, 2001. Comparison of tubular member strength provisions in codes and
gravity load was more, but as environmental load increased, the standards. O. T. R. 2001/084.
reliability index became stable and curve straightened up. The BOMEL(a), 2003. Component based calibration of North western European annex

other influence of higher gravity load was that from 0.1 to 0.5, the environmental load factors for the ISO Fixed Steel offshore structures code
19902. Health and Safety Executive (H. a. Safety. 088).

spread of difference between load factors was not large but as BOMEL(b), 2003. System-based calibration of North West European annex envir-
environmental load increased, spread became more visible. This onmental load factors for the ISO fixed steel offshore structures code 19902,

trend was representative for all regions. The same was also present HSE (087).
Bury, K., 1999. Statistical Distributions in Engineering. University of Cambridge.

for ISO code (BOMEL(b), 2003). The curves were steeper between Chakrabarty, B., Bhar, A., 2006. Sensitivity analysis in structural reliability of Marine
We/G ratio of 0.2–0.3 but became flatter after 1.0. structures. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International ASRANet Colloquium,

Fig. 16 shows typical reliability index with respect to different Glasgow, UK, p. 6.
Choi, S.K., Grandhi, R.V., Canfield, R.A., 2007. Reliability-based Structural Design.

load factors and We/G ratios of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.5 for platforms with Springer-Verlag London Limited.
target reliability index suggested by Efthymiou and Melchers. DNV, 2008. Design of offshore steel structures, general (LRFD) method. DNV-OS-
It shows that except with We/G ratio of 2.5, other ratios were well C101.

Duan, Z.D., Zhou, D.C., Ou, J.P., 2005. Calibration of LRFD format for steel jacket
above the target reliability. When wave load impact increased, the offshore platform in China offshore area (1): statistical parameters of load and
reliability index became lower and vice versa. The reliability index resistances. China Ocean Eng. 20 (1), 1–14.



Z. Nizamani et al. / Ocean Engineering 92 (2014) 31–43 43

Efthymiou, M., Graaf, J.,W., Tromans, P.S., Hines, I.M., 1997. Reliability based criteria Nowak, A.S., Maria, M.S., 2000. Structural reliability as applied to highway bridges.
for fixed steel offshore platforms. J. Offshore Mech. Arct. Eng. OMAE 119, Struct. Eng. Mater. 2, 218–224.
120–124. Nowak, A.S., Raymond, J.T., 1986. Reliability-based design criteria for timber bridges

Ferguson, M.C., 1990. A comparative study using API RP2A-LRFD. In: Proceedings of in Ontario. Can. J. Civil Eng. 13, 1–7.
the Offshore Technology Conference, OTC 6308, Houston. Panchang, V.G., D., Li,, 2006. Large waves in the Gulf of Mexico caused by Hurricane

French, S., Seeto, J., Dominish, P.G., 1992. Structural integrity assessment and life Ivan. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 87, 481–489.
extension of platforms in Australia and Southeast Asia. BOSS 1992. Petrauskas, C., Aagaard, P.M., 1971. Extrapolation of historical storm data for

Frieze, P.A., Hsu, T.M., Loh, J.T., Lotsberg, I. 1997a. Back ground to Draft ISO estimating design-wave heights.
provisions on Intact and damaged Members. BOSS 1997. Phani, R.A., 2006. Robust Estimation of Reliability in the Presence of Multiple

Frieze, P.A., Morandi, A.C., Birkinshaw, M., Smith, D., Dixon, A.T., 1997b. Fixed and Failure Modes (Ph.D. thesis). Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Wright
jack-up platforms: basis for reliability assessment. Mar. Struct. 10, 263–284. State University p. 136.

Gerhard, E., 2005. Assessment of Existing Offshore Structures for Life Extension Pradnyana, G., Surahman, A., Dasbi, S., 2000. Review on the regional annex of ISO-
(Ph.D. thesis). Department of Mechanical and Structural Engineering and 13819 standard for planning, designing, and constructing fixed offshore plat-
Material Science, University of Stavanger, Stavanger, Norway.

forms in Indonesia. In: Proceedings of the sixth AEESEAP Triennial Conference
Gierlinski, J.T., Yarmier, E., 1993. Integrity of fixed offshore structures: a case study

using RASOS software. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Kuta, Bali, Indonesia, p. 9.
Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, OMAE. ASME, Glasgow. PTS, PETRONAS Technical Standard, ed. Malaysia: PETRONAS, 2010.

Graff, J.W., Tromans, P.S., Efthymiou, M., 1994. The Reliability Offshore Structures Renolds, B.F., Trench, D.J., Pinna, R., 2007. On the relationship between platform
and its Dependence on Design Code and Environment. OTC 7382. Houston, TX, topology, topside weight and structural reliability under storm overload.
p. 14. J. Constr. Steel Res. 63, 1016–1023.

Guenard, Y., Goyet, J., Labeyrie, J., 1987. Structural safety evaluation of steel jacket Shell, Sarawak-Shell, Design of fixed offshore structures (10.1), 2005.
platforms. In: Proceedings of the Marine Structural Reliabilty Symposium, Snell, R.O., Wisch, D.J., 2008. ISO 19900 series: offshore structures standards. In:
Virgenia, pp. 169–183. Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Conference, OTC 19605.

Guenard, Y.F., 1984. Application of Structural System Reliability Analsysis to Sorensen, J.D., Sterndorff, M.J., 2001. Stochastic model for Loads on offshore
Offshore Structures (Ph.D. thesis). Civil Engineering, Stanford University p. 168. structures from wave, wind, current and water elevation, Proceedings of the

Hess, P.E., Bruchman, D., Assakkaf, I.A., Ayyub, B.M., 2002. Uncertainties in Material 8th International Conference on Structural Safety and Reliability. Struct. Saf.
Strength, Geometric and Load Variables. American Society of Naval Engineers. Reliab.

Holland, I., 1977. Norwegian Regulaions for Design of Offshore Structures, OTC 2863, Stahl, B., Aune, S., Gebara, J.,M., Cornell, C.A., 1998. Acceptance criteria for offshore
pp. 449–453. platforms, Proceedings, Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engi-

Ingebrigtsen, T., Loset, O., Nielsen, S.G., 1990. Fatigue design and overall safety of neering OMAE98-1463. J. Mech. Arct. Eng.
grouted pile sleeve connections. In: Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Theophanatos, A.R., Cazzulo, R., Berranger, I., Ornaghi, L., Wittengerg, L., 1992.
Conference, OTC 6344, Houston. Adaptation of API RP2A-LRFD to the Mediterranean Sea. OTC 6932. Houston, TX,

ISO19901-1, 2005. Metocean design and operating considerations. pp. 529–538.
ISO19902, 2007. International Standard Organization 19902. Theophanatos, A., Wickham, A.H.S., 1993. Modelling of environmental loading for
ISO-2394, 1998. General Principles on reliability for structures, ISO-2394. ISO. adaptation of API RP 2A—load and resistance factor design in UK offshore
Jin, W., Hu, Q., Shen, Z., Shi, Z., 2009. Reliability-based load and resistance factors structural design practice. In: Proceedings of ICE.

design for offshore jacket platforms in the Bohai bay: calibration on target Thomas. R., Wartelle, R., Griff, C.L., 1976. Fixed Platform Design for South East Asia.
reliability index. China Ocean Eng. 23 (1), 15–26. Society of Petroleum Engineering.

Kunda, J., 2005. Load Modelling. ASCE, United States of America. Tromans, P., 2001. Extreme Environmental Load Statistics in UK Waters. Offshore
Kurian, V.J., Nizamani, Z., Liew, M.S., 2013. Modelling for uncertainties in resistance Technology Report (2000/066).

for jacket platforms in Malaysia. Res. J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol. 5 (3), 750–759. Tromans, P.S., Forristall, G.Z., 1998. What is Appropriate Wind Gust Averaging
Lind, N.C., 1994. Target reliability levels from social indicators. In: Proceedings of

Period for Extreme Force Calculations? OTC 8908, Houston, TX, pp. 785–789.
the Sixth International Conference of Structural Safety and Reliability Rotter-

Tromans, P., Vanderschuren, L., 1995. Response based design conditions in the
dam, Netherlands.

Lloyd, J.R., Karsan, D.I., 1988. Development of a reliability-based alternative to API North Sea: application of a new method. In: Offshore Technology Conference
RP2A. In: Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Conference, OTC 5882, 7683, Houston, pp. 387–397.
Houston, TX. Turner, R.C., 1993. Partial safety factor calibration for North Sea adaptation of API

Marley. M., Etterdal, E., Grigorian, H., 2001. Structural Reliability Assessment of RP2A-LRFD. Institution of Civil Engineers 9.
Ekofisk Jacket Under Extreme Loading, OTC 13190. Houston. Turner, R.C., Ellinas, C.P., Thomas, G.A.N., 1992. Towards the worldwide calibration

Melchers, R.E., 2002. Structural Reliability Analysis and Prediction, second ed. John of API RP2A-LRFD, OTC 6930, Houston.
Wiley & Sons, Chichester; New York. Wisch, D.J., 1997. Fixed Steel Standard: IS0 & API Developments - IS0 TC 671SC

Moses, F., Reliability based design of offshore structures, American Petroleum 7NVG 3. presented at the Offshore Technology Conference OTC 8423, Houston.
Institute, 1981. Yiquan, Q., Zhizu, Z., Ping, S., 2010. Extreme wind, wave and current in deep water

Moses, F., 1995. Application of reliability to formulation of fixed offshore design codes. of South China Sea. Int. J. Offshore Polar Eng. 20 (1), 18–23.
In: Proceedings of the Marine Structural Reliability Symposium, pp. 15–30. Zhou, D.C., Duan, Z.D., OU, J.P., 2006. Calibration of LRFD for steel jacket offshore

Moses, F., Stahl, B., 2000. Calibration issues in development of ISO standards for platform in China offshore area (2); load, resistance and load combination
fixed steel offshore structures. Trans. ASME, 122. factors. China Ocean Eng. 20 (2), 199–212.



O conceito de Fatores Humanos
na aviação

DANIELA DE ALMEIDA MARTINS

LILIANA ANDOLPHO MAGALHÃES GUIMARÃES

RUY LANGE FILHO

LEONARDO DA VINCI RIBEIRO SIQUEIRA

DIRETORIA GERAL DE RECURSOS HUMANOS – DGRH – UNICAMP
FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS – FCM - UNICAMP

VARIG LINHAS AÉREAS

Dados estatísticos recentes levantados pela Boeing mos-
tram que 62% dos acidentes aéreos envolvendo aero-
naves de grande porte são causados por erro humano

(MARQUES, 2004). Estão incluídos neste resultado todos os
fatores contribuintes conhecidos: falha de treinamento,
estresse, fadiga, desatenção, imprudência, imperícia, negligên-
cia, erro de julgamento, falha de planejamento, supervisão
deficiente, falta de coordenação entre a tripulação, falhas de
comunicação, operação indevida do equipamento e outros.

Do ponto de vista dos Fatores Humanos, não existe a
possibilidade de uma operação livre de erros humanos. Por ser
a falibilidade humana um fato inegável, diversas teorias foram
desenvolvidas para explicar as razões dos diferentes tipos de
erro, pois alguns deles podem ser causados por simples in-
compatibilidade física, como letras impressas que podem ser
confundidas quando muito pequenas, enquanto outros podem
ser causados por complexos fatores psicológicos ou por certos

203



tipos de estressores como fadiga e limites de tempo rígidos
(HELMREICH, 1998; FAA, 2002).

De maneira concordante, Helmreich, um dos mais im-
portantes estudiosos dos Fatores Humanos na aviação, afirma que,
dado que seres humanos operem sistemas complexos, erros ocor-
rerão e que, sob situações de estresse e/ou sobrecarga de trabalho
(ou trabalho monótono, ou sub-carga), a probabilidade de ocor-
rência de erro pode ser ainda maior (HELMREICH, 1998).

Portanto, o conceito de Fatores Humanos passou a ser
de fundamental importância na aviação, especialmente na pre-
venção de acidentes aéreos, aplicando-se também em outros
contextos.

Entretanto, por ter se tornado um termo de uso
abrangente, observa-se que o termo Fator Humano para o senso
comum tende a significar qualquer aspecto relacionado com
seres humanos. Em estudos no referido campo, o termo deve
ser operacionalmente definido, evitando-se diferentes enten-
dimentos, o que pode implicar em vários entraves, inclusive
de ordem metodológica.

A partir dessa preocupação, buscou-se nesse artigo
apresentar um breve histórico do conceito de Fatores Huma-
nos (FH), abordando as principais definições e descrevendo os
dois modelos teóricos de FH mais utilizados na aviação.

Breve Histórico

O campo de estudos dos FH, segundo a Federal Aviation
Association (FAA, 2002), tem suas raízes na aviação e em dados
e estudos de manutenção bélica. A 2ª Guerra Mundial foi o
embrião para a estruturação desse conhecimento em decor-
rência dos inúmeros acidentes ocorridos e da necessidade de
adaptar, então, veículos militares, aviões e demais equipamen-
tos bélicos, às características físicas e psicofisiológicas dos sol-
dados, especialmente em situações de emergência e pânico
(VIDAL, 1999).

204



Segundo a mesma fonte, o primeiro trabalho identifi-
cado na área de projeto de equipamentos e desempenho hu-
mano foi realizado durante esse período. Havia a preocupação
em eliminar certos acidentes relacionados ao projeto do cockpit1

e ao desempenho da tripulação. De fato, a maior parte dos tra-
balhos pioneiros relacionados ao projeto de equipamentos, trei-
namento, desempenho humano sob estresse, vigilância e outros
tópicos foram conduzidos e publicados no pós-guerra.

A FAA (2002) ressalta ainda que, durante esse perío-
do, o rápido aperfeiçoamento dos sistemas técnicos expôs o
equívoco de se ignorar a pessoa, isto é, o piloto, no sistema.
Erros humanos induzidos pelo sistema, como a leitura errada
de altímetros ou a seleção errada dos controles do cockpit, fo-
ram reduzidos ou eliminados através de uma melhor interface
entre piloto-cockpit.

Dessa experiência no pós-guerra, principalmente nos
EUA e na Inglaterra, os profissionais envolvidos em equipes
multidisciplinares (médicos, engenheiros e psicólogos) decidi-
ram continuar essa empreitada, voltando-se, com sucesso, para
a produção da indústria civil (VIDAL, 1999).

Nos EUA, segundo a FAA (2002), o campo de estudos
sobre os FH foi reconhecido em 1957, durante a fundação e o
primeiro encontro da Human Factors Society. Já na Europa, um
campo profissional paralelo, conhecido como Ergonomia, já vi-
nha se desenvolvendo havia ao menos uma década. Na Ingla-
terra, a Ergonomics Research Society, atualmente conhecida como
The Ergonomics Society, foi criada em 1947. Dentro desse movi-
mento nasceu a corrente da Ergonomia denominada de Enge-
nharia de FH (Human Factors Engeneering – HFE) (VIDAL, 1999).

Os profissionais americanos da área de FH tinham como
foco inicial os elementos relacionados ao desempenho huma-
no, que incluíam alguns componentes psicológicos. Já a cor-
rente da Ergonomia se concentrava mais nos aspectos
biomecânicos e biofísicos do trabalho. Entretanto, ambas bus-
cavam uma melhor conformação da interface entre pessoas e
sistemas técnicos (FAA, 2002).

205



Segundo Vidal (1999), os principais tratados de
Ergonomia, tendo como abordagem dominante a do HFE, fo-
ram produzidos nos anos 60, sendo os mais representativos os
de Woodson e Conover (EUA), em 1966, e Grandjean (Suíça),
em 1974.

Posteriormente, nos EUA, a Human Factors Society mu-
dou seu nome para a Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, fa-
zendo com que ambos os termos (FH e ergonomia) passassem
a ser utilizados de maneira alternada, como, por exemplo, o
faz a FAA (FAA, 2002).

Observa-se então que as principais ferramentas utili-
zadas em FH foram desenvolvidas entre a década de 40 e 50.
Dentre essas, a análise e a investigação de erros auxiliou os
engenheiros a enfocar a elaboração de projetos voltados para o
trabalhador. Já a análise da tarefa proporcionou a elaboração
de um procedimento sistemático para a compreensão e a pre-
dição de incompatibilidade entre operador-sistema que fosse
capaz de levar a erros (MAURIÑO, 2004, p. 13).

Segundo o autor acima citado, inúmeras pesquisas
quantitativas acerca das capacidades humanas físicas e men-
tais levaram ao desenvolvimento de uma vasta base de dados e
de princípios específicos de projetos. Dessa maneira, a notável
redução de acidentes aéreos nas últimas 4 décadas se deve, em
parte, à redução sistemática do erro do piloto, através da apli-
cação dos conceitos e das técnicas baseadas no estudo dos FH.

Conceito

Segundo a International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO, 2003, p.1-1), o elemento humano é “a parte mais flexí-
vel, adaptável e valiosa dentro do sistema aeronáutico, mas é também
a que está mais vulnerável às influências externas que poderão vir a
afetar negativamente o seu desempenho”.

Como a maior parte dos acidentes e incidentes aéreos
resulta de um desempenho humano menor do que o “ótimo”

206



necessário, surgiu uma tendência a atribuí-los meramente ao
erro humano. Entretanto, o termo “erro humano” é de pouca
ajuda para a prevenção de acidentes e incidentes aéreos. Ape-
sar de ele indicar ONDE o colapso do sistema ocorreu, ele não
oferece respostas precisas sobre COMO ele ocorreu.

De maneira geral, o conceito de Fator Humano tende
a ser identificado como um ramo da Medicina por conta da
tradição de estudos iniciais realizados na aviação, que o relaci-
onavam com os efeitos, nas pessoas, do ruído, do calor, do frio,
da vibração e da aceleração. Entretanto, seu alcance e signifi-
cado é muito mais complexo e amplo (FAA, 2002).

Na aviação, o estudo do Fator Humano abarca todos
os aspectos do comportamento e desempenho humanos: a to-
mada de decisões e outros processos cognitivos; o projeto dos
instrumentos e das cabines de pilotagem; as comunicações e o
suporte lógico dos computadores; mapas, cartas, manuais de
operações de aeronaves; check list, entre outros, transforman-
do-se numa ciência multidisciplinar por natureza (ICAO, 2003).

Para HAWKINS (1993), a atenção aos FH busca pro-
porcionar os melhores resultados possíveis da relação entre as
pessoas e as suas atividades, através de uma aplicação sistemá-
tica das Ciências Humanas, integrada aos conceitos da Enge-
nharia de Sistemas. Seus objetivos são a garantia da eficiência
do sistema que inclui a segurança, a eficiência e o bem-estar
do indivíduo, tendo como ponto de partida de análise as
interações entre os indivíduos, os grupos e as organizações às
quais pertencem, e as interações entre as organizações que cons-
tituem o sistema da aviação.

Para a ICAO (2003), o conceito de Fator Humano refe-
re-se ao estudo das capacidades e das limitações huma-
nas oferecidas pelo local de trabalho. É o estudo da interação
humana em suas situações de trabalho e de vida: entre as pes-
soas e as máquinas e equipamentos utilizados, os procedimentos
escritos e verbais, as regras que devem ser seguidas, as condições
ambientais ao seu redor e as interações com as outras pessoas.
Todos esses aspectos podem influenciar no comportamento no
trabalho de maneira a poder afetar a saúde e a segurança.

207



Na aviação, segundo a FAA (2002), esse conceito en-
volve um conjunto de cuidados médicos, pessoais e biológicos
para uma ótima operação da aeronave, a manutenção aero-
náutica e o controle de tráfego aéreo, o que compreende um
esforço multidisciplinar com o objetivo de gerar e compilar in-
formações sobre a potencialidade e a limitação humana, alian-
do estas informações aos equipamentos, sistemas,
procedimentos, tarefas, ambiente, treinamento e
gerenciamento, buscando assim alcançar a segurança e a
performance humana efetiva.

O ponto crucial acerca dos FH reside no fato de que as
pessoas não devem ser consideradas de maneira isolada de
outros componentes, dado que todos estão em interação, tor-
nando impossível que se mude um aspecto do sistema sem
considerar seus efeitos nos outros elementos.

Dessa maneira, na definição do FAA (2002), o Fator
Humano é o estudo do ser humano como parte central de qual-
quer sistema:

• identificando suas capacidades e limitações para, pos-
teriormente, adaptá-las conforme os demais compo-
nentes do sistema;

• quantificando o desempenho humano através de me-
didas como tempo, unidades de trabalho, segurança,
erro, e mudanças necessárias relacionadas a uma situ-
ação específica;

• projetando ou modificando os sistemas de acordo
com as necessidades identificadas, buscando o melhor
desempenho humano possível.

Como conseqüência desses procedimentos, a atenção
operacional aos FH pode elevar a eficiência, a produtividade e
a segurança no ambiente aeronáutico, o que se traduz em con-
trole de custo e segurança contínua (ICAO, 2003).

208



Dessa maneira, na prevenção e na investigação de aci-
dentes aéreos deve-se considerar o avião (equipamento), o ser
humano que o opera, projeta, fabrica e faz sua manutenção, o
meio e as condições em que a atividade se desenvolve (condi-
ções atmosféricas, cabine de pilotagem, meio social, familiar
e laboral em que vive e trabalha) – ou seja, o trinômio o
HOMEM – o MEIO – a MÁQUINA que constitui a base e o
objeto de toda a atividade de prevenção.

Principais modelos teóricos em FH

Um dos modelos que possibilita uma compreensão grá-
fica da necessidade de se ajustar os componentes envolvidos
na atividade aérea é o Modelo SHELL, desenvolvido inicial-
mente por Edwards, em 1972, modificado posteriormente por
Hawkins, em 1975 (ICAO, 2003), como abaixo:

S – simboliza Software (suporte lógico)
H – simboliza Hardware (equipamento, máquina)
E – simboliza Environment (ambiente)
L – simboliza Liveware (elemento humano)

FIGURA 1 – Representação gráfica do modelo SHELL
Fonte: ICAO (2003, p. 1-7)

209



O modelo SHELL é representado por um diagrama de
blocos (figura 1) baseado nas iniciais de seus componentes,
tendo o homem (liveware) como o elemento central. As
interfaces entre cada componente (S – H – E) são vinculadas
ao componente L (o elemento humano), devem adaptar-se e
ajustar-se a ele, e não envolvem as interfaces que se encon-
tram fora dos FH (máquina – máquina, máquina – ambiente,
suporte lógico – máquina).

O elemento humano (liveware) é o componente mais
crítico e flexível no sistema. Apesar das pessoas estarem sujei-
tas a consideráveis variações em termos de desempenho e so-
frerem muitas limitações, grande parte desses fatores são
atualmente previsíveis. As margens dos blocos desenhados (as
áreas de contato entre os componentes do modelo) não são
simples e retas, portanto, os outros componentes do sistema
devem ser cuidadosamente combinados entre si se algum
estressor ou colapso eventual tiver que ser evitado, pois uma
falha nessa combinação poderá ser uma importante fonte de
erro humano.

Segundo a ICAO (2003), para que se alcance esse en-
cadeamento é essencial que haja uma compreensão das carac-
terísticas do componente central – o homem – quanto a:

a) Tamanho físico e forma

b) Necessidades físicas

c) Características de input – O aparelho sensório humano
é capaz de coletar informações do mundo a sua volta,
capacitando as pessoas a responder aos eventos exter-
nos e a realizar as tarefas necessárias. Entretanto, to-
dos os sentidos estão sujeitos à deterioração por uma
razão ou outra.

d) Processamento de informações – Essa capacidade hu-
mana possui limitações relevantes. Projetos de instru-
mentos e de sistemas de alerta precários resultaram
freqüentemente de uma falha em considerar as

210



potencialidades e as limitações do sistema de
processamento de informações humano.

e) Características de output – Assim que a informação é
percebida e processada, mensagens são enviadas aos
músculos para iniciar a resposta desejada, que pode
ser desde um movimento objetivando o controle físico
até o início de alguma forma de comunicação.

f) Tolerância ambiental – Temperatura, pressão, umida-
de, barulho, hora do dia, claridade e escuridão podem
interferir no desempenho e no bem estar de uma pes-
soa. A altura, os espaços confinados e um ambiente de
trabalho monótono ou estressante podem influenciar
no desempenho humano.

A partir dos aspectos acima descritos, os demais com-
ponentes do modelo se relacionam e se adaptam a esse com-
ponente central como a seguir (FAA, 2002; ICAO, 2003):

• Elemento Humano – Máquina: é a interface mais
freqüentemente considerada e relaciona-se com os
ajustes da máquina ao corpo humano (assento, telas,
controles, etc). Entretanto, por uma característica na-
tural do homem de se adaptar aos desajustes, é possí-
vel encobrir-se uma deficiência nesse sistema, mas isso
não eliminará a sua existência. Erros podem advir da
má localização ou da identificação inadequada de bo-
tões e alavancas, por exemplo, o que justifica a impor-
tância da análise dessa relação desde o início do projeto
de um sistema.

• Elemento Humano – Software (Suporte Lógico): envol-
ve o ser humano e os aspectos não físicos do sistema,
tais como procedimentos, apresentação geral dos ma-
nuais e check lists, símbolos e programas de computa-
dor. Os problemas nessa interface não são objetivos e
são de difícil solução, podendo resultar da má inter-
pretação de mapas confusos, de documentação enga-

211



nosa ou composta por excessivos elementos, incluindo
a automação.

• Elemento Humano – Ambiente: foi uma das interfaces
que primeiro se reconheceu na aviação. As medidas
adotadas inicialmente visavam garantir a adaptação do
ser humano ao ambiente (capacetes, trajes de vôo,
macacão anti-G2, máscaras de oxigênio, entre outros).
Posteriormente, buscou-se adaptar o ambiente ao ho-
mem (pressurização e sistema de ar condicionado, iso-
lamento acústico). Hoje, as preocupações incluem
também as conseqüências das concentrações de ozô-
nio e de radiação em vôos de altitude, alteração do rit-
mo circadiano em viagens transcontinentais, erros de
percepção provocados por condições metereológicas,
aspectos organizacionais, o contexto político e econô-
mico da empresa aérea e suas restrições.

• Elemento Humano – Elemento Humano: é a interface
que envolve as relações interpessoais entre as equipes
de trabalho, sendo relevantes aspectos como lideran-
ça, cooperação, trabalho em equipe, interação de per-
sonalidades, relações de trabalho. A tripulação, os
controladores de tráfego aéreo, os engenheiros e téc-
nicos de manutenção e os demais profissionais
operacionais funcionam como um grande grupo, e a
influência grupal exerce importante papel na determi-
nação de comportamentos e de desempenho. É nessa
interface que atuam os programas de gerenciamento
de recursos de cabine, como, por exemplo, o CRM, in-
cluindo a cultura corporativa, o clima organizacional,
as pressões em funcionamento dentro da empresa, que
são capazes de afetar significativamente o desempe-
nho humano.

• Outro modelo de FH de grande relevância para a avi-
ação é o Modelo de Gerenciamento de Erros, desen-
volvido pelo inglês James Reason, que inicialmente
concebe a indústria aeronáutica como um sistema de
produção complexo, interativo e organizado. Nesse mo-
delo, Reason analisa o modo como os seres humanos

212



contribuem para as falhas desse sistema a ponto de
produzir um acidente aeronáutico.

• Dessa maneira, para o autor, um acidente é causado
por uma série de fatores múltiplos contribuintes, que
se formam através de uma cadeia de eventos (falhas
latentes em interação com falhas ativas) que rompem
as barreiras defensivas (REASON, 2000). As barreiras
defensivas seriam então os filtros desenvolvidos pelas
organizações com o objetivo de remover, minimizar
ou proteger-se de danos operacionais.

• Dentro desse enfoque, para se compreender os fatores
causais de um acidente dentro da cadeia de eventos
deve-se considerar inicialmente o tipo de falha
(REASON, 1995; 2000; 2002):

• FALHAS ATIVAS – São os atos inseguros de efeito ime-
diato, geralmente cometido por operadores, em conta-
to direto (na “linha de frente”) com o sistema (pilotos,
controladores de tráfego aéreo, entre outros). Podem
assumir diferentes formas: falha, lapso, perda, engano
e violações de conduta.

• FALHAS LATENTES – São os elementos patogênicos que
residem no sistema. Ficam latentes por muito tempo e
demoram a se manifestar, até que se combinam com
algum erro ativo que cria a oportunidade de ocorrência
de um acidente, dependendo das defesas existentes. Es-
tão ligados a decisões equivocadas ou falhas cometidas
por profissionais que não estão necessariamente presen-
tes nem no local nem na hora em que o acidente ocor-
re (fabricante, decisões gerenciais e manutenção). Essas
decisões estratégicas possuem o potencial de introduzir
os elementos patogênicos no sistema e, por sua caracte-
rística latente, podem ser identificadas e remediadas an-
tes da ocorrência de um evento adverso, o que permite
uma atitude pró-ativa no gerenciamento do erro. En-
tretanto, a maioria dos erros latentes só é descoberta
quando uma defesa falha.

213



REASON (2000) escolheu a imagem gráfica do “quei-
jo suíço” (figura 2) para explicar seu modelo, inspirado na
“teoria dos dominós” desenvolvida por Heinrich, que repre-
sentaria a trajetória do acidente através das camadas defensi-
vas do sistema.

FIGURA 2 – O modelo do “queijo suíço” de Reason
Fonte: Reason (2000, p. 769).

Segundo LIBERMAN (2004), a imagem de um mundo
“ideal” seria representada pelas sucessivas camadas defensivas
que permaneceriam intactas e assim impediriam a penetração
de possíveis acidentes. Entretanto, no mundo “real” as cama-
das de defesa apresentam fraquezas ou “buracos” que se movi-
mentam dinamicamente em resposta às ações dos operadores
do sistema.

Na imagem do “queijo suíço”, as falhas ativas causam
acidentes quando combinadas com rupturas nas camadas de
defesa. As falhas latentes são “janelas” nas defesas do sistema
que, ao se combinarem com falhas ativas, criam uma trajetó-
ria de oportunidades de acidente através de algumas ou de
todas as camadas protetoras do sistema. São estas janelas ali-
nhadas nas várias defesas que constituem um evento. Dessa
maneira, os caminhos das falhas ativas e latentes se juntam

214



para criar trajetórias completas ou parciais de oportunidades
de acidentes (REASON, 2000).

Para REASON (1995), as falhas humanas, mais do que
as técnicas, representam a maior ameaça a sistemas complexos
e potencialmente perigosos. Isso ocorre porque os problemas
relacionados aos FH são produto de uma corrente de causas na
qual os fatores psicológicos individuais (desatenção momentâ-
nea, esquecimento, entre outros) são os elos últimos e menos
gerenciáveis. Preocupações ou distrações são condições neces-
sárias para se cometer deslizes e lapsos. Além disso, sua ocor-
rência é quase impossível de se predizer ou controlar
efetivamente. O mesmo pode ser dito dos fatores associados ao
esquecimento. Dessa maneira, estados mentais que contribu-
em para o erro são extremamente difíceis de serem gerenciados;
podem acontecer para as melhores pessoas a qualquer tempo.

Além disso, as pessoas nunca agem isoladamente. Seus
comportamentos são moldados pelas circunstâncias. O mesmo
vale para os erros e violações. A probabilidade de um ato inse-
guro ser cometido é altamente influenciada pela natureza da
tarefa e pelas condições do trabalho. Isso, por sua vez, é produ-
to dos fatores organizacionais. Ganhos significativos em segu-
rança podem ser alcançados através de pequenas modificações
nos equipamentos e no local de trabalho. Por outro lado, trei-
nar as pessoas para trabalhar em equipe custa pouco e traz
avanços relevantes para o desempenho humano na aviação.

A partir do acima exposto pode-se entender que o aci-
dente (ou o quase-acidente3) ocorre dentro de um determina-
do contexto, que não pode ser desprezado na análise dos fatores
contribuintes, partindo assim de uma perspectiva global e
sistêmica da situação, considerando todas as variáveis
(REASON, 2002).

A alta incidência da chamada ‘falha pessoal’ nas con-
clusões das investigações quanto às causas dos acidentes aero-
náuticos mostra, claramente, que a identificação do Fator
Humano é mais complexa do que se imagina.

A crescente literatura sobre a cultura de segurança e a
proliferação de instrumentos desenvolvidos para mensurá-la

215



(WIEGMANN et al., 2003) aponta para a importância das vari-
áveis organizacionais como condições latentes importantes para
a ocorrência dos erros.

Para WIEGMANN & SHAPPELL (1997), as diversas clas-
sificações de erros utilizadas na indústria aeronáutica enfatizam
o papel organizacional assim como as variáveis individuais. As
últimas apresentam graves desvantagens para a prevenção de
acidentes, pois focalizam os erros nos indivíduos, que são cul-
pados por falhas como o esquecimento, a falta de atenção ou a
fraqueza moral.

Numa perspectiva de análise sistêmica, FOGARTY
(2004) atesta que os modelos descritivos sobre as causas de
acidentes sugerem que o indivíduo erra por causa de elemen-
tos organizacionais patogênicos latentes, capazes de criar con-
dições nas quais as fraquezas humanas são expostas
desnecessariamente. Dessa maneira, aceita-se conceitualmente
que é a interação de variáveis organizacionais e individuais
que leva ao erro.

Além disso, segundo MAURIÑO (2004), com o desenvol-
vimento do conceito e da compreensão do Fator Humano, evo-
luiu-se para a noção de que acidentes são causados através de
falhas no sistema em lugar do mau comportamento individual.

Dessa maneira, a evolução do conceito de FH transfor-
mou as relações de trabalho na aviação, trazendo uma nova
consciência acerca da importância das relações entre Homem
– Meio – Máquina e dos fatores organizacionais envolvidos, o
que culminou na criação de um modelo de treinamento co-
nhecido como CRM (Crew Resource Management).

216



Referências bibliográficas

FEDERAL AVIATION ASSOCIATION (FAA). FAA Research 1989
- 2002/Human Factors in Aviation Maintenance and Inspection/
Human Factors Guide for Aviation Maintenance. Publicação do
Human Factors on Aviation Maintenance and Inspection
(HFAMI) web site. 2002. Disponível em: <http://hfskyway.faa.gov/
HFAMI/lpext.dll/FAA%20Research%201989%20-%202002/
Infobase/1a4?fn=main-j-hfami.htm&f=templates> Acesso em: ja-
neiro de 2005.

FOGARTY, G. The role of organizational and individual
differences variables in aircraft maintenance performance.
International Journal of Applied Aviation Studies, v. 4, n. 1, p. 73-
90, 2004.

HAWKINS, F. H. Human factors in flight. Aldershot : Ashgate,
1993.

HELMREICH, R.L. Error management as organizational
strategy. In: Proceedings of the IATA Human Factors Seminar.
Bangkok,Thailand, April 20-22, p. 1-7, 1998.

INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION (ICAO).
Human Factors Guidelines for Aircraft Maintenance Manual (Doc
9824). Montreal, Canadá: ICAO, 2003. Disponível em: < http:/
/www.icao.int/ANB/humanfactors/Documents.html> Acesso em: fe-
vereiro 2005.

LIBERMAN, F. Repensando a instrução do CRM. In: PEREIRA,
M.C. (Org.) Voando com o CRM: da filosofia operacional técnica à
filosofia interativa humana. Recife: Comunigraf Editora, 2004.
p. 138-155.

MARQUES, E. Fator humano. In: INSTITUTO DE FOMENTO E
COORDENAÇÃO INDUSTRIAL (IFI). Seminário Internacional de Fa-
tor Humano. 6 e 7 de outubro, 2004, CTA: São José dos Campos.

MAURIÑO, D. Prefácio. In: PEREIRA, M.C. (Org.) Voando com o
CRM: da filosofia operacional técnica à filosofia interativa humana.
Recife: Comunigraf Editora, 2004. p. 13-17.

217



REASON, J. Understanding adverse events: human factors.
Qual. Health Care, v. 4, n. 2, p. 80-9, 1995.

REASON, J. Human error: models and management. British
Medical Journal, n. 320, p. 768-770, 2000.

REASON, J. Combating omission errors through task analysis
and good reminders. Qual. Saf. Health Care, n. 11, p. 40-44, 2002.

VIDAL, M.C. Introdução à ergonomia. Apostila utilizada pelo cur-
so de Especialização em Ergonomia Contemporânea da UFRJ. 1999.
Disponível em: <http://www.gente.ufrj.br/ceserg/arquivos/
erg001.pdf> Acesso em: maio 2004.

WIEGMANN, D.A. et al. Development and initial validation of a
safety culture survey for commercial aviation. Technical Report
AHFD-03-3/FAA-03-1, Federal Aviation Administration,
Atlantic City International Airport, NJ, 2003.

WIEGMANN, D.A. & SHAPPELL, S.A. Human error analysis of
commercial aviation accidents: application of the Human
Factors Analysis and Classification system (HFACS). Aviat. Space
Environ. Med., v. 72, n. 11, p. 1006-16, 2001.

218



Aeronáutica
BNDES Setorial 38, p. 213-264

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo 
e no Brasil – análise setorial  

Sérgio Bittencourt Varella Gomes
Paulus Vinicius da Rocha Fonseca 
Vanessa de Sá Queiroz*

Resumo
Por não necessitar de uma pista para pouso ou decolagem e ser capaz de rea-
lizar o voo pairado, o helicóptero pode ser utilizado em um grande leque de 
aplicações, tais quais o transporte executivo e de chefes de Estado, serviços 
jornalísticos, serviços médicos de emergência e busca e resgate em áreas 
de difícil acesso a outros veículos. Além disso, o Brasil vem despontando 
nos últimos anos como um dos mais importantes mercados para os grandes 
fabricantes de helicópteros, com perspectivas atraentes advindas da explo-
ração de petróleo offshore, para o transporte de pessoas e equipamentos para 
suprir plataformas de petróleo em alto-mar, o que tende a crescer com as 
novas descobertas no pré-sal. Estima-se que, em 2012, a indústria mundial 
de helicópteros tenha faturado mais de US$ 13 bilhões e entregado pouco 
mais de duas mil aeronaves civis e militares. Diante do cenário exposto, a 
compreensão dessa indústria é importante para o BNDES, em razão de de-
mandas de apoio financeiro por parte do Banco a fabricantes instalados ou 
que venham a se instalar no país.
* Respectivamente, engenheiro aeronáutico (Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica – ITA), Ph.D. em 
Dinâmica de Voo (Cranfield, Inglaterra) e gerente do Departamento de Comércio Exterior da Área de 
Comércio Exterior do BNDES; contador do Departamento de Comércio Exterior da Área de Comércio 
Exterior do BNDES; e advogada (Ucam), Mestre em Gestão Empresarial (Fundação Getulio Vargas, Rio 
de Janeiro – FGV-RJ/Escola Brasileira de Administração Pública e de Empresas – Ebape) e administradora 
do Departamento de Comércio Exterior da Área de Comércio Exterior do BNDES.



214 Introdução
O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis é constituído pelas empresas 

fabricantes desse tipo de aeronave. Seus principais clientes são as empre-
sas de táxi aéreo, transportadoras offshore,1 grandes corporações com seus 
flight departments,2 operadores individuais, pessoas físicas, operadores 
parapúblicos,3 empresas de seguro-saúde etc.

O helicóptero é um veículo de transporte aéreo de pessoas e cargas com 
características muito especiais. A principal delas é a habilidade de decolar e 
pousar sem a necessidade de uma pista para tal, ou seja, basta-lhe um ponto 
de terreno ou estrutura que suporte seu peso para que o helicóptero o/a uti-
lize como seu “aeroporto”. Além disso, o helicóptero é capaz de executar o 
chamado “voo pairado”, podendo ser utilizado como plataforma de obser-
vação tanto para profissionais como jornalistas quanto para sensores espe-
ciais como câmeras de TV, de infravermelho, radares etc. Por outro lado, 
essa característica também faculta ao helicóptero ser utilizado em funções 
altamente especializadas como a busca e o resgate de náufragos ou vítimas 
de afogamento, assim como no transporte expresso de doentes ou vítimas d e 
acidentes em estradas, embarcações, áreas afetadas por desastres naturais etc.

Isso torna o helicóptero um veículo capaz de estar em (quase) todos os 
lugares a (quase) qualquer tempo. Torna-o indispensável em um leque de apli-
cações que, sem dúvida, excede, em larga escala, os objetivos dos inventores 
e engenheiros-projetistas pioneiros que o conceberam, construíram, testaram, 
certificaram, produziram e entregaram aos mercados civil e militar em fins da 
primeira metade do século XX. No entanto, só é possível desfrutar das carac-
terísticas excepcionais da operação de helicópteros pagando um preço alto. Tal 
situação é resultado do consumo energético elevado em relação à carga paga 
transportada na distância percorrida, nos custos relativos de manutenção, na 
formação e treinamento mais exigentes dos pilotos, nas demandas mais crí-
ticas quanto à segurança de voo (relativamente às aeronaves convencionais) 
etc. Entre operadores e participantes desse mercado, segundo voz corrente, 
tudo o que diz respeito a helicópteros (quando se compara com a aviação 
convencional) é mais caro, complexo, exigente e crítico.

1   É a empresa que faz o transporte regular de trabalhadores, da indústria de petróleo e gás, entre as 
bases de operações localizadas em terra e as plataformas marítimas.
2   Divisão de empresa comercial ou industrial de porte que opera frota própria de aeronaves corporativas.
3   Tais como secretarias de segurança pública, polícias, bombeiros, serviços de resgate médico etc.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Para entender as características básicas desse mercado, portanto, é ne- 215
cessária, ao contrário do que ocorre no caso da aviação comercial a jato, 
uma percepção um pouco maior das características técnicas do veículo em 
questão. Tais características explicam os segmentos que integram esse mer-
cado, assim como os diversos tipos de helicópteros. 

O presente artigo foi dividido, então, em sete seções, com esta intro-
dução, que apresentam aspectos técnicos fundamentais, aplicações e usos 
tradicionais, caracterização do setor/indústria (perspectivas, cooperação in-
ternacional e sustentabilidade), setor de helicópteros no Brasil (caracteriza-
ção do mercado brasileiro, o fabricante Helibras, e padrão de concorrência 
e concentração), perspectivas do mercado brasileiro e considerações finais. 

Aspectos técnicos fundamentais
Também é comum se referir ao mercado de helicópteros como o de “ae-

ronaves de asas rotativas” (rotary wing aircraft). Isso encontra fundamento 
no fato de o rotor principal do helicóptero desempenhar a função aerodinâ-
mica de asa ao girar suas pás horizontalmente, forçando massa considerável 
de ar para baixo, o que permite sustentar o veículo em voo pairado. Des-
sa maneira, a história do helicóptero é por natureza uma história de busca 
por motores, caixas de transmissão (que levam o giro do motor aos rotores 
principal e de cauda), materiais (resistentes às vibrações) e sistemas de voo 
mais confiáveis a cada dia. 

Quanto aos motores, os primeiros helicópteros usavam motores a pis-
tão de quatro tempos, que equipavam a maioria das aeronaves de então e 
os automóveis até hoje. A partir do fim da década de 1950, foi se tornan-
do possível equipar os helicópteros com versões derivadas de motores a 
jato, desenvolvidos originalmente para a aviação convencional militar 
e comercial. Denominados de “turboeixos” (turboshaft engines), esses 
motores colocaram o helicóptero em definitivo na categoria de aeronave 
para o dia a dia das operações, dada sua maior confiabilidade. O quadro 
seria completado com o desenvolvimento de helicópteros biturbina, ou 
com dois motores a jato. Em tais aeronaves, a pane de um dos motores não 
impedirá, na maior parte das situações e condições de voo, que o veículo 
possa ser levado a um “porto seguro” com toda a tranquilidade. 

A evolução tecnológica ocorrida nas últimas décadas fez com que a 
confiabilidade dos motores de helicópteros aumentasse de forma exponen-

Aeronáutica



216 cial, motivada pelo emprego crescente e cada vez mais amplo desse tipo de 
aeronave, tanto no campo militar quanto no civil. Esse aumento de confia-
bilidade se deu para os motores convencionais a pistão, de quatro tempos 
e que empregam gasolina de aviação, tanto quanto para os motores a jato 
turboeixos que utilizam o tradicional querosene de aviação.

Logo, no que tange à propulsão, de modo bastante genérico, há atual-
mente três classes de helicópteros sendo produzidos e comercializados no 
mercado internacional:

i.	 Monomotor a pistão (equipado com um motor convencional 
a pistão): é a classe dos helicópteros mais leves, para poucos 
ocupantes (um a três, mais o piloto), utilizados em escolas de 
pilotagem, em coberturas jornalísticas, filmagens etc.

Figura 1 | Robinson R22

Foto de divulgação Robinson. © Copyright Robinson Helicopter Company. All rights reserved. 
<www.robinson.com>.
Nota: O Robinson R22, para dois ocupantes, com motor convencional a pistão e rotor de duas pás, é 
um dos helicópteros mais vendidos no mundo. É muito popular nas escolas de formação de pilotos 
além de ser utilizado em larga escala por indivíduos em seus deslocamentos diários em grandes 
metrópoles dos EUA.

ii.	 Monoturbina (equipado com um motor a jato do tipo turboei-
xo): é a classe-padrão do moderno helicóptero civil, de am-
plo uso. Por ser mais caro que o tipo monomotor a pistão, o 
monoturbina tem vendas mais baixas, mas sua capacidade é 
superior – até oito ou nove ocupantes, mais a tripulação.

iii.	 Biturbina (equipado com dois motores a jato do tipo turboeixo): 
é a classe “top”, com capacidade que vai de sete a 19 passa-

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



geiros, mais a tripulação. É empregado em situações em que 217
a confiabilidade e a segurança de voo adquirem níveis críti-
cos, como o transporte de chefes de Estado, Chief Executive 
Officers (CEOs) de corporações globais, transporte offshore 
para plataformas marítimas distantes do continente etc. 

Esses três tipos de configuração de motorização permitiram que uma 
gama cada vez maior de usos e empregos de helicópteros fosse desenvol-
vida nas últimas décadas. 

Aplicações e usos tradicionais para helicópteros 
Do ponto de vista da engenharia aeronáutica, o projeto de um novo he-

licóptero é uma empreitada mais complexa e arriscada do que o projeto de 
um novo avião de transporte comercial a jato, em que se sabe de antemão 
que ele deverá transportar um número X de passageiros pagantes, a uma 
distância Y, com nível de conforto Z. Assim, é uma questão de aplicar as 
últimas inovações tecnológicas para se diferenciar da concorrência e chegar 
à certificação e subsequente produção seriada, dentro de prazos e recursos 
razoáveis e já estabelecidos. No caso do helicóptero, tem-se um quadro 
diametralmente oposto já que não há linhas aéreas, em todo o mundo, que 
se utilizem desse tipo de veículo para o transporte regular. Seus custos ope-
racionais, em face da carga paga transportada (passageiros e/ou carga) nas 
distâncias possíveis, são elevados demais para permitir tarifas aceitáveis 
pelo público em geral. Por outro lado, o helicóptero tem a rara faculdade 
de ser capaz de executar determinadas tarefas ou missões que apenas suas 
características técnicas especiais tornam possível.

Portanto, o projetista de um novo helicóptero tem sempre diante de si 
este dilema: partir logo para um veículo aéreo especializado em determi-
nada tarefa ou missão, ou tentar conceber um veículo com características 
“genéricas” o suficiente para, ao longo da vida econômica do produto no 
mercado (vinte, trinta anos ou mais), permitir que sejam feitas adaptações 
que tornem seu emprego o mais amplo possível – conquistando substancial 
fatia de mercado nesse processo. Na prática, um mesmo tipo de veículo aca-
ba sendo capaz de dar conta de uma ou mais dessas missões, com as adap-
tações possíveis. Por outro lado, em casos extremos, determinado tipo de 
helicóptero só pode dar cabo de um tipo de tarefa ou missão especializada, 
caracterizando-se, então, como “veículo de nicho de mercado”.

Aeronáutica



218 Considera-se, assim, que as principais aplicações comerciais para os 
helicópteros civis hoje em produção são:

•	 Transporte executivo: com certeza é a aplicação mais visível e glamou-
rosa com o grande público. A aeronave costuma ser de propriedade 
da própria empresa à qual pertencem os executivos. Ela é operada 
por seu departamento de transportes ou por empresa de táxi aéreo 
terceirizada. O tipo monoturbina é o clássico para essa aplicação, 
mas algumas grandes corporações são obrigadas a ter o biturbina. 

•	 Transporte VIP e/ou de chefes de Estado: semelhante ao anterior, ex-
ceto pelo fato de que aqui predomina o tipo biturbina, dado o aspecto 
crítico da confiabilidade e da segurança de voo. É uma aplicação civil, 
mas, no caso de chefes de Estado, a aeronave em geral pertence a uma 
das Forças Armadas, sendo por ela operada em regime especializado 
e dedicado (esquadrão próprio).

•	 Utility: termo de origem militar, essa aplicação se refere ao simples 
transporte de pessoas, equipamentos ou materiais entre pontos inaces-
síveis por outros meios de transporte e/ou que requeiram, pela natureza 
da demanda, o mais rápido atendimento possível. Exemplos incluem 
levar técnicos especializados para resolver panes em instalações elétri-
cas remotas ou em navios à deriva, médicos e/ou medicamentos para 
atendimento de emergências em áreas difíceis etc. O tipo monoturbina 
é perfeitamente adequado e bastante utilizado, mas os monomotores a 
pistão vêm tendo uso crescente nessa aplicação graças ao custo inferior 
e ao aumento da confiabilidade dos modernos motores a pistão.

•	 Parapúblicas: é a classe de aplicações mais vasta. Compreende o uso 
por parte de determinados setores governamentais, distintos das For-
ças Armadas. Refere-se ao emprego, por parte da polícia, em missões 
de observação, perseguição a criminosos, apoio ao pessoal em terra 
etc.; ao emprego, por parte do Corpo de Bombeiros, em missões de 
observação, combate a incêndios, como ambulância aérea, resgate de 
banhistas afogados etc.; ao emprego em outras funções de adminis-
tração governamental, tais como fiscalização ambiental, monitoração 
de florestas, fiscalização de grandes obras etc. Os tipos monomotor a 
pistão e monoturbina são os mais utilizados.

•	 SAR: sigla em inglês para “busca e resgate” (search & rescue), 
adaptada em português para Serviço Aéreo de Resgate. Refere-se ao 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



socorro a náufragos mar adentro, alpinistas perdidos em montanhas 219
ou florestas etc. Missões simples são bem atendidas pelo tipo mo-
noturbina; as mais complexas, que demandam incursões longas, são 
mais bem atendidas pelo tipo biturbina.

Figura 2 | Sikorsky S-76

Foto de divulgação Sikorsky. © Copyright Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation. All rights reserved. 
<www.sikorsky.com>.
Nota: O S76, nas suas diversas versões, é o principal modelo de helicóptero da Sikorsky para o 
mercado civil com uso em ampla gama de missões, incluindo SAR (search & rescue).

•	 EMS: sigla em inglês para “serviços médicos de emergência” 
(emergency medical services). Refere-se ao transporte de doentes em 
situação crítica (enfartes, AVCs, TVPs etc.), acidentados em rodovias, 
ferrovias, em áreas de desastres naturais etc. Embora parte dessas 
missões esteja na esfera parapública, há também operadores privados 
ligados a empresas de seguro-saúde ou similares. Contudo, dado o 
intenso uso de helicópteros nessa função, ao longo dos últimos dez 
anos, ainda mais nos Estados Unidos (EUA), essa aplicação passou 
a ser considerada uma categoria à parte, com requisitos técnicos e 
operacionais próprios e específicos. 

•	 Offshore: é a aplicação mais contemporânea. Diz respeito ao trans-
porte de trabalhadores da indústria de petróleo e gás entre bases em 
terra firme e plataformas marítimas que podem estar centenas de 
quilômetros mar adentro. As regiões do Golfo do México, da Bacia de 

Aeronáutica



220 Campos e do Mar do Norte (Escócia) são as de mais intenso tráfego 
aéreo de helicópteros do mundo. Aqui predomina claramente o tipo 
biturbina, seja o para sete ocupantes ou o “top” para até 19 passageiros. 
Isso é resultado dos estritos requisitos de confiabilidade e segurança 
de voo estabelecidos pelas autoridades aeronáuticas e pelas próprias 
empresas petrolíferas. 

•	 Treinamento/instrução: aplicação fundamental, pois se refere ao 
treinamento e/ou atualização de pilotos. Embora seja crescente a uti-
lização de simuladores de voo em atualizações ou cheques de rotina, 
a formação básica não prescinde do voo real. Aqui o predomínio é do 
monomotor a pistão, dado seu custo operacional inferior.

•	 Miscelânea: são aplicações marginais para helicópteros, como a 
adaptação de alguns veículos de treinamento/instrução ou mesmo 
da função utility para a missão de pulverização agrícola, em regiões 
na maioria das vezes inacessíveis para as aeronaves convencionais; 
e os helicópteros que operam de modo exclusivo como “guindastes 
aéreos”, transportando carga externa sob um guincho.

Caracterização do setor/indústria
Estima-se que, considerada de forma global e agregada, a indústria mun-

dial de helicópteros, que inclui a produção civil e militar, tenha faturado 
cerca de US$ 13 bilhões, em 2012, e entregado pouco mais de duas mil 
aeronaves (Tabela 1).

Tabela 1 | Estimativa da produção mundial de helicópteros em unidades e valor 
para o ano de 2012
Cinco maiores Nº de unidades Cinco maiores Valor da 
fabricantes pela fabricadas fabricantes pelo produção
produção faturamento (US$ bilhões)
Robinson Helicopters 571 Sikorsky 3,9
Eurocopter 446 Eurocopter 3,0
Sikorsky 253 Bell Helicopters 2,6
Bell Helicopters 190 Boeing Rotorcraft 2,3
Russian Helicopters 156 AgustaWestland 1,5
Demais fabricantes 439
Total 2.055 Total 13,3

Fonte: Forecast International (2011).
Nota: Observa-se que a Robinson é campeã em unidades fabricadas, porém, por serem aeronaves de 
baixo valor unitário, a empresa não chega a figurar entre as cinco maiores em valor da produção.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Comparados apenas à produção de aeronaves comerciais a jato fa- 221
bricadas pela Airbus, Boeing, Embraer e Bombardier, constata-se que 
os números da indústria de helicópteros são relativamente modestos. De 
fato, as chamadas “quatro grandes” dos jatos comerciais faturam um va-
lor aproximado de US$ 100 bilhões anuais para entregar pouco mais de 
mil aeronaves.

Assim, os US$ 13 bilhões auferidos por ano na venda de pouco mais 
de dois mil helicópteros significam um “tíquete médio” de US$ 6,4 mi-
lhões por aparelho, civil ou militar. Já o “tíquete médio” no setor de jatos 
comerciais gira em torno de US$ 100 milhões, e na Embraer esse tíquete 
para os e-jets (jatos comerciais de setenta a 122 assentos) está atualmente 
em torno de US$ 30 milhões. 

Nesse contexto, não é nenhuma surpresa constatar que os principais 
fabricantes desse tipo de aeronave estejam localizados nos mesmos paí-
ses que já detêm o grosso da produção de aeronaves civis e militares do 
planeta: EUA e União Europeia. No caso dos helicópteros, essa produção 
se torna ainda mais essencial em vista das características de sua deman-
da. Uma vez que a demanda do mercado civil está sujeita às flutuações 
do ciclo econômico e às crises internacionais, boa parte dos fabricantes 
de helicópteros tem dependência visceral de regulares compras governa-
mentais militares para sua viabilidade e sustentabilidade. 

A maioria dos modelos de helicópteros civis que se encontra em produ-
ção originou-se em algum projeto ou desenvolvimento militar ocorrido em 
décadas passadas. Isso só não é verdade no que diz respeito aos modelos 
mais leves e básicos – como os produzidos pela Robinson H elicopters – , 
capazes de se autossustentar no mercado civil por uma combinação de baixo 
preço e funcionalidade adequada às funções de treinamento, uso pessoal, 
jornalísticas, utility etc.

O mercado de helicópteros civis está hoje estruturado para atender às 
aplicações e funções esperadas. A concorrência existente é uma função 
das faixas de Pesos Máximos de Decolagem (PMD) de cada modelo de 
aeronave, os quais delimitam a carga paga transportável e o alcance dos 
veículos, classificados pelos agentes do mercado como: o “veículo da clas-
se de XXX toneladas”, o “da de YYY toneladas” etc. (Tabela 2).

Aeronáutica



222

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial

Tabela 2 | A concorrência entre os modelos de helicópteros no mercado atual

Fabricante Classe “entrada” – Classe “leve” – PMD de 1.501 kg até Classe “intermediária/média” – PMD de Classe “pesada” – PMD acima 
PMD até 1.500 kg 4.000 kg 4.001 kg até 10.000 kg de 10.000 kg

AgustaWestland    AW AW AW   AW  AW AW      AW  
(Itália) 119 109 109S 169 139 189 101

Avicopter AC   AC AC     AC       AC   
(China) 310 301 311 312 313

Bell Helicopters    206L 407GX  429 430   412EP 525*        
(EUA)

Eurocopter    EC 120 AS 350 EC EC EC AS EC  EC EC AS      
(França e Colibri Esquilo 130 135P2 145 365 155 175 225 332
Alemanha) Ecureuil Dauphin
MD Helicopters  MD520N  MD530F  MD MD Explorer             
(EUA) 600

Russian      Ansat ka226T    ka-62 ka    MI-  MI-38* MI-26T
Helicopters 32A11BC 171A2*

(Rússia)
Robinson R22 R44 R66                 
Helicopters 
(EUA)
Enstrom (EUA) F28 F280 480B                 

Sikorsky (EUA) 300-C  333       S-76D     S-92A     

Fonte: Elaboração própria, com base em dados dos fabricantes.
* Em desenvolvimento.



Perspectivas 223

Do ponto de vista dos analistas de mercado, a perspectiva para a indús-
tria mundial de helicópteros é de crescimento. Assim, para o quinquênio 
2013-2017, espera-se que a produção acumulada no período atinja quase 
12 mil unidades, com um valor total pouco acima de US$ 80 bilhões. A 
forma como tal crescimento se distribuirá é apresentada nos gráficos 1 e 2. 

Gráfico 1 | Participação de mercado dos fabricantes de helicópteros, em unidades 
vendidas

Robinson Helicopters
2.975

25,5% 

Outros
1.668
14,3% Eurocopter

3.057
26,2%

AgustaWestland
1.263

10,8%
Bell Sikorsky
1.358 1.352
11,6% 11,6% 

Fonte: Aviation Week Intelligence Network (2013).

Gráfico 2 | Projeção da distribuição das fatias de mercado entre os cinco maiores 
fabricantes por valor da produção no quinquênio 2013-2017

Boeing Rotorcraft
11,4 (14%)

AgustaWestland
14,8 (18%)

Bell
11,1 (14%)

Eurocopter Sikorsky
22 (27%) 21,8 (27%)

Fonte: Aviation Week Intelligence Network (2013).

Aeronáutica



224 Logo, em relação ao ano encerrado de 2012, a perspectiva é que nos 
cinco anos seguintes o número médio de unidades fabricadas anualmente 
aumente em 13,6%, e o valor da produção cresça em média 23% em valores 
correntes. Trata-se de uma perspectiva encorajadora para o setor. 

No entanto, é importante ressaltar que, em relação ao número de aero-
naves em operação no mercado, a predominância de aeronaves militares é, 
por tradição, preponderante (Gráfico 3). Dessa forma, com exceção dos fa-
bricantes de helicópteros básicos de treinamento, uso pessoal, jornalístico 
etc. – de menor valor unitário –, os principais fabricantes de helicópteros 
têm de manter a competitividade, auferindo assim um fluxo perene de re-
ceitas anuais nas compras governamentais de material de defesa, que lhes 
dá sustentabilidade no longo prazo.

Por outro lado, dadas as condições atuais prevalecentes nas economias 
dos EUA e dos países da União Europeia, não há expectativa de que a fa-
tia das aeronaves militares (Gráfico 3) se altere de modo substancial nos 
próximos cinco anos, podendo até mesmo sofrer algum decréscimo. Nesse 
caso, é provável que a fatia da frota de uso parapúblico cresça, substituin-
do em parte alguns empregos militares atuais. Seja como for, a produção 
total deverá crescer. 

Gráfico 3 | Segmentação do mercado mundial de helicópteros por tipo de 
operador em 2012

Militar
72,3%

Comercial
18,5%

Parapúblico
9,2%

Fonte: Leboulanger (2012).
Nota: As Forças Armadas em todo o mundo são as operadoras preponderantes de helicópteros.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Uma característica importante da indústria de helicópteros é a fabrica- 225
ção ou montagem final do veículo também em outros países, de maneira 
a aumentar o potencial de vendas naqueles mercados. Já são “clássicos” 
os casos dos fabricantes europeus Eurocopter e AgustaWestland que têm 
unidades de montagem nos EUA. Nesses casos específicos, a existência 
das subsidiárias integrais das fabricantes europeias se deve a dois motivos: 

i.	 o fornecimento de helicópteros militares, pois o Pentágono em 
geral impõe aos fornecedores estrangeiros ao menos a monta-
gem final em solo americano; e

ii.	 a facilidade e a credibilidade da marca em função do apoio 
pós-vendas (assistência técnica) no mercado civil.

Todavia, para que as projeções de crescimento da indústria apresentadas 
se tornem realidade, parece ser cada vez mais importante a realização de 
alianças e acordos internacionais de produção e/ou de design conjunto entre 
os fabricantes tradicionais e empresas/instituições localizados em merca-
dos de outros países. Isso significa uma composição comercial, industrial 
e tecnológica mais complexa do que a dos casos “clássicos” assinalados, 
que será examinada a seguir.

Cooperação internacional
Um aspecto que distingue, no âmbito da indústria aeronáutica mundial, 

o setor de helicópteros dos demais é a frequência e intensidade de acordos 
de cooperação internacional. Tais acordos costumam suceder entre os fabri-
cantes de helicópteros tradicionais e longamente estabelecidos e empresas, 
agentes ou instituições nos “países-alvo” (países vistos como mercados real 
ou atraentes em potencial). Embora a fabricação aeronáutica de partes, peças 
e sistemas embarcados seja uma atividade global hoje em dia, distribuída 
por inúmeros países, a característica peculiar da cooperação internacional 
em helicópteros é o fato de ela sempre visar à montagem final da aeronave 
no país-alvo.

Tal cooperação em geral resulta de uma compra governamental de aero-
naves militares, de valor elevado (centenas de milhões ou mesmo bilhões de 
dólares) e com cláusula de offset (contrapartida industrial). Isso significa que 
uma quantia equivalente a 30%, 50% ou mesmo 100% do contrato terá de ser 
despendida pelo fabricante dos helicópteros (e seus fornecedores) em com-

Aeronáutica



226 pras industriais no país adquirente das aeronaves; caso contrário, o contrato 
pode prever a montagem de componentes ou mesmo da aeronave final no 
país, em instalações já existentes ou a serem construídas. Mas outros fatores 
também podem levar à cooperação internacional, como o simples tamanho do 
mercado local ou regional do país-alvo, como teria sido o caso da Helibras.

Entre alguns dos acordos internacionais mais representativos em vigor 
tem-se:

•	 O acordo assinado, em 2010, entre o fabricante anglo-italiano 
AgustaWestland e a Russian Helicopters, formando a empresa Helivert 
JV (joint venture) em Tomilino, na grande Moscou, segundo informa-
ções extraídas das páginas eletrônicas (sites) das empresas. O objetivo 
inicial era chegar à montagem/fabricação do helicóptero civil biturbina 
AW 139, na cadência de 15 aeronaves por ano, tendo como alvo a Rússia 
e a Comunidade dos Estados Independentes (antigo bloco soviético). O 
primeiro AW 139 produzido na Rússia fez seu voo inaugural em janeiro 
de 2013 conforme consta no site da Aviation Today.

•	 O acordo celebrado, em 2007, entre o governo da Turquia e a 
AgustaWestland para o codesenvolvimento e a fabricação, na Turquia, 
de um novo helicóptero militar de ataque, baseado na plataforma já 
existente do Agusta A129 Mangusta. O planejamento original previa 
a fabricação de 51 unidades, com opção para mais quarenta. Do lado 
turco, foi contratante a empresa Tusas Aerospace Industries (TAI), e 
o T-129 deverá ser uma nova plataforma construída integralmente na 
Turquia, a qual reterá todos os direitos comerciais, incluindo os de 
exportação, que englobam até o motor LHTEC CTS800-4N o qual 
ficará a cargo da Tusas Engine Industries (TEI). O voo inaugural do 
protótipo ocorreu em 2009, e o programa continua em desenvolvi-
mento, já na fase de ensaios em voo. Há estimativas de que seu custo 
total alcance US$ 3,2 bilhões [Wikipédia (2013)].

•	 O acordo celebrado entre a Eurocopter e o governo do México, em 2010, 
para a fabricação de partes e peças aeronáuticas em uma nova planta 
industrial em Queretaro. Tal acordo resultou da cláusula de offset do 
contrato de compra de 15 helicópteros EC725 que estão sendo adquiri-
dos pelas Forças Armadas mexicanas. A princípio, serão fabricados itens 
completos para as aeronaves Airbus A320 e A330, uma vez que tanto 
a Eurocopter como a Airbus integram o Grupo European Aeronautic 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Defence and Space Co. (EADS). A partir de 2015, a fábrica mexicana 227
passará a produzir os estabilizadores verticais e cones de cauda para o 
helicóptero AS350 Ecureuil [Wikipédia (2013)].

•	 Os acordos entre o fabricante estatal chinês AVIC Helicopter Co. 
(Avicopter) e fabricantes ocidentais para desenvolver a sua capaci-
dade de projetar e construir helicópteros de uso civil. Há registros 
documentados de que tal iniciativa governamental já envolveu o 
helicóptero básico MD300 da MD Helicopters, gerando o AC310 
chinês; o AS350 Ecureuil da Eurocopter, gerando o AC311 chinês; e o 
AW109 da AgustaWestland, gerando o CA109 chinês [Perret (2011)]. 
Isso faz parte do último Plano Quinquenal da China.

•	 A produção do helicóptero militar S-70i Black Hawk da Sikorsky na em-
presa aeronáutica polonesa PZL Mielec (antes adquirida pela S ikorsky), 
desde 2010. O planejamento elaborado indica a possibilidade de virem 
a ser produzidos vinte aparelhos por ano, essencialmente destinados à 
exportação. A Sikorsky, que é parte de um dos maiores grupos aeroespa-
ciais do mundo – a United Technologies –, ao que parece teria decidido 
que tal iniciativa seria estratégica na medida em que diversifica sua base 
de custos e amplia seu corpo de engenheiros e técnicos especializados, 
tornando seu produto mais competitivo nos mercados internacionais de 
acordo com informações obtidas no site da empresa.

•	 O acordo celebrado no Brasil entre a Eurocopter e a Helibras (origi-
nalmente em 1978).

Constata-se, então, que as negociações e acordos mencionados envol-
vem sempre um fabricante tradicional de um lado e uma empresa existente 
ou especialmente constituída no país-alvo. Como passará a deter os direitos 
de comercialização sobre a aeronave em seu território e, é provável, no que 
concerne a seus vizinhos, a empresa do país-alvo também é conhecida como 
“empresa regional” (a contratante), em oposição à empresa tradicional que 
foi contratada para organizar a produção, codesenvolver o produto etc., que 
é então classificada como “empresa global”.

Dessa forma, o consenso existente entre diversos analistas de merca-
do [Leboulanger (2012)] é que, do ponto de vista da “empresa regional”, 
a estratégia de se associar à “empresa global” ser-lhe-ia benéfica, porque:

•	 ao entrar em um programa já formatado (fruto do acordo com a “em-
presa global”), com as rotas tecnológicas conhecidas e/ou mapeadas, 

Aeronáutica



228 ela reduz a sua vulnerabilidade financeira, tendo em vista a limitação 
em sua penetração do mercado em geral e a sua dependência da 
economia local; e

•	 ao aumentar seu capital de conhecimento, facilitará as condições para 
a transferência e/ou o desenvolvimento das tecnologias requeridas e, 
no limite, a ampliação de seu mercado potencial.

Por outro lado, do ponto de vista da “empresa global”, o acordo ou a as-
sociação com a “empresa regional” ainda lhe traz vantagens, porque:

•	 diversifica suas competências e habilidades, assim como seus ati-
vos financeiros, por regiões diversas do mundo, contribuindo para 
limitar o impacto da atual crise financeira em sua fatia do mercado 
mundial; e

•	 dá destaque a sua posição no mercado, permitindo-lhe competir de 
maneira indireta por oportunidades de negócios interessantes, sendo 
certo que tais oportunidades podem estar abertas para apenas alguns 
concorrentes em razão das crescentes barreiras protecionistas e 
preocupações geopolíticas trazidas pela crise financeira atual.

A questão da sustentabilidade
Apesar do amplo leque de estratégias de internacionalização, é importante 

enfatizar mais uma vez que a sustentabilidade das “empresas globais” fabri-
cantes de helicópteros vem das compras governamentais militares. Quando 
estas não são suficientes para prover essa sustentabilidade, os governos en-
volvidos não hesitam em empregar soluções heterodoxas. 

Como exemplo claro, tem-se o braço inglês da AgustaWestland (hoje 
controlada pelo grupo italiano Finmecanica, que tem 30% de suas ações 
pertencentes ao Estado italiano): como as compras de seus helicópteros, por 
parte do governo britânico caíram muito além do esperado por conta da atual 
crise financeira e por se tratar de fornecedor estratégico, o mesmo governo 
não hesitou em apelar para a concessão de várias parcelas de grants (sub-
sídios a fundo perdido) para manter a empresa em operação e concebendo 
novos produtos, com maior destaque para o mercado civil. Em 2011, teriam 
totalizado £ 42 milhões e, em 2012, £ 46 milhões [Nelms (2013)], sendo a 
principal exigência para sua obtenção uma contrapartida da própria empresa 
para os novos projetos e desenvolvimentos propostos.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Setor de helicópteros no Brasil 229

Caracterização do mercado
Com pouco mais de 1.800 helicópteros registrados com matrícula bra-

sileira (4% da frota mundial), em 2012, o Brasil teria a sexta maior frota 
civil do mundo, de acordo com dados consultados no site da Anac. Ficaria 
atrás apenas dos EUA (41% da frota mundial), da União Europeia (20%), 
do Canadá (7%), da Austrália (6%) e da Rússia (5%) [Rigsby (2011)]. O 
que mais impressiona é que o crescimento parece ter se acentuado nos úl-
timos cinco anos (Gráfico 4).

Gráfico 4 | O crescimento da frota brasileira

2.500

2.000

1.500

1.000

500

0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Fonte: Anac.

As taxas de crescimento dessa frota se mantiveram elevadas, mesmo 
quando o Brasil teve de enfrentar o período mais difícil (2009-2010) da cri-
se financeira internacional (Gráfico 5). Isso reflete um crescimento robusto 
do mercado para esse tipo de aeronave, que é quase sem paralelo em outras 
partes do mundo, e com toda certeza desperta a atenção dos principais fa-
bricantes e analistas de mercado.

Por outro lado, deve-se notar que as bases de operação da frota brasilei-
ra estão muito concentradas nas regiões Sudeste e Sul do país (Gráfico 6), 
com mais de 80% da frota. É claro que tal fato não reflete a participação 
econômica dessas regiões no PIB brasileiro – em torno de 70% –, mas ape-
nas aponta para a maior concentração das atividades econômicas que fazem 
uso intensivo de helicópteros nestas regiões.

Unidades em operação

Aeronáutica



230 Gráfico 5 | Taxas de crescimento anual da frota de helicópteros civis no Brasil 

16

14

12

10

% 8

6

4

2

0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Fonte: Elaboração própria, com base em dados da Anac (2012).
Nota: A frota brasileira de helicópteros civis cresceu, em média, 11,2% a.a. de 2007 a 2012.

Gráfico 6 | Distribuição geográfica da frota brasileira de helicópteros civis 
em 2012

Sul
10%

Sudeste
71% Norte

8%

Nordeste
4%

Centro-Oeste
7%

Fonte: Anac (2012).
Nota: As regiões Sudeste e Sul detinham mais de 80% dos helicópteros civis em 2012.

No mercado brasileiro, dentre essas atividades econômicas, destacam-se:
•	 O serviço aéreo privado (“transporte VIP”), realizado pelos Departa-

mentos de Serviços (ou Transporte) Aéreos de grandes empresas ou 
por empresas de táxi aéreo. Há estimativas de que a cidade de São 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Paulo deteria “a maior frota urbana de helicópteros do mundo”, com- 231
preendendo por volta de 420 aeronaves registradas, 193 helipontos 
regularizados e quinhentas operações diárias de pouso e decolagem 
contabilizadas [Oliver (2012)]. 

•	 As missões offshore, de ligação entre bases no continente e as pla-
taformas de petróleo em alto-mar, levadas a cabo por empresas de 
táxi aéreo respaldadas por contratos de transporte de longo prazo. As 
bacias petrolíferas brasileiras offshore concentram-se no litoral dos 
estados de São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro e Espírito Santo. 

•	 As missões parapúblicas, em geral a cargo das administrações pú-
blicas estaduais. Neste caso, a maior operadora parapública seria o 
Grupamento de Radiopatrulha Aérea João Negrão da PM paulista, 
que conta com 21 Esquilos (fabricados pela Helibras), com apoio de 
dez bases de operação no interior do estado [Pereira (2013)].

Gráfico 7 | Frota brasileira de helicópteros civis por tipo de motorização

Monoturbina
720
37,7% Biturbina

486
25,5%

Pistão Outros/não 
638 homologados
33,4% 65

3,4%

Fonte: Anac (2012).

Já a classificação quanto ao tipo de motorização apresentada pela frota 
brasileira apresenta uma relação mais equilibrada (Gráfico 7). O tipo mo-
noturbina é o que predomina em virtude de seu emprego nas modalidades 
de serviço aéreo privado (“transporte VIP”) e parapúblico. Em seguida, 
tem-se o tipo convencional, com motor a pistão, que compreende as aero-
naves mais baratas e de menor capacidade de carga paga. Encontram grande 

Aeronáutica



232 número de aplicações como aeronaves de instrução, transporte individual, 
utility, usos jornalísticos etc. Por fim, com uma participação de um quarto 
do mercado, tem-se o tipo mais sofisticado e caro: o helicóptero biturbina, 
que é empregado em essência no transporte offshore, dado o nível excep-
cional de segurança demandado tanto pelas longas distâncias a serem per-
corridas sobre o mar quanto nos serviços aéreos privados para clientes mais 
exigentes e/ou que se utilizem de helipontos demandantes de aeronaves de 
grande desempenho (situados, por exemplo, em locais de altitude elevada 
e/ou de temperatura média também elevada). Os biturbinas incluem ainda 
os modelos com capacidade máxima de carga paga (19 assentos), empre-
gados essencialmente no transporte offshore.

Gráfico 8 | Fatias do mercado nacional por fabricante de helicópteros em 2012 

Eurocopter/
Helibras AgustaWestland
537 170
28,1% 8,9%

Bell Sikorsky/
317 Schweizer
16,6% 179

9,4%

Robinson MD Helicopters
560 52
29,3% 2,7%

Outros
94
4,9%

Fonte: Anac (2012).

Por outro lado, tem-se a divisão do mercado nacional entre os princi-
pais fabricantes (Gráfico 8). Como esperado, a Robinson Helicopters, com 
sede em Torrance, Califórnia, tem a maior fatia do mercado, dado que são 
os helicópteros mais simples e baratos do mercado (sendo a maior parte de 
monomotores convencionais a pistão), com amplo espectro de usos – ins-
trução, utility, jornalístico etc. A segunda colocação (por margem bastan-
te reduzida), posição ocupada pela Helibras, também não surpreende: seu 
monoturbina Esquilo, montado em Itajubá (MG), desde 1978, é o campeão 
de vendas dessa classe no país, sendo empregado nas missões de serviços 
aéreos privados (“transporte VIP”) e parapúblicas. A terceira colocada é 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



a Bell Helicopters, com sede em Hurst, Texas, tradicional fornecedora há 233
várias décadas, que ocupa posição de destaque, embora tenha pouco mais 
da metade dos dois primeiros colocados. A quarta posição, em 2012, fica 
com a Sikorsky, com sede em Stratford, Connecticut, empresa integrante do 
conglomerado United Technologies, que atua principalmente na classe de 
veículos biturbinas, para as missões offshore e de serviços aéreos privados 
categoria premium. Por fim, a AgustaWestland, empresa anglo-italiana, cuja 
presença no mercado civil brasileiro só se tornou significativa há menos de 
dez anos (já está no setor militar há várias décadas, em particular na Mari-
nha), conquistou uma honrosa quinta posição, atuando essencialmente no 
mesmo segmento da Sikorsky.

O Anexo 1 apresenta a tabela dos helicópteros civis produzidos por 
cada um desses fabricantes, com suas características principais. Boa parte 
deles ainda opera ou já operou no mercado brasileiro, tendo em vista que 
um mesmo modelo de helicóptero tem diversas versões ao longo de várias 
décadas de existência.

Figura 3 | Bell 429

Foto de divulgação Bell. © Copyright Bell Helicopter Textron Inc. All rights reserved. 
 <www.bellhelicopter.com>.
Nota: O Bell 429 é um helicóptero biturbina com rotor principal de quatro pás. Representa o produto 
de última geração da empresa no mercado civil.

Aeronáutica



234 Durante a vida útil de uma aeronave, o item que costuma demandar as 
maiores despesas com manutenção é o chamado grupo motopropulsor. No 
caso dos helicópteros, para cada aeronave, isso significa um motor con-
vencional a pistão, um motor a jato (monoturbina) ou dois motores a jato 
(biturbina). De acordo com o modelo de motor, há diversas empresas espe-
cializadas (Anexo 2). Isso significa que o operador brasileiro já dispõe de 
um parque de manutenção amplo o suficiente para a realização de tarefas de 
manutenção, reparos ou revisão (MRO – sigla em inglês para maintenance, 
repair & overhaul).

Para além da manutenção de motores, o parque de empresas instalado 
no país também já seria capaz de realizar as tarefas de MRO da maioria dos 
componentes de helicópteros (pás de rotor, caixas de transmissão, aviônicos 
etc.) que compõem a frota nacional, incluindo as manutenções pesadas que 
se realizam a cada dez ou 12 anos [Valdemar Jr. (2013a)]. Conclui-se, assim, 
que o mercado brasileiro de helicópteros civis ocupa uma posição compatí-
vel com a importância relativa da economia do país em relação às demais: 
ambos não estão entre os cinco primeiros lugares, mas ficam sempre entre 
a sexta e a oitava posição. Além disso, o mercado brasileiro é diversificado 
e competitivo o suficiente para atrair os principais fornecedores globais de 
helicópteros. Um parque de manutenção bastante amplo para essas aerona-
ves complementa esse quadro.

Portanto, do ponto de vista de análise industrial, a posição do Brasil pare-
ce ser a de “país intermediário”: um dos principais fabricantes (Eurocopter) 
conta com unidade de montagem no país (Helibras), os demais fabricantes 
são fornecedores de porte e o parque de manutenção é amplo e diversifica-
do em razão dos números expressivos da frota brasileira total. Além disso, 
o crescimento apresentado por esse mercado nos últimos anos foi bastante 
significativo, a ponto de despertar o interesse na intensificação da presença 
dos fornecedores. 

A Helibras
A Helicópteros do Brasil S.A. (Helibras) foi fundada em 1978, tendo 

passado por uma fase pré-operacional no então Centro Técnico Aeroespa-
cial (CTA) de São José dos Campos (SP). A fábrica propriamente dita só 
viria a ser inaugurada de fato em Itajubá (MG), em 1980, mas a empresa 
comemora seus 35 anos de existência em 2013. 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



A constituição da Helibras no Brasil obedeceu à diretriz governamental, 235
ainda no período autoritário da História do Brasil, e a empresa nasceu, de 
modo curioso, como uma empresa estatal estadual, já que seu capital inicial 
foi dividido entre o governo do estado de Minas Gerais,4 com 54%, a Aero-
foto Cruzeiro S.A., com 1%, e a Societé Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, 
com 45% [Laux (2013)]. O sócio que aportava a tecnologia de fabricação de 
helicópteros era a então empresa francesa estatal Aerospatiale, que atendia 
a convite do governo brasileiro para criar a primeira montadora de helicóp-
teros em série no país. A sucessora da Aerospatiale passou a ser a empresa 
Eurocopter, constituída, em 1992, pela fusão da francesa Aerospatiale com 
a divisão de helicópteros da alemã DaimlerChrysler. No momento atual, o 
capital da Helibras está repartido entre a Eurocopter (85,65%), o governo 
de Minas (12,45%) e os fundos de investimentos Bueninvest (1,84%) e 
SACS (0,05%). 

Como seu capital é fechado, a empresa não está obrigada a divulgar 
suas informações contábeis e financeiras, mas teria, em 2011, fatura-
do o equivalente a € 123,8 milhões, empregando 604 pessoas [Helibras 
(2013)]. Já em 2012, o faturamento global da Helibras teria atingido 
R$  351 milhões (sendo pouco mais de um terço com a prestação de 
serviços pós-venda), com a entrega de 29 aeronaves e o registro de 34 
vendas [Helibras (2013)].

A Eurocopter delegou à Helibras os direitos exclusivos de fabricação 
da “família” de helicópteros AS 350/355 (Esquilo) para o Brasil, assim 
como a exportação desses modelos para a América do Sul. A empresa in-
forma que, nesses 35 anos, já entregou mais de quinhentos helicópteros 
no Brasil, sendo 70% do modelo Esquilo, com exportações realizadas 
para a Argentina, Bolívia, Chile, Paraguai e Venezuela [Helibras (2013)]. 
Como ao longo desses 35 anos as Forças Armadas brasileiras adquiriram, 
além das versões militares do Esquilo, outros helicópteros da Eurocopter, 
a Helibras também se envolveu nas etapas finais de entrega desses apa-
relhos e em atividades de apoio pós-vendas (product support), as quais 
cresceram após o renascimento da Aviação do Exército, na segunda me-
tade da década de 1980, e cujos primeiros helicópteros foram adquiridos 
da Eurocopter/Helibras.

4   Isso ocorreu por meio de duas empresas, a saber: a Companhia de Distritos Industriais de Minas 
Gerais (CDI-MG) e a Minas Gerais Participações S.A.

Aeronáutica



236 Figura 4 | Esquilo AS 355

Foto de divulgação Helibras. © Todos os direitos reservados. <www.helibras.com.br>.
Nota: O helicóptero Esquilo biturbina AS355 tem um rotor principal com três pás. Com seu “irmão” 
monoturbina AS 350, é um dos campeões de vendas da Helibras.

É importante notar que a controladora da Helibras – a Eurocopter – é, 
por sua vez, controlada pela EADS, o maior conglomerado europeu do setor 
e, sem dúvida, um dos mais importantes do mundo. A EADS tem cerca de 
140 mil empregados espalhados por diversos países e faturou pouco mais de 
€ 56 bilhões em 2012 [EADS (2013)]. As principais empresas controladas 
pela EADS são a Airbus, a Astrium (sistemas aeroespaciais, incluindo saté-
lites e foguetes lançadores), a Cassidian (integradora de sistemas de defesa 
e segurança) e a própria Eurocopter. Os governos da França e da Alemanha 
detêm diretamente 12% das ações cada, e o governo espanhol tem parti-
cipação limitada em 4%. Portanto, na fria análise, a participação direta de 
estados nacionais europeus na EADS atinge nos tempos atuais 28% [EADS 
(2013)], com um free float de 72%.

Dessa forma, parece lícito concluir que, se em sua origem a Helibras 
era controlada por uma empresa estatal francesa, hoje seu controle é 
exercido por um dos maiores grupos aeroespaciais do mundo, que atende 
aos interesses de investidores privados, assim como àqueles dos estados 
nacionais da França, Alemanha e Espanha. Tal constatação é importante 
para se ter em mente quando se considera a trajetória da Helibras no con-
texto brasileiro.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Por um lado, parece claro que, apesar do indiscutível sucesso comercial da 237
empresa no país, não se logrou atingir o objetivo que levou a sua criação na 
década de 1970: atingir o domínio da tecnologia, o que levaria à capacidade de 
conceber, projetar, construir, testar, certificar e produzir em série aeronaves de 
asas rotativas no país. Conforme análise já publicada [Gomes (2012, p. 160)]:

[...] com a alegação de que o mercado brasileiro ainda não justificaria 
investimentos mais pesados, não se logrou implementar um programa 
que levasse à progressiva nacionalização de partes, peças e compo-
nentes, ou mesmo dotasse a empresa da capacidade em engenharia 
necessária para a concepção, o projeto e a produção de helicópteros 
no país. Dessa forma, restou à Helibras o papel de montadora desse 
tipo de aeronave, a partir de componentes importados da matriz e de 
seus fornecedores, com um percentual mínimo de itens efetivamente 
nacionalizados.

Por outro lado, e conforme já visto, o grande responsável pela susten-
tabilidade do setor de indústria de helicópteros em todo o mundo são as 
compras governamentais, de maneira específica as realizadas pelas Forças 
Armadas de cada país em seu parque industrial – e as eventuais exportações 
daí decorrentes. No caso do Brasil, não havia a premissa do desenvolvi-
mento de uma indústria de helicópteros nesses termos e sim de que, com o 
domínio tecnológico alcançado, a empresa poderia se manter atendendo a 
determinados nichos com produtos originais e inovadores, seja na seara civil, 
seja na militar. A partir daí, mais à frente, seria tentada a diversificação e a 
ampliação de seu portfólio de produtos, meio pelo qual ela se consolidaria 
como o fabricante brasileiro de helicópteros.

Porém, tal “perspectiva de mercado” não se concretizou. O país passou 
por diversos ciclos de crescimento e crise que, para uma empresa cuja “ter-
ritorialidade de mercados” estava – e está –, de forma contratual, restrita 
ao Brasil e à América do Sul, não se configurou como materialmente sus-
tentável. Mas sua operação continuada no país foi assegurada ao longo de 
todas essas décadas com certeza pelo interesse estratégico e pela capacidade 
financeira de seus acionistas principais. Há pouco tempo, o atual presidente 
da Helibras chegou a declarar que: 

Nessas mais de três décadas, enfrentamos momentos difíceis para 
chegar onde estamos. Teve período em que chegamos até a ter 
apenas um helicóptero na linha de montagem durante o ano todo 
[Fuhrmann (2013a)]. 

Aeronáutica



238 [...] em 2004, considerou-se a possibilidade de fechar a Helibras. Os 
acionistas consideraram fechar a empresa, pois, nesses 35 anos, na 
realidade somente nos últimos quatro anos distribuímos dividendos. 
Pouca gente sabe disso [Furhmann (2013b)].

Como o quadro atual do mercado brasileiro teve uma evolução bastante 
positiva nos últimos anos (gráficos 7 e 8), é claro que o posicionamento da 
empresa avançou do mesmo modo. O contrato para o fornecimento de cin-
quenta helicópteros militares EC725, no valor aproximado de € 1,9 bilhão, 
firmado entre o governo federal e a Eurocopter/Helibras, em dezembro de 
2008, deverá trazer consequências positivas e palpáveis para o setor. Há um 
programa de nacionalização progressiva em curso para os cinquenta apa-
relhos, algo inédito para esse setor no país, fruto de um investimento esti-
mado em US$ 450 milhões. Uma vez que o EC725 tem um correspondente 
civil – o EC225 –, o qual tem aplicação no transporte offshore e também 
deverá ser montado na Helibras, a iniciativa industrial ora em curso tem 
potencial de se estender para além do fornecimento militar exclusivo para 
as Forças Armadas brasileiras, o qual se encerraria em 2017 com a entrega 
do 50º aparelho.

Figura 5 | Eurocopter EC 225

Foto de divulgação Helibras. © Todos os direitos reservados. <www.helibras.com.br>.
Nota: O helicóptero EC 225 corresponde à versão civil do EC 725 (adquirido pelas Forças Armadas 
do Brasil). O transporte offshore é seu mercado natural, assim como o de aeronave VIP para chefes 
de Estado.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



O número de empregados da Helibras já passou de pouco mais de trezen- 239
tos (2009) para mais de seiscentos (fim de 2011), e já estaria em 759 (2013), 
devendo atingir mil até 2015, e o de engenheiros saltou de nove para quase 
setenta [Helibras (2013)]. Isso porque a empresa estaria aproveitando essa 
oportunidade para consolidar o próprio Centro de Engenharia, o qual foi 
equiparado ao da filial da Espanha, no nível mais alto de engenharia entre 
as subsidiárias do grupo Eurocopter [Helibras (2013)]. Em compromisso 
assumido com o governo brasileiro, tal centro será responsável por proje-
tar, construir, certificar e orientar a fabricação em série de um helicóptero 
inteiramente brasileiro até 2020. Especula-se que o valor a ser investido 
nesse projeto possa alcançar € 600 milhões, quantia a ser repartida entre a 
Helibras e a Eurocopter.

Outras empresas no país também estariam sendo contratadas para fazer 
parte dessa iniciativa (haja vista a necessidade de nacionalização progres-
siva), no âmbito do chamado Industrial Cooperation Program, formando-
-se assim uma cadeia produtiva de fornecedores. Há a previsão de “[...] 
execução de 22 projetos de cooperação industrial e sete projetos relaciona-
dos ao offset [contrapartida industrial] de transferência de tecnologia [...]” 

[Helibras (2013)]. Além disso, a Universidade Federal de Itajubá (Unifei) 
já implantou o curso de engenharia mecânica aeronáutica com ênfase em 
helicópteros e estaria aguardando a definição dos governos federal e esta-
dual para a construção do Centro Tecnológico de Helicópteros (CTH), com 
investimento avaliado em R$ 200 milhões [Silveira (2013)].

Por outro lado, ao deflagrar o processo de expansão ora em curso, a em-
presa parece ter reconhecido a necessidade de ampliar sua “territorialidade de 
mercado” (originalmente restrita ao Brasil e à América do Sul, como visto), 
assim como a ferramenta representada pelos financiamentos às exportações, 
provida pelo BNDES. Seu presidente teria declarado que

hoje existem mercados em outras regiões do mundo que são mais 
facilmente acessados por uma indústria brasileira do que uma europeia 
ou norte-americana, por conta da relação entre os países e também 
por programas públicos de financiamento, como o Finame do BNDES 
[Furhmann (2013a)].

Por fim, dado que a importação de helicópteros é livre no mercado bra-
sileiro, resta saber se, apesar desse fato, a empresa ainda tem alguma van-
tagem por estar estabelecida no país.

Aeronáutica



240 Padrão da concorrência e concentração de mercado
A situação da Helibras comporta alguns posicionamentos opostos aos 

afetos à Embraer, sendo o principal deles o foco principal da empresa no 
mercado doméstico brasileiro. Neste ela obtém mais de 90% de suas vendas, 
mesmo percentual médio que, na Embraer, representam as exportações. Os 
demais concorrentes da Helibras no mercado doméstico não têm fábricas no 
país, ou seja, as vendas resultam da importação das aeronaves demandadas 
pelo mercado. Portanto, é lícito supor que o mercado brasileiro é atendido, 
como qualquer outro, pelos principais fabricantes de helicópteros, tais como 
a Robinson Helicopters, a Sikorsky, a Bell, a AgustaWestland e a Eurocopter 
(EADS). Destaque-se que, neste último caso, é a Helibras que atende ao Bra-
sil (e a mais alguns países da América do Sul) para alguns de seus modelos.

O mercado de helicópteros apresenta uma segmentação um pouco dis-
tinta da aviação convencional. No mercado doméstico brasileiro, a partici-
pação da Helibras atinge os seguintes valores em seus segmentos principais:

Gráfico 9 | Participação de mercado da Helibras, conforme a classificação, no 
mercado doméstico brasileiro 

100
90 84
80 73
70 66

60 53 52
48

% 50 47

40 34
30 27

20 16

10
0

Turbina Executivo Militar Governo Oil & Gas
Helibras Outros

Fonte: Helibras (mar. 2012).
Nota: O item “turbina”, ao excluir os veículos com motores a pistão, engloba todas as outras 
classificações aqui lançadas, pois se refere com exclusividade ao tipo de propulsão da aeronave, seja 
qual for o segmento de mercado para o qual foi comercializada.

No entanto, como o mercado brasileiro não apresenta restrições à livre 
importação de helicópteros, parece lícito supor que o padrão de concorrência 
aqui enfrentado pela Helibras deveria reproduzir o da Eurocopter n o merca-

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



do mundial. Conforme assinalado na Tabela 3, as participações n o mercado 241
global desse ramo da indústria aeronáutica atingem:

Tabela 3 | Participação no mercado global de helicópteros dos cinco maiores 
fabricantes
Fabricante Robinson Eurocopter Demais Sikorsky Bell Agusta-

Westland
Fatia de 25,5% 26,2% 14,3% 11,6% 11,6% 10,8%
mercado

Fonte: Aviation Week.

Tem-se, assim, que o nível de concentração global dessa indústria pode 
ser estimado – utilizando-se a razão de concentração CR4 – como

CR4 - global = 25,5% + 26,2% + 11,6% + 11,6% = 74,9%

Portanto, com esse valor de CR4, a indústria de helicópteros – em sua 
esfera global, civil e militar – caracteriza-se como um oligopólio, pois ape-
nas quatro empresas detêm três quartos do mercado. No caso do Brasil, e 
considerando-se apenas o mercado de aeronaves civis, conforme visto no 
Gráfico 9, a concentração alcança

CR4 – Brasil/civis = 29,3% + 28,1% + 16,6% + 9,4% = 83,4%

o que indica um nível ainda maior de oligopolização no mercado domésti-
co civil brasileiro.

Por outro lado, buscou-se também apurar o Índice de H erfindahl-H irschman, 
o qual, ao elevar os percentuais de fatias de mercado ao quadrado, acaba por 
dar maior peso à avaliação para o caso de alguma empresa ser marcadamente 
predominante. Assim, para a esfera global, civil e militar tem-se5

HHI = (25,5%)2+(26,2%)2+(11,6%)2+(11,6%)2+(10,8%)2+3 x (4,77%)2 =1.791

o que indica uma concentração moderada, pois o valor ficou entre 1.500 e 
2.500. Ou seja, o HHI confirma que há concentração/oligopolização nesse 

5   Os fabricantes agrupados no título “demais” foram considerados como sendo apenas três, repartindo 
igualmente os 14,3% de fatia de mercado, para representar os casos de China, Rússia e, é provável, a Turquia.

Aeronáutica



242 mercado, porém sem que uma única empresa tenha domínio ou que ele seja 
absoluto. Já para o caso do Brasil, e considerando-se apenas o mercado de 
aeronaves civis, conforme visto no Gráfico 9 o HHI alcança6 

HHI = (29,3)2+(28,1)2+(16,6)2+(9,4)2+(8,9)2+(2,7)2+3x(1,69)2 = 2.200
o que mais uma vez indica concentração moderada no mercado doméstico 
civil brasileiro, mas superior à constatada no mercado global civil e militar.

Tais resultados, se analisados em conjunto com as fatias por segmento 
de mercado da Helibras (Gráfico 9) no Brasil, podem levar a algumas im-
portantes conclusões:

i.	 No mercado global, civil e militar, a Eurocopter é a empresa 
líder por pequena margem. Haja vista que o mercado global é 
constituído de maneira predominante (75%) por helicópteros 
a jato (mono e biturbina), a liderança da Eurocopter fica bem 
mais significativa quando se exclui o segmento dos helicópte-
ros básicos convencionais de motor a pistão.

ii.	 Apesar disso, o mercado global, civil e militar tem nível de con-
centração suficiente para ser configurado como um oligopólio. 
Embora seja a empresa líder, a Eurocopter não tem um domínio 
absoluto do mercado, pois os demais players detêm fatias de 
mercado suficientes para evitar que isso ocorra, gerando assim 
uma concentração de mercado qualificada como moderada.

iii.	 No mercado civil do Brasil, a liderança é, com pequena mar-
gem, dos helicópteros convencionais a pistão, essencialmente 
da Robinson Helicopters (aos quais se devem somar as reduzi-
das participações do Schweizer, hoje fabricados pela Sikorsky). 
Todavia, ao se excluir esse segmento, posto que os helicópteros 
a jato (mono e biturbina) representam quase 70% do mercado 
brasileiro, a liderança da Eurocopter/Helibras torna-se significa-
tiva, o que pode ser mais bem apreciado no Gráfico 9. Fica então 
claro que apenas no segmento de petróleo e gás a Eurocopter/
Helibras não predomina. Uma vez que o mercado brasileiro foi 
avaliado como também constituindo um oligopólio, e com nível 

6   Os fabricantes agrupados em “Outros” foram considerados sendo apenas três, repartindo igualmente 
a fatia de mercado de 4,9%.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



de concentração ainda superior ao do mercado global, tal quadro 243
serve para qualificar até mais o sucesso de Eurocopter/Helibras 
no país.

Conclui-se, portanto, que a Helibras vem sendo bem-sucedida no mer-
cado doméstico brasileiro, assegurando a sua controladora Eurocopter uma 
participação superior à que esta tem no mercado global. Isso ocorre em um 
ambiente que apresenta ainda maior grau de concentração de mercado e 
oligopolização do que o mercado mundial, como comprovado pelos indi-
cadores CR4 e HHI vistos.

Perspectivas do mercado brasileiro
As projeções de vendas de helicópteros civis são mais difíceis de obter 

do que, por exemplo, as da aviação comercial. Nesta, os próprios fabrican-
tes (Embraer, Airbus, Boeing etc.) têm grande tradição na elaboração e na 
publicação, com periodicidade anual, de documentos intitulados Market 
Outlook, com projeções de vendas para os vinte anos seguintes, de forma 
agregada e também segregada por faixas do número de assentos das aero-
naves, por distribuição geográfica etc.; o que não ocorre entre os fabrican-
tes de helicópteros. 

No caso do helicóptero, tem-se que ele, ao contrário dos jatos e tur-
boélices comerciais, não serve às necessidades de linhas aéreas regulares, 
que atendem a passageiros pagantes em quantidades e fluxos de demanda 
bem conhecidos. O helicóptero é um veículo que tem sua atuação justifi-
cada pelo fato de que só ele pode desempenhar determinadas missões. O 
transporte offshore é o que mais se aproxima do transporte aéreo comercial, 
mas, mesmo nesse caso, a demanda atendida é a estritamente especificada 
pela empresa petroleira contratante para seus empregados. Sua expansão 
ou contração dependerá em primeiro lugar da produção petrolífera e não 
de variáveis econômicas exógenas, como no caso da aviação comercial. As 
demais aplicações para helicópteros são mais próximas do transporte tipo 
“táxi aéreo” da aviação convencional, como o transporte VIP, os usos pa-
rapúblicos, jornalísticos, EMS etc.

Ainda que os fabricantes de helicópteros não tenham tradição de 
publicar Market Outlooks, algumas projeções são elaboradas e publica-
das, tais como as já mostradas nos gráficos 1 e 2, que apresentam dados 

Aeronáutica



244 agregados para o setor de forma global. Consultorias especializadas, 
tais qual a Forecast International, chegam a elaborar projeções de frotas 
futuras por modelo de helicóptero, mas de novo considerando apenas o 
mercado global. 

Já a Honeywell, empresa que está entre as mais importantes forne-
cedoras de sistemas e equipamentos para esse setor (e todos os demais 
de A & D – Aeroespaço e Defesa), adota uma metodologia original: a 
cada ano publica uma espécie de survey – um levantamento feito com 
os principais operadores de helicópteros em todo o mundo, intitulado 
Annual Turbine-Powered Civilian Helicopter Purchase Forecast. Trata-
-se de uma estimativa anual de vendas de helicópteros civis movidos a 
turbina, que acaba funcionando como uma espécie de “termômetro do 
mercado” ao refletir as intenções de compras de helicópteros civis a jato 
dos próprios participantes – fabricantes e operadores de helicópteros – 
presentes ao evento.

Na última edição publicada [Aerospace Honeywell (2013)], destinada à 
Heli-Expo 2013, os seguintes pontos mereceram destaque:

•	 De modo amplo, no período 2013-2017, os planos de aquisição de 
novos helicópteros – para substituição e expansão da frota civil – 
apresentaram recuperação de quatro pontos percentuais no agregado 
geral mundial em relação à apuração anterior (2012-2016), sendo que 
os planos específicos para 2013-2015 significariam uma demanda 
bastante robusta.

•	 Se considerado o período total (2013-2017), a América Latina seria a 
região com o maior índice percentual de substituição e expansão da frota 
civil, o qual atingiria 34% do total atual dessa região. Em contraste, o 
mesmo índice para o mercado da América do Norte teria apresentado 
indicação de crescimento pela primeira vez em cinco anos.

•	 Os principais direcionadores das expectativas de compras de novas 
aeronaves seriam a idade e a condição da frota atual, requisitos con-
tratuais normais de renovação de frota ou mudanças nos requisitos 
operacionais que afetam o ciclo de substituição normal, expiração 
de garantias pós-venda e regulamentação, impondo a operação de 
helicópteros biturbina.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



•	 Tão logo a decisão tenha sido tomada (seja para substituição ou para 245
expansão da frota), o fabricante e o modelo a ser adquirido serão 
selecionados com base em critérios como o desempenho da aeronave 
(que incluem o seu alcance e performance em condições de aeródromo 
situado em local quente e elevado), o tamanho da cabine, os registros 
de confiabilidade e segurança do modelo de helicóptero cuja aquisição 
esteja sendo considerada, assim como a experiência demonstrada pelo 
fabricante no mercado civil.

•	 Os três fabricantes mais citados como os que detêm a preferência 
nas intenções de compra de helicópteros civis foram a Eurocopter, 
a Bell Helicopters e a AgustaWestland, e menos de 15% das men-
ções foram direcionadas aos demais fabricantes. Além disso, em 
relação a modelos específicos, os seis mais apontados, por ordem 
alfabética, teriam sido o AW139, os Bell 206, 407 e 412, os EC130/
EC350 e o S-76.

•	 A utilização média anual mostrou forte dependência em relação ao 
segmento de mercado em que cada helicóptero atua. O segmento 
de offshore seria o de uso mais intenso, com 725 horas de voo 
anuais por aeronave, seguido pelos de EMS, treinamento e utility com 
410 a 430 horas, os de polícia e de jornalismo com 375 a 390 horas e, 
por fim, o de transporte executivo com menos de trezentas horas. Isso, 
sem dúvida, coloca o setor de helicópteros na mesma faixa de 
demanda da chamada aviação geral, ou seja, aquela das aeronaves 
convencionais para uso de indivíduos, empresas de táxi aéreo ou 
dos departamentos de voo de grandes corporações. Em contraste, 
na aviação comercial a faixa de utilização anual nunca é inferior 
a mil horas anuais, situando-se na maioria das ocasiões acima de 
três mil horas por aeronave.

•	 Por outro lado, no que diz respeito ao uso pretendido para o 
quantitativo dos novos helicópteros a ser adquirido em todo 
o mundo, 38% se destinariam ao transporte executivo, 22% 
ao segmento de utility, 19% a EMS, 15% ao uso policial, 9% 
a offshore e 1% ao jornalismo; o total supera os 100% porque 
algumas dessas novas aeronaves serão empregadas em mais de 
uma dessas funções.

Aeronáutica



246 O mercado brasileiro é o mais importante da América Latina. Assim, 
como as perspectivas para essa região parecem apontar para uma condição 
bastante positiva de crescimento (o maior índice de substituição e expan-
são da frota etc.), conclui-se que o mercado brasileiro apresenta potencial 
bastante atraente, em particular, o mercado offshore, em especial o novo 
segmento oriundo da camada do pré-sal localizada na costa brasileira. Se-
guem os principais motivos:

•	 Do ponto de vista do mercado global, o setor de transporte offshore 
foi, em boa parte, o sustentáculo de vendas para os fabricantes de 
helicópteros durante o período mais agudo da crise econômico-
-financeira atual, os anos de 2009-2011. Nas principais regiões de 
produção offshore de petróleo do mundo (incluindo o Brasil), as fontes 
vêm sendo localizadas a distâncias cada vez maiores do continente, 
o que demanda a compra de novas aeronaves capazes de oferecer 
maior alcance e, em diversos casos, também com maior capacidade 
de transporte de carga paga relativa a passageiros e equipamentos 
especializados [Citigroup (2013)].

•	 Embora no Brasil os leilões realizados pela Agência Nacional do Pe-
tróleo (ANP) para novas áreas de exploração tenham sido paralisados 
em 2008, a retomada desse processo a partir de 2013, prolongando-se 
pelos anos subsequentes, incluindo as áreas afetas ao pré-sal, traz 
grandes expectativas de crescimento [Valdemar Jr. (2013)]. Na ver-
dade, se a estimativa é de haver mais de 150 helicópteros dedicados 
ao setor no Brasil, segundo algumas previsões esse número vai dobrar 
até 2020, puxado pela demanda por empresas que têm projetos no 
pré-sal [Alonso (2013)].

•	 Por fim, cabe registrar que tanto no Brasil como no resto do mundo 
“[...] mais projetos de extração energética offshore criam a necessidade 
de mais helicópteros para missões SAR (search & rescue)”, ou seja, 
de busca e salvamento [Citigroup (2013, p. 5)].

Como resultado desse quadro, já há especulações no mercado de que 
a Petrobras exigiria, nas regras das novas concorrências públicas para o 
transporte offshore, um percentual crescente do índice de nacionalização 
dos aparelhos selecionados, como a estatal petrolífera vem fazendo em 
outros equipamentos e serviços [Fuhrmann (2013)]. Como é provável que 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



a Helibras teria mais facilidade para satisfazer esse tipo de exigência, tais 247
especulações parecem ter despertado o interesse de outros fabricantes em 
se instalar no Brasil.

Essa teria sido a motivação para o anúncio, feito pela Embraer, em 21 
de janeiro de 2013, da assinatura de um memorando de entendimentos 
que assinalava sua intenção de vir a participar de uma empresa do tipo 
joint venture com a AgustaWestland para a fabricação de helicópteros no 
Brasil. Embora as negociações entre as duas empresas tenham sido en-
cerradas em 19 de abril, data oficial, sem lograr êxito, parece estar longe 
a extinção do interesse de ambas as empresas por uma atuação mais con-
creta no mercado brasileiro de helicópteros, exatamente pelo fato de que 
o segmento offshore seria o forte da AgustaWestland, com seu modelo 
AW139 [Citigroup (2013)]. 

Como visto na seção sobre cooperação internacional, o mercado brasi-
leiro, a caminho de se tornar o quinto maior do mundo em 2013 [Cabral 
(2013)], parece assim ter atingido um nível de maturidade que já desperta 
o interesse de outros fabricantes de helicópteros em se instalarem aqui. O 
futuro dirá, portanto, se tal avaliação se traduzirá em ações concretas de 
novas iniciativas no setor.

Inovação
Ao se tentar analisar a dimensão da inovação na indústria de helicóp-

teros não é possível deixar de compará-la ao que ocorre, por exemplo, na 
seara da aviação comercial. Neste último caso, não é exagero afirmar que 
a inovação é um direcionador de esforços e investimentos constantes. As 
aeronaves comerciais, por exemplo, que disponham de quarenta, setenta, 
cem, duzentos, trezentos ou mesmo quinhentos assentos, são operadas por 
empresas aéreas em ambiente de intensa concorrência, que geram reduzi-
das margens de lucro (quando não prejuízos consideráveis) e estão sujeitas 
à volatilidade no preço do petróleo, em geral sua rubrica de maior dispên-
dio. E tudo sem falar nos requisitos cada vez mais presentes de redução de 
impacto no meio ambiente, como redução das emissões de gases do efeito 
estufa, do ruído, do uso de biocombustíveis etc. – dado que é uma indústria 
com presença global e grande visibilidade para o grande público e a mídia 
de maneira ampla.

Aeronáutica



248 Já no caso da indústria de helicópteros, sua sustentabilidade vem a prin-
cípio de compras governamentais de aeronaves militares. Para estas, a ino-
vação só importa na medida em que atende a requisitos estabelecidos pelas 
Forças Armadas. Nesse ponto, o helicóptero é visto muito mais como uma 
plataforma para vários tipos de armamento e/ou sensores, para o transporte 
de tropa, para a evacuação de feridos etc., em que sua capacidade excep-
cional de executar as missões pretendidas é o que importa. Ou seja, têm-
-se como base requisitos de desempenho operacional em ambientes hostis 
ou de combate e não necessariamente de economicidade, impacto no meio 
ambiente, conforto etc.

Assim, ao se contemplar, por exemplo, as últimas três décadas de de-
senvolvimentos na vertente civil da indústria de helicópteros, o que se per-
cebe é apenas a lenta incorporação de inovações que foram desenvolvidas 
previamente para a aviação comercial ou, em alguns casos, para a chamada 
aviação geral, aquela de pequeno porte. As inovações não parecem “nascer” 
para a aeronave de asas rotativas, mas lá chegam quando seus custos de de-
senvolvimento já foram até certo ponto amortizados pelas vendas ocorridas 
na aviação comercial e geral. Isso parece se dar de forma clara na parte de 
materiais para a construção aeronáutica, eletrônica embarcada (“aviôni-
cos”), propulsão etc. Como exemplo extremo tem-se os comandos de voo 
fly-by-wire7 (digitais): o primeiro modelo a incorporar essa tecnologia será 
o Bell 525 Relentless, com certificação prevista para 2015 e entrada em 
operação em 2016-2017. O Airbus A320 para 150 passageiros já tinha esse 
desenvolvimento desde 1988.

Apesar disso, pode-se constatar que boa parte dos helicópteros civis hoje 
comercializados está, dentro do possível, razoavelmente próxima da tecno-
logia aeronáutica de ponta em geral. Contudo, para desenvolvimentos de 
inovação substanciais, de ruptura mesmo, é necessário que algo extraordi-
nário funcione como “elemento provocador”. Nesse caso, tal personagem é 
um dos maiores operadores – na verdade, o maior operador individual – de 
helicópteros do mundo: o exército dos EUA.

7   Comandos FBW: aqueles em que a sinalização dos comandos de pilotagem da aeronave chega às 
superfícies de comando (ou rotores, como no caso do helicóptero) por meio de sinais elétricos digitalizados 
que acionarão atuadores elétricos ou hidráulicos (e não mais por meio de cabos de aço e polias como 
ocorria desde os primórdios da aviação).

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



O programa Joint Multi-Role (JMR) reflete, no nível do exército dos 249
EUA, suas necessidades, prerrogativas e diretrizes que têm por respaldo os 
trabalhos emanados de grupo de trabalho, constituído no nível do Gabinete 
do Secretário de Defesa, denominado Future Vertical Lift (FVL). A inicia-
tiva é conhecida no mercado como JMR/FVL.

A ideia é fomentar um salto tecnológico, com base em requisitos do 
exército, da marinha e do Comando de operações Especiais (daí a palavra 
“joint”). Além disso, as tecnologias e inovações assim desenvolvidas ser-
viriam para amplo leque de veículos de asas rotativas (daí o “multi-role”), 
que poderia começar com helicópteros leves de apoio tático, passar por al-
guns de porte médio (de combate, utility etc.) e incluir até os mais pesados 
(de transporte de tropa, guerra antissubmarino etc.). Essa nova “família” de 
veículos atenderia, entre outros, aos seguintes requisitos [Warwick (2011)]:

•	 velocidade de cruzeiro acima de 200 nós/370 km/h (nos tempos atuais 
a média está abaixo de 150 nós/280 km/h);

•	 raio de ação para combate de 230 milhas náuticas/425 km;
•	 bom desempenho para operar em localidades situadas até 6 mil pés/ 

1,8 mil metros de altitude e com temperatura de 95ºF/35ºC;
•	 características superiores ao atualmente disponível em relação a custos 

de aquisição/operação, durabilidade e sobrevivência em combate ou 
ambientes hostis;

•	 arquitetura de aviônicos (equipamentos eletrônicos de bordo) com 
núcleo comum a toda a “família”; e

•	 capacidade de operar tanto como Vant (veículo aéreo não tripulado) 
quanto como aeronave pilotada de modo convencional.

Há um reconhecimento tácito de que tais demandas não são atingíveis 
com o atual estado da arte da tecnologia de helicópteros. Daí o empenho 
com que, aparentemente, os órgãos envolvidos vêm se dedicando em as-
segurar os recursos para o desenvolvimento a contento do Programa JMR/
FVL. Na Fase 1, considera-se que haverá dois concorrentes para a cons-
trução da plataforma tecnológica:8 a associação da Boeing com a Sikorsky, 

8   Plataforma tecnológica (technology demonstrator no original inglês) é uma aeronave construída única 
e especificamente para ensaios em voo, desenvolvimentos e validações de determinadas tecnologias, 
as quais ela incorpora pela primeira vez. Sua escala costuma ser menor do que a definitiva, em apenas 
um ou dois exemplares no máximo.

Aeronáutica



250 que vai propor uma solução com base no helicóptero experimental X2 da 
Sikorsky, e a Bell com a tecnologia dos rotores basculantes (do tipo hoje 
empregado no V-22 Osprey).

Figura 6 | Sikiorsky X2

Foto de divulgação Sikorsky. © Copyright Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation. All rights reserved.  
<www.sikorsky.com>.
Nota: O helicóptero X2 é a plataforma tecnológica da Sikorsky para o desenvolvimento das 
inovações vislumbradas para a próxima geração de helicópteros.

Já na Fase 2, estima-se que a Eurocopter tentará tomar parte, oferecendo 
um veículo que se baseie na tecnologia de seu helicóptero experimental X3. 
Embora, nos tempos atuais, só houvesse US$ 110 milhões alocados para se 
iniciar a Fase 1, ao que parece a Sikorsky considera que o JMR/FVL será o 
maior programa de desenvolvimento de helicópteros da história. A explica-
ção para isso é que ele busca a substituição de mais de quatro mil aparelhos 
hoje existentes, com um valor total estimado na casa dos US$ 80 bilhões no 
longo prazo [Citigroup (2013)], e 2027-2028 seria o período pretendido para 
a entrada em serviço da primeira unidade, ou seja, o primeiro helicóptero 
de projeto totalmente original do Exército dos EUA em mais de cinquenta 
anos [Warwick (2011)].

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Figura 7 | Eurocopter X3 251

Foto de divulgação Eurocopter. © Copyright Eurocopter. All rights reserved. <www.eurocopter.com>.
Nota: O helicóptero X3 da Eurocopter representa uma plataforma tecnológica. É um veículo 
experimental, não fabricado em série, e está sendo utilizado para o desenvolvimento de tecnologias 
inovadoras vislumbradas para a próxima geração de helicópteros.

Considerações finais
Em razão do quadro geral da indústria e do mercado de helicópteros ci-

vis apresentado nas seções precedentes, pode-se concluir que os principais 
aspectos afetos a esse setor são:

•	 O emprego de helicópteros civis em todo o mundo é revestido de 
uma característica única: nas missões a que se destinam, não haveria 
outro tipo de aeronave que pudesse substituí-los a contento. Mes-
mo no tão alardeado e esperado crescimento no emprego de Vants 
(veículos aéreos não tripulados) nas próximas décadas [Dimascio 
(2012)], não se vislumbra a substituição dos helicópteros tripulados, 
a não ser para algumas missões de vigilância policial e talvez alguns 
usos jornalísticos.

•	 Apesar disso, a indústria de helicópteros tem como fonte primá-
ria de sustentabilidade, no longo prazo, o setor governamental, 

Aeronáutica



252 por meio do qual se dão as compras de aeronaves militares, que 
respondem por pouco mais de 72% da frota mundial. Se somadas 
as unidades de emprego parapúblico, chega-se a mais de 80% da 
frota mundial operando em ou para governos, com os restantes 
menos de 20% sendo utilizados para finalidades puramente co-
merciais (transporte offshore, táxi aéreo, utility, VIP corporativo, 
jornalístico etc.).

•	 Em vista desse quadro, o apoio governamental a suas indústrias, 
sejam quem forem os controladores das empresas, é sempre pre-
sente, até mesmo na forma de subvenções econômicas com valores 
elevados (recursos a fundo perdido).

•	 Os dois pontos anteriores têm, no caso brasileiro, a sua compro-
vação inconteste na história da Helibras. De fato, não segue os 
cânones estabelecidos uma empresa dedicada a montar praticamen-
te apenas um tipo de helicóptero (o Esquilo), ainda que popular 
ao extremo, em adição à prestação de serviços de manutenção e 
na entrega desse e de outros tipos fabricados no exterior por sua 
controladora, mesmo que para os mercados civil e militar da Amé-
rica do Sul. A empresa, segundo declarações públicas de seu atual 
presidente, chegou aos 35 anos de existência por motivos outros 
que não a remuneração aos acionistas, tendo até estado muito pró-
xima de fechamento em 2004. Por outro lado, o momento atual é 
bem positivo, impulsionado por compras governamentais militares 
de aproximadamente €  1,9  bilhão para as três Forças Armadas 
brasileiras, até mesmo com repercussões para a cadeia produtiva 
do país e diversas instituições de ensino superior e pesquisa, em 
Itajubá e arredores.

•	 No bojo desse momento positivo, existe a iniciativa e o com-
promisso de que a Helibras venha a desenvolver, até 2020, um 
helicóptero todo novo, algo inédito para o Brasil, e que integra-
ria o portfólio global (e não mais apenas a América do Sul) da 
Eurocopter. Com isso, o país poderá, potencialmente, ficar mais 
parecido com outros países que têm indústrias de helicópteros 
sediadas em seus territórios, ainda mais se os EC225 (a versão 
civil do militar EC725 que gerou o contrato de €  1,9  bilhão) 

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



que também estão sendo montados em Itajubá lograrem êxito no 253
mercado brasileiro de offshore, o segmento no qual a Helibras 
registra uma participação reduzida até agora.

Nesse ponto, o papel do BNDES adquire importância, uma vez que 
as aeronaves fabricadas no país, com um programa progressivo de na-
cionalização de partes e peças, estão credenciadas na Finame e, portan-
to, são passíveis de ser financiadas a longo prazo, em reais; o que atrai 
diversos tipos de operadores de helicópteros.

O Brasil continua sendo um mercado atraente para os principais 
fabricantes de helicópteros do mundo, não só pelas recentes taxas de 
crescimento desse mercado, como pelas perspectivas da exploração do 
pré-sal e pelo fato de que a maioria das aeronaves, independentemente 
de sua origem, já conta com serviços de manutenção, reparo e revisão 
feitos no país. 

Existe a hipótese de uma segunda indústria de helicópteros se ins-
talar no Brasil? Pelo que foi visto ao longo do presente trabalho, se 
for uma indústria para helicópteros mono ou biturbina, de porte leve 
ou médio para cima, a resposta só será sim se compras governamentais 
militares, complementadas por parapúblicas e comerciais, forem con-
sideradas viáveis o suficiente. Já uma indústria para helicópteros bási-
cos de treinamento, uso jornalístico etc., como a faixa dos R obinsons 
e Schweizers, ou até inferiores, pode ser perfeitamente viável desde 
que, como qualquer indústria aeronáutica, seu mercado potencial seja 
o mundo todo. 

Entretanto, o que parece mais atraente para o país no curto e no mé-
dio prazo seria, como já faz o México, o fomento à cadeia produtiva. 
Instrumentos adequados e direcionados de fomento podem fazer com 
que esse setor se expanda em razão das oportunidades de curto prazo 
trazidas pela expansão da Helibras e, no médio prazo, empresas desse 
setor possam fornecer para outras cadeias produtivas localizadas nos 
mais diversos países. Nesse sentido, o BNDES Proengenharia, as linhas 
de inovação e o Inova AeroDefesa (em parceria com a Financiadora de 
Estudos e Projetos – Finep), os dois últimos integrantes do Plano Brasil 
Maior, são passos na direção certa.

Aeronáutica



254

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial

Anexo 1 | Tabela dos helicópteros civis produzidos por fabricante

Fabricante/ Peso  máximo de Tripulantes/ Velocidade de Alcance Observação
nome do decolagem (kg) passageiros cruzeiro (km/h) (km)
helicóptero
AgustaWestland 
AW 101 15.600 2/30 278 1.390 O maior dessa categoria. Tem três turbinas 

RTM3222 (ou GE CT7), sendo assim voltado para o 
transporte VIP, busca e salvamento e offshore.

AW 109 Power 3.000 1/7 285 948 Biturbina Turbomeca Arrius 2K-1, bem vendido no 
Brasil.

AW 119 2.850 1/7 257 1.015 Monoturbina Pratt & Whitney PT6B-37A, teve 
Ke (Koala a performance melhorada, cabine adequada para 
enhanced) serviços médicos de emergência.
AW 139 6.400 2/14 305 1.060 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PT6C-67C, de última 

geração, transporte executivo (bagageiro acessível 
em voo) e offshore, bem aceito no Brasil.

Grand 3.175 1/7 ou 287 800 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PW207C, novo modelo 
2/6 derivado do AW 109, ampla cabine, foco na redução 

de custos operacionais.
Bell Helicopters
206L-4 Long 1.535 1/6 210 600 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C30P, evolução 
Ranger ampliada do popular Jet Ranger, um dos mais 

vendidos do mundo, missões parapúblicas, VIP etc.
407 2.270 1/6 250 615 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C47B, sucessor 

do Long Ranger, com mais conforto e melhor 
desempenho.

Continua



255Continuação
Fabricante/ Peso  máximo de Tripulantes/ Velocidade de Alcance Observação
nome do decolagem (kg) passageiros cruzeiro (km/h) (km)
helicóptero
412EP 5.400 1-2/14- 226 660 Biturbina Pratt & Whtney PT6T-3D, versão civil do 

13 legendário UH-1H Huey, uso executivo e offshore, 
frota com alto índice de despachabilidade.

429 3.175 1/7 265 676 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PW207D, aeronave de 
última geração, ampla cabine desobstruída, permite 
vários arranjos, até mesmo duas macas com dois 
atendentes.

Enstrom
F28 Falcon 1.180 1/2 180 425 Monomotor a pistão Lycoming HIO-360-F1AD, 

popular p/ instrução e aplicações parapúblicas.
280FX Shark 1.200 1/2 180 425 Evolução do F28, com motor turbo Lycoming 

HIO-360-F1AD, fuselagem redesenhada e melhor 
desempenho operacional.

480B 1.360 1/4 215 685 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C20W, visa ao 
mercado do Bell 206 e MD 500, sendo mais leve e 
econômico para múltiplas missões.

EADS - Eurocopter
AS 332L1 9.350 2/20 262 840 Biturbina Turbomeca Makila 1A1, ampla cabine 
Super Puma p/ passageiros ou carga, mercado offshore e o mais 

utilizado por chefes de Estado (inclusive no Brasil).
AS 350B3 2.250 1/5-6 245 665 Monoturbina Turbomeca Arriel 1D1, é o foco 
Esquilo da Helibras há décadas, mais de 450 unidades 

entregues no país p/ uso parapúblico, executivo, 
Forças Armadas etc.

Continua

Aeronáutica



256

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial

Continuação
Fabricante/ Peso  máximo de Tripulantes/ Velocidade de Alcance Observação
nome do decolagem (kg) passageiros cruzeiro (km/h) (km)
helicóptero

AS 355N 2.600 1/5-6 222 730 Biturbina Turbomeca Arrius 1A1, destaca-se no 
Esquilo Bi transporte executivo, em missões policiais, altitudes 

elevadas, resgate no mar e offshore.
AS 365N-3 4.300 2/12 270 790 Biturbina Turbomeca Arriel 2C, foco em operações 
Dauphin em locais quentes e elevados, bom desempenho em 

múltiplas missões, bem aceito no Brasil.
EC 120 Colibri 1.715 1/4 223 710 Monoturbina Turbomeca Arrius 2F, bem aceito no 

Brasil p/ transporte civil e policial pela versatilidade e 
ruído reduzido (rotor de cauda tipo Fenestron).

EC 130B4 2.427 1/6-7 240 610 Monoturbina Turbomeca Arriel 2B1, evolução do 
Esquilo, foco no mercado de transporte urbano pelo 
ruído reduzido (rotor Fenestron).

EC 135 2.910 1/7 ou 2/6 255 635 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PW206B2, ou Arrius 2B2, 
leve, multifunção, bem vendido no Brasil, apresenta 
avanços tecnológicos significativos.

EC 145 3.585 1/9 ou 2/8 245 680 Biturbina Turbomeca Arriel 1E2, tem cabine deso-
bstruída p/ ampla variedade de missões, inclusive p/ 
serviços médicos e de polícia.

EC 155B 4.920 2/13 265 790 Biturbina Turbomeca Arriel 2C2, evolução do Dau-
phin, foco no mercado offshore e executivo (tem um 
dos maiores bagageiros da categoria).

EC 175 7.500 2/16-18 278 700 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PT6C-67E, último lança-
mento da Eurocopter, situa-se entre o EC155/Duphin 
e o Super Puma.

EC 225 8.600 2/20 262 840 Biturbina Makila 2A, evolução do Super Puma, foco 
no transporte VIP e offshore, com reduzidos custos de 
manutenção.

Continua



257Continuação
Fabricante/ Peso  máximo de Tripulantes/ Velocidade de Alcance Observação
nome do decolagem (kg) passageiros cruzeiro (km/h) (km)
helicóptero
MD Helicopters
500E 1.360 1/4 250 470 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C20R, destaca-se por 

ser o mais veloz – e com a maior cabine – de sua 
categoria.

520N 1.520 1-2/4-3 240 400 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C20R, destaca-se 
pela boa relação carga útil/peso vazio, e a redução 
de ruído p/ sistema Notar (sem rotor de cauda). 

530F 1.406 1/4 250 430 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C30, é a versão de 
alto desempenho (p/ operação em locais quentes e 
elevados) do 500E.

600N 1.860 1/7 250 705 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C47, é versão 
alongada do 520N p/ maior carga paga.

Explorer 902 2.835 1/7 250 475 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PW207E, tem foco no 
mercado multimissão, offshore, policial, médico etc., 
inclusive em ambientes urbanos p/ sistema Notar.

Robinson
R-22 Beta II 623 1/1 180 490 Monomotor a pistão Lycoming O-360 é um dos 

mais populares helicópteros do mundo, utilizado 
em instrução, p/ a imprensa, transporte em geral e 
pulverização agrícola.

R-44 Raven II 1.135 1/3 217 560 Monomotor a pistão Lycoming O-540 c/ injeção 
direta, é versão alongada do R-22, para quatro 
ocupantes e de melhor performance.

R-66 Turbine 1.225 1/4 223 600 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 300, é a evolução do 
R-44, mais confortável, com melhor desempenho e 
mais um ocupante.

Continua

Aeronáutica



258

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial

Continuação
Fabricante/ Peso  máximo de Tripulantes/ Velocidade de Alcance Observação
nome do decolagem (kg) passageiros cruzeiro (km/h) (km)
helicóptero
Sikorsky
Schweizer 930 1/1-2 159 360 Monomotor a pistão Lycoming HIO-360-G1A, 
300C projeto original de 1964, é um dos helicópteros 

mais populares, frota mundial de mais de 2,5 mil 
unidades, utilização similar à do R-22 acima.

Schweizer 333 1.155 1-2/1-3 195 590 Monoturbina Rolls Royce 250-C20W, foco nos 
menores custos operacionais de sua categoria.

S-76D 5.306 2/6 285 818 Biturbina Pratt & Whitney PW210S, última versão 
da linha S-76, agora entrando no mercado médio 
porte, p/ missões corporativas, VIP e offshore (no 
Brasil, foi bem aceito nessa função nas suas versões 
anteriores).

S-92 12.020 2/19 280 999 Biturbina GE CT7-8A, categoria médio-pesado, tem 
forte utilização offshore (Brasil), transporte VIP e de 
chefes de Estado.

Fonte: Elaboração própria, com base nos dados divulgados pelos fabricantes.



Anexo 2 | Manutenção de motores de helicóptero no Brasil – empresas 259
certificadas pela Anac

Fabricante Modelo Helicóptero cor- Empresas com CHE*  Total de 
do motor do motor respondente para manutenção do modelo empresas 

do motor
Rolls Royce 250 - C20R MD 500E; 520N Helipark; AgustaWestland; 8

Helimar; Keystone; Líder 
Aviação; TC Eusébio; Ultra 
Ver; WM Manut

250 - C20W S - 333; 480E  Helipark; Edra Aero Ipeúna; 4
Helit; Keystone

250 - C30 MD530F  Helipark; Aeróleo; Flyone 9
Aracaju; Helisul; Keystone; 
Líder Aviação; TC Eusébio; 
Ultra Ver; WM Manut

250 - C47 MD 600N Helipark 1

300 R-66 Helipark 1

250 - C30P Bell 206-4 Helipark; Aeróleo; Tucson 3
Aviação

250 - C47B Bell 407 Helipark; Helistar; Helisul; 5
Keystone; Líder Aviação

RTM3222 AW 101 0

Pratt & PT6B - 37A AW 119 Ke Helipark; PWC do Brasil; 5
Withney AgustaWestland; Fênix 

(Goiânia); Ultra Ver

PT6C - 67C AW 139 PWC do Brasil; Aeróleo; 3
Agusta Westland

PT6C - 67E EC 175 PWC do Brasil 1

PT6T - 3D Bell 412 PWC do Brasil; Fênix 3
(Goiânia); Helisul

PW206B2 EC 135 PWC do Brasil; Rotortrans; 4
Helibras; Omni

PW207D AW Grand; Bell Helipark; PWC do Brasil; Líder 3
429 Aviação

PW207E MD Explorer 902 PWC do Brasil 1

Continua

Aeronáutica



260 Continuação
Fabricante Modelo Helicóptero cor- Empresas com CHE*  Total de 
do motor do motor respondente para manutenção do modelo empresas 

do motor
Turbomeca Arriel 1D1 AS 350B3 Ancoratek; Claro BH; Copters 22

do Brasil; Flyone Aracaju; 
Helibras; Helimar; Helistar; 
Helisul; Helit; Keystone; Líder 
Aviação; Maricá; North Star 
Fortaleza; PMR Porto Alegre; 
TAF Táxi Aéreo; Tucson 
Aviação; Ultra Rev; Weston 
Recife; WM Manut

Arriel 1E2 EC 145 Turbomeca; Helibras; WM 3
Manut  

Arriel 2B1 EC 130  Helistar; Líder Aviação; 9
Tucson Aviação; Turbomeca; 
Ultra Ver; WM Manut

Arriel 2C AS 365N-3 Helipark; Rotortrans; Helibras; 6
Keystone; Turbomeca; WM 
Manut 

Arriel 2C2 EC 155 Helipark; Rotortrans; Helibras; 7
Keystone; Omni; Turbomeca; 
Wm Manut 

Arriel 2S2 S-76C BHS; Keystone; Líder Aviação; 7
Líder Táxi Aéreo; Omni; 
Turbomeca; Ultra Ver

Arrius 2F EC 120 Helipark ; Turbomeca; Copters 10
do Brasil; Helibras; Helistar; 
Helisul; Líder Aviação; Tucson 
Aviação; Ultra Ver; Wm Manut 

Arrius 2K-1 AW 109 Turbomeca 1

Makila 1A1 AS 332 L1; AS Turbomeca; BHS 2
355N

Makila 2A EC 225 Turbomeca; BHS; Omni 3

Lycoming O - 360 R-22 Power Helicópteros; Globo 8
Aviação; Ancoratek; Cheyenne 
Atibaia; Claro Bh; Helialfa; 
Helifor; Helisul

Continua

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



Continuação 261

Fabricante Modelo Helicóptero cor- Empresas com CHE*  Total de 
do motor do motor respondente para manutenção do modelo empresas 

do motor
O - 540 R-44 Power Helicópteros; Globo 8

Aviação; Ancoratek; Cheyenne 
Atibaia; Claro Bh; Helialfa; 
Helifor; Helisul; Taf Táxi 
Aéreo 

HIO - 360 - Schweizer 300C Globo Aviação 1
G1A

HIO - 360 - F28; 280FX Globo Aviação; Cheyenne 3
F1AD Atibaia; Helit 

GE - General CT7 - 8A S-92 BHS 1
Electric

Fonte: Conforme última atualização em 2 de março de 2011, disponibilizado no site da Anac:  
<http://www2.anac.gov.br/certificacao/AvGeral/AIR145BasesPadrao.
asp?StdCodi=07&StdPadrao=D3>. Consultado em 22 de fevereiro de 2013.
* CHE (Certificado de Homologação da Empresa).

Referências
Aerospace Honeywell. 15th Annual Turbine-Powered Civilian 
Helicopter Purchase Forecast. Disponível em: <www.aerospace.
honeywell.com>.  Acesso em: 27 mar. 2013.
Alonso, O. Waypoint traz ao Brasil leasing de helicópteros para 
petroleiras. Valor Econômico, São Paulo, p. B9, 12 jun. 2013.
Cabral, M. Duelo no ar. Época Negócios, São Paulo, n. 73, mar. 2013,  
p. 64.
Citigroup. Up & Away, Helicopter Industry Energized as it Flies Into 
New Growth Phase. Citi Research Equities, Citigroup Global Markets 
Inc., p. 5 e 7, 20 mar. 2013. Disponível em: <http://www.citivelocity.
com>. Acesso em: 20 mar. 2013.
Dimascio, J. On deck. Aviation Week & Space Technology, p. 66-68,  
fev. 2012.
EADS.  Aerospace & Defense, Equity Research, Europe/France. Credit 
Suisse AG report, 6 mar. 2013.

Aeronáutica



262 Fallows, J. China Airborne. Nova York: Random House, 2012.
Fuhrmann, L. Alta rotação. Avião Revue, São Paulo, n. 162, p. 44,  
mar. 2013a. 
______. Planos traçados. Avião Revue, São Paulo, n. 164, p. 48,  
mai. 2013b.
Gomes, S.B.V. A Indústria Aeronáutica no Brasil: Evolução Recente e 
Perspectivas. BNDES 60 Anos: Perspectivas Setoriais, v. 1, p. 138-185. 
Rio de Janeiro: BNDES, out. 2012.
Helibras. Helibras no Ar (Publicação Informativa da Helibras), São 
Paulo, n. 38, ano 20, abr. 2013.
Laux, P. Helibras planeja voos maiores. Avião Revue, São Paulo, n. 164, 
p. 43, mai. 2013.
Leboulanger, A. Global Civil and Military Helicopter Market. Frost & 
Sullijanvan, ago. 2012. Disponível em: <http://www.frost.com/sublib/
display-market-insight-top.do?id=265174617>. Acesso em: 5 mar. 2013.
Nelms, D. Simpler is Better. Revista Aviation Week & Space technology, 
Nova York, p. 47-48, 25 fev. 2013.
Oliver, S. Um mercado que só cresce. AERO Magazine, ano 19, n. 223, 
dez. 2012. 
Pereira, R. O helicóptero que fez a Helibras. Avião Revue, São Paulo,  
n. 160, p. 74, jan. 2013.
Perrett, B. Outsource Model. Revista Aviation Week & Space 
Technology, p. 44, 26 set. 2011.
Rigsby, M. Rotorcraft Operations and Statistics. Proceedings from 
Aviation Human Factors and SMS Conference, Federal Aviation 
Administration, mar. 2011.
Royce, D. Looking for Lift. Aviation Week & Space Technology, 24-31 
jan. 2011, p. 132.
Silveira, V. Helibrás está mais perto do primeiro projeto nacional. Valor 
Econômico, São Paulo, p. B10, 4 mar. 2013.
Valdemar Junior. Céu azul à vista. Avião Revue, São Paulo, n. 163, p. 88, 
abr. 2013a.

O setor aeronáutico de helicópteros civis no mundo e no Brasil – análise setorial



______. Investimentos constantes, Guia de manutenção, Oficinas/ 263
Helicópteros. Avião Revue, São Paulo, n. 165, p. 86-90, jun. 2013b.
Warwick, G. Spinning up. Aviation Week & Space Technology, Nova 
York, p. 30, 12 set. 2011.
______. Rotary Rebound. Aviation Week & Space Technology, Nova 
York, p. 85, 7 jan. 2013.

Sites consultados	
AgustaWestland – <www.agustawestland.com/print/node/5379>.
Anac – Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil – <www2.anac.gov.br/rab/
servicos/certidao_inteiro.asp>.
Aviation Today. – <www.aviationtoday.com/rw/commercial/ems/
HeliVert-Built-AW139-Takes-Flight-in-Russia>.
Aviation Week – <www.aviationweek.com/awin/ArticlesStory.aspx?id=/
article-xml/AW_02_25_2013_p50-548410.xml>.
EADS – European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company –  
<www.eads.com/eads/int/en/investor-relations/Debt/key-figures.html>. 
Eurocopter – <www.eurocopter.com/site/en/ref/HELIBRAS_363.html>.
Helibras – <www.helibras.com.br/a-helibras_historico.php>.
Sikorsky – <www.sikorsky.com/About+Sikorsky/News/Press+Details?pr
essvcmid=ec821075c9257210VgnVCM1000004f62529Frcrd>. 
Wikipédia – <www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TAI/AgustaWestland_T-129>.

Aeronáutica



  

UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO 

CENTRO DE FILOSOFIA E CIÊNCIAS HUMANAS 

ESCOLA DE SERVIÇO SOCIAL 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

O TRABALHO NAS PLATAFORMAS MARÍTIMAS DE PETRÓLEO 

NA BACIA DE CAMPOS: 

A IDENTIDADE DO TRABALHADOR OFFSHORE 

 

 

 

 

 

Rose Mery dos Santos Costa Leite 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Julho de 2006 

 



 ii

O TRABALHO NAS PLATAFORMAS MARÍTIMAS DE PETRÓLEO 

NA BACIA DE CAMPOS: 

A IDENTIDADE DO TRABALHADOR OFFSHORE 

 

 

Rose Mery dos Santos Costa Leite 

 

 

DISSERTAÇÃO SUBMETIDA AO CORPO DOCENTE DA COORDENAÇÃO DOS 
PROGRAMAS DE PÓS-GRADUAÇÃO DE SERVIÇO SOCIAL DA 
UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO COMO PARTE DOS 
REQUISITOS NECESSÁRIOS PARA A OBTENÇÃO DO GRAU DE MESTRE EM 
SERVIÇO SOCIAL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

_____________________________________ 
Prof. Erimaldo Matias Nicácio 

 

_____________________________________ 
Prof ª Andréa Moraes Alves 

 
 

_____________________________________ 
Prof. Milton Raimundo Cidreira de Athayde 

 

 

 

 

RIO DE JANEIRO, RJ – BRASIL 
JULHO DE 2006 



 iii

Resumo da Dissertação apresentada ao Programa de Pós Graduação em Serviço Social/ 

UFRJ como parte dos requisitos necessários para a obtenção do grau de Mestre em 

Serviço Social. 

 

O TRABALHO NAS PLATAFORMAS MARÍTIMAS DE PETRÓLEO 

NA BACIA DE CAMPOS: 

A IDENTIDADE DO TRABALHADOR OFFSHORE 

 

 

 

Rose Mery dos Santos Costa Leite 

Julho de 2006 

 

 

Orientador: Erimaldo Matias Nicácio 

Programa: Serviço Social 

 

 

O presente estudo se propõe a pesquisar sobre o processo de construção da 

identidade do trabalhador offshore, próprio da Petrobras, na Bacia de Campos, região do 

norte fluminense do estado do Rio de Janeiro. É uma atividade que submete estes 

profissionais a inúmeros riscos e a uma condição de confinamento nas plataformas 

marítimas de petróleo por um período de quatorze dias.  Esta análise se desenvolve a 

partir da configuração da empresa, enquanto estatal, se estendendo posteriormente para 

a área de exploração e produção, especificamente a Bacia de Campos, procurando 

mostrar que o processo de construção identitária se formou num eixo de ambigüidades e 

tensões, presentes pela dicotomia entre trabalho e vida, embarque e desembarque. Além 

disso, descreve e investiga o modo como estes trabalhadores interpretam suas condições 

de trabalho, em particular, o risco.  



 iv 

Abstract of the Master’s Dissertation presented at the Federal University of Rio de 

Janeiro’s Social Work Graduation Program as a part of the requirements for the 

attainment of the degree of Master in Social Work. 

 

 

WORK AT THE MARITIME PLATFORMS OF OIL IN BACIA DE CAMPOS: 

THE OFFSHORE WORKER´S IDENTITY 

 

 

Rose Mery dos Santos Costa Leite 

July 2006 

 

 

Advisor: Erimaldo Matias Nicácio  

Program: Social Work 

 

 

The present study intends to research about the process of construction of the 

identity of the offshore worker, characteristic of Petrobras, in the Campos Basin, a 

region north of the Rio de Janeiro state. This is an activity which makes these 

professionals subject to countless risks as well as to a confinement condition at 

maritime oil platforms for a period of fourteen days. This analysis has been developed 

from a historical perspective, since the company’s configuration, as a state agency, to 

the company’s extension towards the exploration and production areas, particularly the 

Campos Basin, seeking to demonstrate that an axle of ambiguity and tensions, which 

were present due to the dichotomy between work and life, boarding and landing. 

Beyond that, describes and research how these professionals understand their conditions 

of work, in particular, the risk.  



 v 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dedico este trabalho aos inúmeros trabalhadores da indústria petrolífera 

offshore, particularmente os da Bacia de Campos.  

Aos heróis anônimos que construíram a história de crescimento, de recordes e de 

prêmios, mas que permanecem, ainda, como grandes desconhecidos. 

“Vejam como é bom trabalhar embarcado durante 14 dias e folgar 21, podendo andar 

de helicóptero na ida e na volta do trabalho e, ainda, poder ter experiências 

emocionantes para contar aos netos, se sobreviver...”. 

(fala de um trabalhador offshore) 



 vi 

Agradecimentos 

 

 

 Agradeço, inicialmente, ao professor Erimaldo Matias Nicácio que, além de ter 

contribuído diretamente durante toda a elaboração desse trabalho, me incentivou, 

principalmente, nos momentos difíceis dessa trajetória. 

 Ao professor e amigo Carlos Eduardo Bielschowsky, presidente da Fundação 

Cecierj/Consórcio Cederj pela acolhida, pela força, pelas horas cedidas na elaboração 

desse trabalho.  

 Ao amigo petroleiro Germano Alvarenga pelas horas de contribuições teóricas 

sobre a temática desta pesquisa, pelo material cedido, pelos caminhos abertos e pelos 

anos de amizade. 

 À amiga Flora Daemon pelos momentos compartilhados de apreensões e 

dúvidas e pela grande ajuda na revisão dos textos.  

 Às amigas do Cederj Elisabeth Britto, Marta Strauch e Ana Teresa Andrade pelo 

incentivo e estímulo na continuidade da caminhada. 

 À gerente de Ambiência Organizacional da Bacia de Campos Leila Brito, por ter 

de imediato autorizado a pesquisa.  

 Aos trabalhadores offshore, entrevistados, pois sem a sua disponibilidade, 

interesse e colaboração esse trabalho não poderia ter sido realizado.  

 À Maria das Graças Alcântara, assistente social do Sindicato dos Petroleiros do 

Norte Fluminense - Sindipetro NF, pela presteza e disponibilidade em ajudar e buscar as 

informações.  

 Aos amigos Albano Auri, Carlos Köhler, Cristiane Piomonte, Cristina 

Nascimento, Márcia Castello, Patrícia de Faveri, Regina Cavalcante, Teresa Torres e 

Valnéa Paes que compartilharam de experiências importantes durante minha trajetória 

na Petrobras.  

 À Jaelir e Talita pelas muitas horas roubadas, pela compreensão, pela paciência, 

pelo incentivo e estímulo diante dos obstáculos e surpresas que a vida, por vezes, nos 

apresenta.  

 



 vii 

SUMÁRIO 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUÇÃO..........................................................................................................1 
 
 
 
 

CAPÍTULO I – A PETROBRAS – UM POUCO DE HISTÓRIA 
 
1.1. A Petrobras – como tudo começou............................................................................9 

1.2. Exploração e Produção – a área que cresce.............................................................26 

1.3. O processo de exploração e produção de petróleo offshore.....................................28 

1.4. Tipos de plataformas................................................................................................32 

1.5. A implantação da indústria offshore na Bacia de Campos.......................................34 

1.6. Bacia de Campos – E hoje, como está?....................................................................38 

1.7. A plataforma marítima de petróleo..........................................................................40 

 
 
 
 

CAPÍTULO II – A AMBIGÜIDADE DO TRABALHADOR 
OFFSHORE 

 
2.1. Introdução................................................................................................................44 

2.2. Tradição....................................................................................................................53 

2.3. Crachá – que identidade é essa?...............................................................................65 

2.4. A influência do mar..................................................................................................67 

2.5. A não visibilidade offshore .....................................................................................72 

 



 viii 

CAPÍTULO III – VIDA E TRABALHO NO MUNDO OFFSHORE 
 
3.1. Como chegar na plataforma.....................................................................................78 

3.2. O confinamento – vida e trabalho............................................................................81 

3.3. Síndrome de Offshore..............................................................................................99 

3.4. TPE, TPD ..............................................................................................................101 

        3.4.1. Como esses trabalhadores enfrentam os efeitos da TPE?...........................105 

3.5. O desembarque – 21 dias de folgas........................................................................112 

        3.5.1. O significado do desembarque....................................................................112 

        3.5.2. As dificuldades e angústias do desembarque..............................................116 

 
 
 
 

CAPÍTULO IV – O TRABALHO OFFSHORE NA BACIA DE 
CAMPOS 

 
4.1. O enfrentamento do risco.......................................................................................124 

4.2. Trabalho offshore em turnos..................................................................................133 

4.3. Os acidentes de trabalho matam.............................................................................142 

4.4. Os acidentes industriais ampliados........................................................................159 

4.5. O aprendizado e a lição de casa – PCE-1 e P-36...................................................161 

 
 
 

CAPÍTULO V – AS ESTRATÉGIAS DEFENSIVAS OFFSHORE 
 
5.1. Introdução..............................................................................................................170 

5.2. Medo......................................................................................................................178 

5.3. Cooperação, companheirismo e reconhecimento...................................................194 

5.4. Saber offshore.........................................................................................................205 



 ix

CONCLUSÃO.........................................................................................219 
 
BIBLIOGRAFIA.....................................................................................223 
 
ANEXOS 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 1 

INTRODUÇÃO 

 
 
 O presente estudo se propõe a pesquisar sobre o processo de construção da 

identidade do trabalhador offshore, próprio da Petrobras, na Bacia de Campos, região do 

norte fluminense do estado do Rio de Janeiro. É uma atividade que submete estes 

profissionais a inúmeros riscos e a uma condição de confinamento nas plataformas 

marítimas de petróleo por um período de quatorze dias.  Esta análise se desenvolve a 

partir da configuração da empresa, enquanto estatal, se estendendo posteriormente para 

a área de exploração e produção, especificamente a Bacia de Campos, procurando 

mostrar que o processo de construção identitária se formou num eixo de ambigüidades e 

tensões, presentes pela dicotomia entre trabalho e vida, embarque e desembarque. Além 

disso, descreve e investiga o modo como estes trabalhadores interpretam suas condições 

de trabalho, em particular, o risco.  

 A complexidade do universo offshore tem despertado, ao longo dos anos, 

interesses de vários pesquisadores, principalmente vinculados à linhas de pesquisas no 

campo das aplicações de tecnologias específicas a essa atividade.  

 No entanto, mais recentemente, na década de 90, algumas produções científicas 

foram elaboradas a partir do ponto de vista dos trabalhadores que operam na indústria 

petrolífera offshore.   

  Em primeiro lugar, destacamos as dissertações de mestrado, de Choueri1 (1991) 

e de Rodrigues2 (2001) que analisam a realidade das plataformas marítimas de 

perfuração da Bacia de Campos. A primeira identifica os fatores que contribuem para a 

formação de um quadro de satisfação ou insatisfação dos trabalhadores nas equipes, 

bem como estabelece uma correlação entre os índices de produtividade e os graus de 

satisfação ou insatisfação. A segunda analisa as relações de trabalho nestas instalações 

marítimas, bem como os riscos aos quais esses trabalhadores estão expostos.  

                                                
1 Choeuri Jr., N. Equipes de perfuração marítima – uma análise das relações sociais, das condições de 
trabalho e de produtividade.  
2 Rodrigues, V. Relações de trabalho em Unidades de perfuração marítima – estudo de caso com ênfase 
em trabalho em turnos. 



 2 

 Internamente à empresa, cabe o registro de duas pesquisas desenvolvidas em 

épocas bastante distintas. Na década de 80, o estudo intitulado “Perfil do Homem 

Offshore3” que estabeleceu a interdependência entre as condições de trabalho offshore e 

a saúde dos trabalhadores. E uma outra pesquisa, em 2000, com o título de “Os 

funcionários embarcados da Bacia de Campos e a proposta de alteração do regime de 

trabalho4” junto a executivos da Petrobras e trabalhadores offshore, com o objetivo de 

conhecer a percepção destes sobre as propostas empreendidas pela empresa, de 

mudança do regime de trabalho, de 14 por 21 para 14 por 14. Cabe mencionar que os 

resultados de ambos estudos não foram divulgados externamente à empresa e, 

internamente, somente em alguns fóruns específicos.  

 Um outro trabalho importante se refere à dissertação de mestrado de Pessanha5 

(1994), na qual analisa os reflexos das inovações tecnológicas e das mudanças 

organizacionais na indústria do petróleo offshore sobre o conteúdo do trabalho dos 

operadores de produção.   

 Deve-se ainda, mencionar a pesquisa desenvolvida por Siqueira Silva6 (1997), 

sobre a saúde mental dos trabalhadores embarcados, por solicitação do Sindicato dos 

Petroleiros da Região Norte Fluminense (Sindipetro NF). Esta pesquisadora também 

participou juntamente com Losicer de um estudo intitulado “Intervenção Clínico-

Institucional7” que a partir de entrevistas com trabalhadores offshore identificou as 

questões que estavam, na época, contribuindo para que um elevado número de 

trabalhadores estivesse solicitando a saída desse regime de trabalho.   

                                                
3 Para coordenação dessa pesquisa foi formada uma equipe interdisciplinar, com profissionais da 
Petrobras e de instituições externas de pesquisa. Foi feito um estudo estatístico para definição da amostra 
que representasse o universo offshore na Bacia de Campos. A pesquisa foi desenvolvida utilizando-se 
entrevistas e a aplicação de um questionário. Tratava de questões referentes às relações de trabalho, às 
relações familiares e sociais, condições de trabalho, perspectivas pessoais e profissionais etc. É 
importante mencionar, que nessa época o regime offshore era estruturado por 14 dias de trabalho e 14 de 
folgas, em terra.  
4 Para desenvolvimento da pesquisa foram realizadas entrevistas com gerentes e discussões em grupo com 
trabalhadores offshore da Bacia de Campos.  
5 Pessanha, R. M. O trabalho offshore – inovação tecnológica, organização do trabalho e qualificação do 
operador de produção na Bacia de Campos. É um estudo que analisa o impacto das condições de trabalho 
e das inovações tecnológicas sobre o conteúdo do trabalho do cargo, atualmente, denominado de operador 
de petróleo. 
6 Siqueira Silva, V. Transtornos mentais que acometem os embarcados. Essa pesquisa é parte integrante 
de um estudo mais amplo, sobre os efeitos da vida profissional offshore na formação e estruturação 
familiar, especificamente sobre os filhos menores.  
7 Foram realizados vários embarques em plataformas da Bacia de Campos com objetivo de elaboração de 
um diagnóstico, a partir do material coletado junto aos trabalhadores offshore.  



 3 

 Losicer8, posteriormente, escreveu dois artigos, sendo que um deles analisa a 

questão do confinamento em alto mar, a partir de depoimentos com trabalhadores 

quando do embarque do pesquisador em várias plataformas de petróleo. Um segundo 

que discute sobre a singularidade da vida do trabalhador offshore, retratando 

particularmente o acidente da plataforma P-36, em 2001, na Bacia de Campos.  

 Acrescenta-se, nessa linha, a dissertação de Bartolotti9 (2002) que discuti o 

cotidiano e o isolamento do homem offshore da Bacia de Campos, a partir do estudo 

entre as condições de trabalho e a vida familiar.  

 Nessa linha, registramos os trabalhos de Marinho10 et al, que trata do 

agravamento do risco de acidentes e das condições de trabalho nas atividades da região 

da Bacia de Campos; Sevá Filho11 e Freitas12 sobre a ocorrência de acidentes de grandes 

proporções, conhecidos como acidentes industriais ampliados; e Sampaio13 et al (1998), 

que aborda sobre a saúde mental e as condições de trabalho offshore e onshore das 

Unidades localizadas no estado do Ceará.   

 Finalmente, duas teses de doutorado, Barreto14 (1998) e Figueiredo15 (2001), 

abordam o trabalho dos mergulhadores profissionais. A primeira estuda a identidade 

desses profissionais brasileiros, incluindo a questão de gênero, geração e processo de 

trabalho. A segunda analisa as condições em que se desenvolve o trabalho de mergulho 

profundo, na Bacia de Campos, destacando a dimensão coletiva da atividade, 
                                                
8 Um artigo intitulado “Confinados” foi apresentado no Segundo Encontro Mundial: Estados Gerais da 
Psicanálise e um segundo foi escrito após o acidente com a plataforma P-36, na Bacia de Campos, em 
2001.  
9 Dissertação de mestrado defendida na PUC-SP, intitulada: Ilhas de aço – homens de ferro: cotidiano de 
trabalho e vida do petroleiro offshore da Bacia de Campos dos Goytacazes.  
10 Marinho, P. juntamente com Sevá Filho, A.; Vasconcellos, E. e Amaral, M. coordenaram a elaboração 
do dossiê do Sindicato dos petroleiros do Norte Fluminense (Sindipetro NF) para a Comissão Parlamentar 
de Inquérito que apura a “Falta de segurança e condições de trabalho nas plataformas petrolíferas do 
estado do Rio de Janeiro”. Esse estudo foi intitulado de “Os subterrâneos da bacia: as mortes, os riscos e a 
ilegalidade na exploração e produção de petróleo da Bacia de Campos”.  
11 Sevá Filho é um experiente e conceituado pesquisador na área de riscos ampliados e vem dando 
assessoramento há muitos anos ao movimento sindical dos petroleiros. 
12 Freitas, C.; Porto, M.; Machado, J. são estudiosos da temática que envolve os acidentes industriais 
ampliados. 
13 A pesquisa desenvolvida por Sampaio e sua equipe foi a materialização de um projeto coordenado pelo 
Sindicato dos Petroleiros do estado do Ceará (Sindipetro-CE). 
14 Barreto defendeu a tese de doutorado no IFCS/UFRJ intitulada “Identidade social dos mergulhadores 
profissionais”.  
15 Figueiredo em sua dissertação de mestrado investigou o trabalho dos operários em tubulões de ar 
comprimido e na tese de doutorado pesquisou sobre a atividade dos mergulhadores da Bacia de Campos, 
que se encontram em condições de confinamento e  fazem intervenções de mergulho que pode chegar na 
faixa dos 320 metros. 



 4 

especificamente a cooperação e a comunicação como aspectos importantes para a 

segurança e a confiabilidade dos sistemas.   

 A escolha da área offshore tem origem na década de 80, mais precisamente no 

período compreendido entre 1987 e 1991, quando atuei como assistente social na Bacia 

de Campos. A partir dessa experiência, tive oportunidade de conhecer as principais 

questões que envolviam o universo offshore. Pelo fato de que a maioria dos usuários do 

serviço social, naquela época, era formada por esses trabalhadores e/ou de seus 

familiares, exigia que embarcássemos eventualmente em plataformas distintas para o 

desenvolvimento de alguns projetos referentes à área de recursos humanos. Cabe 

destacar que esta experiência equivale a uma etapa de observação participante.  

 Embarcar nas plataformas marítimas na Bacia de Campos foi crucial para 

entender sobre a dinâmica que envolvia as fases do pré-embarque, do trajeto até a 

plataforma, do embarque propriamente dito e do desembarque. Além de ter a 

oportunidade de vivenciar, mesmo que por alguns poucos dias, a experiência do 

confinamento em alto mar e das condições de vida e de trabalho offshore. Foi possível 

conhecer vários tipos de aeronaves que transportam os trabalhadores até as plataformas, 

diferentes tipos16 de Unidades marítimas, em distintas fases do processo de exploração e 

produção, partilhar simulados de emergência, conversas, pausas para refeição, 

momentos de lazer e o próprio espaço dos camarotes com outros trabalhadores. Enfim, 

conhecer esse grupo de profissionais, com suas características, particularidades e sua 

linguagem. Essa experiência também ocorreu em outros embarques, onde coordenava 

visitas de familiares dos trabalhadores às Unidades marítimas, nas quais estes estavam 

trabalhando. O grupo de visitantes tinha em média 20 participantes que permaneciam 

durante um dia inteiro, no domingo, na plataforma. Vale acrescentar que também tive 

oportunidade de embarcar na região do Rio Grande do Norte, no nordeste do país, em 

plataformas marítimas, de menor porte, usando o helicóptero também como meio de 

transporte. Nesse período, adotei um diário de campo, como forma de registrar as 

observações e vivências. Foi um período de muita convivência com o universo do 

trabalho embarcado, tanto pelas experiências citadas acima, quanto pelos trabalhos 

desenvolvidos em terra, e também pelos amigos que eram trabalhadores offshore.  

                                                
16 Descreveremos os vários tipos de plataformas existentes na Bacia de Campos no capítulo I.  



 5 

Mesmo não estando em contato direto e cotidiano com os trabalhadores, estes 

sempre se constituíram como uma categoria importante nas áreas em que atuei. Além de 

ser um público estratégico para a empresa, tendo em vista a importância da Bacia de 

Campos no cenário nacional, o que acarreta, conseqüentemente, em exigências de 

pesquisas e estudos em várias áreas do conhecimento. Sendo assim, onze anos após 

deixar a região da Bacia de Campos, resolvi retomar no mestrado, resgatar um antigo 

projeto que desse oportunidade de vez e voz àqueles que tantas vezes ouvi que se 

sentiam “meros desconhecidos offshore”.  

 Então, como realizar a pesquisa? Apesar do desejo em voltar a embarcar e 

realizar a pesquisa a bordo, essa alternativa, na época, não se mostrou a mais factível, 

tanto pelo prazo para concluir a dissertação, quanto pelas dificuldades iniciais colocadas 

pela Petrobras de superlotação nas plataformas, o que geraria um atraso inicial 

significativo e que poderia por em risco a viabilidade da pesquisa. Assim, resolvi buscar 

um caminho mais viável que não comprometesse a qualidade do trabalho e não fosse 

impeditivo para realizá-lo.  

 Dessa forma, contatamos a área de recursos humanos da Petrobras, na Bacia de 

Campos, apresentando um sumário do projeto de pesquisa e solicitando autorização para 

realizá-lo. A proposta foi logo num primeiro momento bem recebida pela gerência de 

ambiência organizacional, posteriormente submetida à gerência geral da Unidade de 

Negócios da Bacia de Campos e, em seguida autorizada. A pesquisa empírica ocorreu 

no período de março a maio/2005 e foi realizada através de entrevistas com 

trabalhadores em regime offshore, durante o período de folgas, em terra. Tendo em vista 

o interesse da Petrobras em buscar possíveis diferenciações entre os trabalhadores mais 

antigos e mais jovens que estão nesse regime, contemplamos do total dos entrevistados, 

que este tivesse 50% de cada grupo. A seleção dos mais antigos foi baseada em 

indicações de certos informantes e dos trabalhadores até cinco anos de empresa foi 

aleatória. Em ambos os grupos a identidade foi totalmente preservada. Todos os 

entrevistados foram contatados sem nenhuma intermediação da empresa. Utilizamos 

para tal, nossos contatos pessoais com colegas que trabalham na Bacia de Campos. 

 Durante toda a pesquisa contamos com a colaboração de um ex-trabalhador 

offshore, que se colocou como um informante estratégico e facilitou vários contatos 



 6 

com os trabalhadores a serem entrevistados, tendo em vista que muitos já estavam 

bastante céticos com experiências anteriores de pesquisas, das quais não obtiveram 

nenhum retorno. 

 Iniciamos todas as entrevistas, entregando uma cópia do resumo do projeto 

autorizado pela Petrobras, explicando a proposta e deixando espaço para que o 

entrevistado, caso desejasse, lesse e solicitasse esclarecimentos, se fosse necessário. 

Conduzimos as entrevistas num ambiente informal para facilitar a livre expressão sobre 

as questões a serem abordadas.  

 Realizamos 20 entrevistas individuais e dois grupos focais, sendo que um grupo 

tinha sete profissionais e o outro, quatro participantes. Todas as entrevistas foram 

gravadas, com uma duração média de duas horas, cada uma. As discussões em grupo 

não estavam programadas, ocorreram de forma circunstancial e enriqueceram o 

trabalho. Foram entrevistados operadores de petróleo, operadores de facilidades, 

inspetores de equipamentos, técnico de enfermagem, técnico de segurança, engenheiros, 

mecânicos, eletricistas, supervisores, coordenadores e gerentes. O uso do gravador foi 

permitido em todas as entrevistas, o que não se constituiu, em nenhum momento, como 

um inibidor para que o entrevistado expusesse a sua opinião e percepção, muito pelo 

contrário, se constituiu como um facilitador no sentido de preservar ao máximo a 

veracidade dos relatos e a análise das suas representações presentes na discussão central 

deste trabalho. Posteriormente, todo material oriundo das entrevistas foi transcrito. 

Todas as entrevistas foram feitas em Macaé ou no Rio de Janeiro, o que implicou, no 

primeiro caso, em muitos deslocamentos ao primeiro município. As entrevistas foram 

semi-estruturadas, isto é, orientadas a partir de um roteiro flexível que variava de acordo 

com o andamento da mesma e a disponibilidade do entrevistado. A coleta do material 

não se constitui, apenas, em um momento de acúmulo de informações, mas como uma 

etapa de construção conjunta entre o pesquisador e o pesquisado. “O pesquisador é o 

mediador entre a análise e a produção da informação, não apenas como transmissor 

(...)”(CARDOSO, 1986:101). Nesse sentido, o roteiro de entrevista inicial foi sofrendo, 

ao longo da pesquisa empírica, uma série de modificações, fruto do aprendizado 

construído. Neste roteiro constavam perguntas sobre um pouco da história de vida, 

sobre a atividade, jornada de trabalho, expectativas, o embarque, o desembarque, os 



 7 

temores, os riscos, os acidentes de trabalho, o relacionamento entre os colegas e a chefia 

e o lazer na plataforma.  

 Todos os trabalhadores, sem exceção, foram muito solícitos, o que facilitou 

extremamente a pesquisa, tendo em vista o interesse em participar, colaborar e falar de 

sua experiência de trabalho. Os mais antigos, principalmente, pela vasta experiência 

acumulada, tinham sempre exemplos pessoais ou de colegas, bastante ilustrativos sobre 

o trabalho offshore. 

 Em momentos posteriores tivemos que contatar alguns entrevistados para checar 

informações que durante a gravação ficaram comprometidas ou para obtenção de dados 

relevantes para a análise. Tivemos, nessa fase, retorno de todas as solicitações, inclusive 

alguns destes nos sugeriram contribuições que enriqueceram o trabalho. Uma 

contribuição de extrema importância, nessa etapa, foi do interlocutor estratégico citado 

anteriormente, que nos repassou informações e materiais atualizados sobre a empresa, 

importantes para estruturação da dissertação e análise dos dados.   

 Na fase de elaboração da dissertação e análise do material empírico, fizemos 

alguns contatos com o Sindipetro NF, a fim de obter uma série de dados esclarecedores 

sobre ocorrências de acidentes envolvendo os trabalhadores offshore.    

 A dissertação está estruturada em cinco capítulos. O primeiro apresenta um 

resumo da trajetória da Petrobras e da indústria petrolífera na Bacia de Campos, 

demarcada por alguns fatos históricos, importantes para o entendimento da configuração 

da identidade do trabalhador offshore. Constam também informações atuais que 

contextualizam a empresa e seus negócios e, particularmente, a área de exploração e 

produção, da qual faz parte as Unidades de Negócio que se localizam na região da Bacia 

de Campos. Trataremos também de caracterizar, sumariamente, uma plataforma 

marítima, local habitado durante os 365 dias do ano pelos trabalhadores offshore. 

 A partir do segundo capítulo, procederemos à análise do nosso objeto de estudo, 

explicitando os traços marcantes da identidade do trabalhador offshore, enfatizando os 

resultados obtidos na pesquisa. No capítulo II abordaremos as bases iniciais da 

ambigüidade que caracterizam a identidade desse trabalhador, os seus traços 

tradicionais, a influência do mar e o não reconhecimento do trabalho offshore. No 

capítulo III trataremos de apresentar as etapas pelas quais o trabalhador passa, de forma 



 8 

intermitente, após ingressar nesse regime, quais sejam: o pré-embarque, a chegada na 

plataforma, o embarque e o desembarque. No capítulo IV apresentaremos os principais 

fatores de riscos que envolvem essa atividade, bem como a percepção que tem do risco 

e os principais acidentes ocorridos na Bacia de Campos. No capítulo V focalizaremos as 

estratégias coletivas utilizadas pelos trabalhadores para lidarem com as condições de 

vida e de trabalho aos quais estão submetidos. 

 Vale mencionar que, em momento algum, foi nossa pretensão esgotar a 

compreensão da dinâmica que envolve a realidade offshore, mas poder contribuir para 

ampliação desse conhecimento e fornecer subsídios para outros estudos e pesquisas. 

Assim, várias pistas para novas investigações encontram-se presentes no decorrer dos 

capítulos. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 9 

CAPÍTULO I  

 

 

 A PETROBRAS - UM POUCO DE HISTÓRIA 

 

 

1.1. A Petrobras – como tudo começou 

 

Inicialmente, entendemos que seja necessário contextualizarmos, de forma 

sintética, um pouco da trajetória histórica da Petrobras, apontando alguns marcos 

importantes para a compreensão dos processos e relações de trabalho nessa realidade 

que foram determinantes na formação da identidade de seus trabalhadores. 

A Petrobras criada no dia do aniversário da Revolução de 30, em 3 de outubro 

de 1953, através de um projeto (Lei 2004), tem sua origem marcada pela campanha “O 

Petróleo É Nosso”, de cunho nacionalista, bandeira essa representada pelo então 

Presidente Getúlio Vargas.  

A Lei 2004 constituiu a Petrobras como uma sociedade por ações de economia 

mista e com controle acionário do governo federal, proclamando “monopólio da União 

a pesquisa, a lavra, o refino e o transporte marítimo e por dutos de petróleo e gás e 

seus derivados17”. Essa Lei, além de definir fontes de recursos financeiros para a 

empresa implementar a condição de monopólio, facultou-lhe também uma série de 

benefícios fiscais, tais como: isenção de impostos para importação de maquinário, 

equipamentos e outros. Em dezembro de 1963, esse monopólio foi expandido também 

para a importação de petróleo. (ALVEAL CONTRERAS, 1994) 

 A questão nacionalista estava presente desde a revolução de 30, em que Vargas 

assume o poder com base em um projeto populista e na soberania do Estado sobre o 

                                                
17 A Petrobras possui mais de cinqüenta tipos de produtos (www.petrobras.com.br) Dentre os derivados 
produzidos pela empresa podemos citar a gasolina, os óleos lubrificantes, gasolina de aviação, diesel etc.   



 10 

conjunto da sociedade. Essa política alavanca a produção industrial, através de uma 

forte intervenção estatal e contrariando muitos interesses internacionais que afirmavam 

não existir petróleo em solo brasileiro.  

 O Estado brasileiro, já nessa época, promovia a substituição de importações de 

bens industrializados por sua produção interna, através de forte intervenção estatal na 

economia, deixando de ser, portanto, um país agrário e exportador. Essas estratégias 

foram implementadas por grupos conservadores com origem nas oligarquias agrárias, na 

burocracia estatal e nas forças armadas.  

 A produção marítima só foi iniciada em maio de 1954, data da inauguração da 

Petrobras, com o primeiro poço a produzir petróleo no mar, a uma profundidade de 

apenas três metros, que recebeu o nome de Dom João Mar.  

 A Petrobras, do período entre 1954 e 1964, tinha a exploração e produção de 

petróleo como um mito a ser alcançado, que justificava sua razão de ser, para romper 

com as amarras do petróleo com as empresas estrangeiras e buscar a independência do 

país. Scaletsky (2003:48) afirma que “esses sentimentos e sentidos têm uma origem: há 

um nacionalismo petrolífero, que é específico e estratégico”. 

 Com esse espírito que as reações de indignação e revolta marcaram as 

conclusões do denominado Relatório Link18 (SCALETSKY, 2003:49), em 1960, que 

afirmava que o petróleo brasileiro era o mais caro do mundo e recomendava o abandono 

da exploração, sugerindo que: “Se, todavia, a Petrobras deseja permanecer na 

exploração petrolífera em larga escala, e em base da competição com a indústria 

petrolífera internacional, e se tem dinheiro para assim o fazer, sugiro que a Petrobras 

vá a outro país onde podem ser obtidas concessões e onde as possibilidades de 

encontrar óleo são boas.” (SCALETSKY, 2003:49) 

 Não encontrar petróleo para atender a demanda interna, exigiu que a empresa 

buscasse uma outra razão que garantisse a sua imponência imperial, ou seja, permanecer 

monopolista e estatal. A alternativa foi tornar-se uma grande empresa em termos de 

eficiência, se possível igual às empresas privadas e o mais distante do restante do setor 

público da administração direta. 

                                                
18 O geólogo Walter K. Link era ex-chefe da Standard Oil of New Jersey, contratado para o cargo de 
superintendente do Departamento de Exploração da Petrobras, entre maio e setembro de 1954.  



 11 

 Ao mesmo tempo em que a Petrobras assumia o papel de ser a guardiã das 

riquezas do subsolo brasileiro, assumia também a sua clara dependência, por ser estatal, 

o que a obrigava a negociações constantes, tanto com o governo federal quanto com o 

poder legislativo, para liberação de recursos orçamentários, o que ocasionava, por 

conseguinte, importantes negociações políticas. Cabe destacar que 83% de seus clientes 

(SCALETSKY, 2003), nessa época, eram do setor público, o que acarretava prejuízos 

significativos, pois permaneciam como inadimplentes. Essa era a face estatal que 

impedia a empresa de alçar vôos maiores. Quaisquer decisões internas assumiam, 

sempre, uma conotação política. 

 Paulatinamente, a Petrobras passou a ocupar um espaço de reconhecimento, 

onde a técnica e o saber técnico passaram a ter um papel privilegiado. A valorização 

desses fatores demarcou um terreno no mundo do petróleo e ampliou o seu raio de ação. 

 Com a decisão da Petrobras de incrementar as atividades no mar, a estratégia foi 

de levar para perto do poder os “descobridores de petróleo” e, assim, ter condições de 

tomar decisões que conduzissem à busca de petróleo. A partir de estudos que apontavam 

esse caminho, foi iniciada a exploração sistemática da plataforma continental brasileira.  

 Enquanto que a capacidade de refino havia praticamente dobrado, com a 

ampliação do seu parque industrial e a inauguração de novas refinarias, as jazidas 

terrestres davam sinais de exaustão e a produção na plataforma continental permanecia 

sem grandes avanços. 

Em 1968, através do Decreto-lei nº 200, foi legitimada a intervenção do Estado 

na economia por meio das empresas estatais. Esse Decreto estabelecia as condições de 

funcionamento das estatais idênticas ao setor privado, cabendo ajustar-se ao plano do 

Governo, desde que sob supervisão ministerial. O rebatimento dessa decisão, na 

Petrobras, ocasionou uma reestruturação organizacional, com a verticalização da 

estrutura, criando-se instâncias intermediárias denominadas departamentos, que 

existiram até o ano 2000. 

No sentido de contemporizar as forças antagônicas, em relação à alocação de 

recursos, de um lado favoráveis à pesquisa e prospecção de petróleo, de conteúdo 

nacionalista, e o posicionamento daqueles mais moderados, a opção que vigorou na 

empresa foi dar “ênfase nas atividades mais rentáveis de refino, transporte e 



 12 

distribuição crescente de volumes de cru importados (...); a entrada decisiva no ramo 

petroquímico e a internacionalização de algumas atividades com a criação de 

subsidiárias internacionais para atuar em áreas de exploração (BRASPETRO) e 

comercial (INTERBRAS)” (SCALETSKY, 2003:54). Desse modo, ao investir em áreas 

de menor risco, aumentava a rentabilidade média da empresa, o que favorecia o 

financiamento das atividades de pesquisa, exploração e produção, áreas estas de 

elevados riscos e custos.   

Por meio da Braspetro (Petrobras Internacional S.A), no mercado internacional 

de petróleo, pode concorrer com as grandes companhias de petróleo na exploração e 

prospecção. Investiu também na comercialização, conseguindo vincular a importação do 

petróleo com a exportação de produtos brasileiros, o que era feito através da Interbras 

(Petrobras Comércio Internacional S.A).  

Com o 1º choque do petróleo, em 1973, o preço do barril do produto pelos países 

produtores e exportadores triplicou e, o Brasil mostrou a sua vulnerabilidade nessa área 

às crises internacionais, pois 80% do petróleo, para o consumo interno, eram 

importados.  

O período da década de 70 é marcado pelo esgotamento do modelo de 

desenvolvimento que tornou possível o período de expansão capitalista no pós-guerra. O 

sistema de welfare state, assim como o pacto entre empresários, sindicatos e o Estado 

começam a dar sinais de saturação ante a lógica de acumulação capitalista, que podem 

ser identificados através da intensificação da luta de classes, expressa nas contínuas 

greves; da queda da taxa de lucros; do endividamento internacional e o aumento do 

índice de desemprego. 

Essa foi uma época em que a Petrobras investiu pesadamente na formação de 

seus técnicos para assumirem funções gerenciais e na preparação de suas lideranças para 

ampliar os espaços de atuação internacional. 

Enquanto as cobranças aumentavam em decorrência do alto volume de petróleo 

importado, o Governo cortava investimentos, reduzia as importações e proibia a 

contratação de pessoal. Mas por outro lado, em 1976, vários contratos de risco foram 

assinados com empresas estrangeiras que davam oportunidades a estas de investirem na 

exploração do petróleo no solo brasileiro. O grande receio para os técnicos do petróleo 



 13 

era de que essas empresas fossem bem sucedidas em suas empreitadas, o que atestaria a 

incompetência brasileira. No entanto, essas iniciativas não apresentaram resultados 

satisfatórios. (SCALETSKY, 2003) 

Por outro lado, a Associação dos Engenheiros da Petrobras (AEPET) entendendo 

que não se tratava de uma questão meramente técnica, afirmava em boletim o seguinte: 

“O técnico é o indivíduo que, depois de alguns anos debruçado sobre 

os livros nos bancos das escolas, maneja com alguma habilidade o 

instrumental estudado. (...) A técnica, como todo saber, não é produzida 

com independência ideológica. Não há saber neutro. As grandes 

transformações do saber, as grandes descobertas, não surgiram da 

imparcialidade ou da neutralidade. Surgiram, precisamente, de 

parcialidades”. (SCALETSKY apud AEPET, 2003:72) 

No plano internacional, o 2º choque do petróleo, em 1979, elevou o preço do 

barril de U$12,70 para U$24,00 e, em dezembro de 1980, para U$31,68 o barril 

importado. Assim, as cobranças só tendiam a aumentar, tendo em vista os gastos com a 

importação do petróleo. (SCALETSKY, 2003) 

Antes do final da década de 70, a empresa privilegiou os seus negócios do “chão 

para cima”, ou seja, o refino de óleo e derivados e, a partir do final de 70, começou a 

priorizar do “chão para baixo”, o petróleo no mar - início da Bacia de Campos19. 

Já nos anos 80, as políticas econômicas foram direcionadas para os subsídios às 

exportações e incentivos fiscais. Houve a maxidesvalorização do cruzeiro e o peso do 

pagamento das dívidas públicas, interna e externa, era extenuante.  Por outro lado, o 

desemprego atingiu taxas super elevadas, o governo interferiu de forma agressiva na 

autonomia das empresas estatais e as condições de trabalho se deterioravam, ampliando 

o trabalho informal. 

A modernização tecnológica em curso exigia, por sua vez, novas tecnologias no 

gerenciamento da força de trabalho.  Para tanto, investiu-se em trabalhos, em equipes e 

que facilitaram o surgimento de terminologias específicas como: “times”, “células” e 

“estrutura matricial”. Como exemplo deste investimento, pode-se citar os ciclos de 

                                                
19 A Bacia de Campos será apresentada no item 1.6. 



 14 

controle de qualidade (CCQ) que se espalharam pelas empresas em todo país, tendo 

como tônica as novas estratégias de produção pautadas em metas, o trabalho em equipe 

e o envolvimento da força de trabalho. O trabalhador deixa de ter um sistema de 

controle dos tempos e movimentos e passa gradativamente a ser seu próprio vigia – “a 

empresa é a sua empresa, a produtividade é a produtividade de sua empresa”. 

(ANTUNES, 1996:81) 

Do início dos anos 80 até aproximadamente 1986, a Petrobras se colocou como a 

grande responsável por 30% de todo investimento das empresas estatais (SCALETSKY, 

2003). Esse foi um período em que o ritmo da produção foi forçado além dos limites de 

segurança, ocorrendo vários acidentes com a morte de trabalhadores e, também, muito 

desperdício de petróleo e prejuízos ao meio ambiente. São exemplos: o vazamento em 

Vila Socó, em Cubatão, onde morreram 93 pessoas e o acidente da plataforma de 

Enchova, em 198420. 

Esse foi um período marcante para os trabalhadores. Foi uma época em que, 

após o último choque do petróleo, a empresa começava a reverter à tendência anterior, 

aumentando sua participação no atendimento ao consumo interno. Superou as 

estimativas iniciais, ultrapassando a produção de 500 mil barris por dia.  

Scalestky (2003) afirma que somente a partir da gestão do presidente Shigeaki 

Ueki, na Petrobras, é que os trabalhadores começaram a perceber que não eram patrões 

e, sim empregados, ou seja, petroleiros. Até então, se sentiam ocupando o papel de 

patrão, pois se a empresa é o patrão e este patrimônio é de todo povo brasileiro, por 

conseguinte “nosso patrão é todo povo brasileiro”. Essa identidade se explica pelo 

próprio objetivo e espírito, na época da criação da empresa, que não tinha como foco o 

enriquecimento de um grupo ou de uma pessoa, mas o enriquecimento de um país.  

Assim, o orgulho está presente nessa trajetória em “o patrão é o dono; o dono é 

o povo; nós somos [trabalhadores] o povo, logo, nós somos o dono; não temos patrão” 

(SCALETSKY, 2003:80). Com essa percepção de si, enquanto petroleiro, de ser o 

representante dos demais trabalhadores, este incorporou essa auto-imagem como uma 

missão: a de defender a empresa e o monopólio estatal dos interesses do capital externo.  

                                                
20 Abordaremos essa temática no capítulo IV.  



 15 

A década de 80 marcou um período em que o trabalhador da Petrobras ultrapassa 

o espaço da empresa e se coloca como protagonista na defesa do país contra o governo 

militar e contra as “forças imperialistas”. O trabalhador petroleiro assume um novo 

papel nas mobilizações sindicais e passa a ser um efetivo sujeito mais consciente dos 

rumos que está trilhando. Esse orgulho de ser petroleiro e representante dos 

trabalhadores, como será discutido no capítulo II, irá permear o processo de construção 

da identidade dos trabalhadores offshore. 

Nessa trajetória, chegamos à década de 90, período fortemente marcado pela 

implantação do modelo neoliberal, através da abertura econômica, incremento às 

importações via redução das alíquotas sobre vários bens de consumo, redução da 

interferência estatal na economia e, conseqüente redefinição de áreas de atuação, no 

qual o Estado se retirou da produção de bens e serviços e focou sua atuação, apenas, na 

regulação e fiscalização e aceleração do processo de privatização.  

Nesse período, ao mesmo tempo em que aumentavam as exigências em relação à 

qualidade dos produtos, preços competitivos e rentabilidade, é estimulado o 

enxugamento das grandes empresas, gerando espaço para os processos de terceirizações, 

recriação de formas de trabalho antigas, como o trabalho a domicílio, familiar, o não 

reconhecimento de direitos sociais e trabalhistas, o que gera maiores índices de 

desemprego. 

Particularmente, no Brasil, esta condição assume proporções mais graves na 

medida em que o desemprego resultante das novas tecnologias alia-se ao permanente 

desemprego e às relações de trabalho violentas, clandestinas, insalubres etc, reforçando 

assim traços históricos em nossa formação social.  

Através do Plano Nacional de Desenvolvimento (PND), em março de 1990, o 

Estado define as áreas a serem privatizadas que teriam por parte dos vários grupos de 

interesse, menor resistência à mudança. Apesar de inicialmente a Petrobras não ser 

incluída no programa de privatização, cinco empresas do Grupo foram vendidas como, 

por exemplo, a Ultrafértil, a Petroquímica União e outras com participação minoritária. 

(SCALETSKY, 2003) 

 Enquanto o governo Collor, especificamente, dirigiu o seu ataque principalmente 

ao movimento sindical, incluindo o dos petroleiros, e ao combate aos marajás do serviço 



 16 

público e das estatais, o governo de Fernando Henrique Cardoso (FHC) foi aquele que 

consolidou o projeto neoliberal no país, com o foco para a redução dos gastos públicos, 

sucateamento dos serviços sociais e para uma ofensiva privatizante.  

A empresa, em seu contexto externo, gradativamente foi se complexificando, de 

modo que durante a greve de 1991, a mais radicalizada, com a produção completamente 

interrompida, a adesão dos gerentes ao movimento grevista foi uma demonstração do 

aumento da credibilidade sindical e perda de credibilidade gerencial. Muitos dirigentes 

sindicais foram demitidos e reintegrados somente em 1993. Ainda, em 91, quando o 

novo presidente da Petrobras assumiu o comando da empresa, em seu discurso de posse, 

afirmou que reduziria a ação dos sindicatos, obstáculos à quebra do monopólio e à 

privatização. (SCALETSKY, 2003) 

A greve mais longa e com repercussões catastróficas no movimento sindical21 é 

originária também dessa década. O presidente, na época Itamar Franco, conduziu uma 

negociação junto aos sindicatos, fechando um acordo que, posteriormente, ficou na 

história do movimento sindical como “letra morta”. Assim, de um acordo verbal e não 

realizado de direito e de fato, as discussões migraram para o campo jurídico, sobre 

quem detinha autoridade e poderes para mandar na Petrobras, o que gerou a mais longa 

greve na empresa, com duração de 32 dias. Foi um período de muita tensão, entre 

decisões judiciais, demissões, invasões a algumas instalações da empresa pelo exército, 

e um processo massificante da impressa contra o movimento, apresentando nos 

principais noticiários filas para compra de gás de cozinha e nos postos de combustíveis. 

O saldo final foi a fragilização da organização sindical, o recebimento de uma 

notificação do Tribunal Superior do Trabalho de uma multa que totalizava dois milhões 

e cem mil reais (SCALETSKY, 2003:164), contas bancárias bloqueadas, retenção do 

repasse das mensalidades dos associados e bens penhorados.  

Posteriormente, o que se viu na era FHC na empresa, foi o crescimento da 

produção e a redução dos postos de trabalho, mostrando a face visível da tentativa de 

desmonte da empresa. A marca de um milhão de barris por dia foi ultrapassada e a 

empresa que já tinha tido mais de sessenta mil trabalhadores em seus quadros, no final 
                                                
21 Compõe o movimento sindical dos trabalhadores da Petrobras, a Federação Única dos Petroleiros 
(FUP) vinculada a CUT. A FUP é formada pelos vários sindicatos de petroleiros nos vários estados. 
Particularmente, o Sindicato dos Petroleiros do Norte Fluminense - SINDIPETRO-NF tem como base de 
filiação os trabalhadores da Bacia de Campos.  



 17 

dos anos 90, teve esse contingente reduzido à metade, com a implantação maciça de um 

processo de terceirização.  

Entre os que consideram que a greve criou facilidades para o Governo para 

receber apoios favoráveis à decisão de quebra do monopólio e os que descartam essa 

interferência, muitas alianças foram feitas entre os segmentos gerenciais e as lideranças 

sindicais para tentar impedir que essa proposta tivesse um desfecho positivo para o 

Governo. No entanto, essas tentativas não foram bem sucedidas e, em 6 de agosto de 

1997, a partir da Lei nº 9.47822 a União deixa de ser a detentora do monopólio do 

petróleo, abrindo o subsolo brasileiro para exploração de capitais nacionais e 

internacionais mediante a concessão de áreas. Essa Lei define o novo Estatuto do Setor 

Petróleo e Gás Natural, criando o Conselho Nacional de Política Energética e a Agência 

Nacional do Petróleo (ANP). As atividades, até então, somente desenvolvidas pela 

Petrobras, passam a ter caráter de livre competição com outras empresas. A ANP23 é 

quem tem amplos poderes para promover a regulação, a contratação e a fiscalização das 

atividades econômicas que compõem a indústria do petróleo.   

 A década de 90, como veremos nos próximos capítulos, impactou 

intrinsecamente a identidade do trabalhador offshore. Enquanto até 90, a identidade era 

moldada a partir de determinados valores de caráter fordistas, a partir desta década, o 

modelo de flexibilização era o sustentáculo de todo o processo organizacional e de 

gerenciamento das relações de trabalho. A seguir apresentaremos algumas 

                                                
22 O art.4º dessa lei define que, nos termos do art. 177 da Constituição Federal, constituem monopólio da 
União as atividades: I- a pesquisa e lavra das jazidas de petróleo e gás natural  e outros hidrocarbonetos 
fluidos; II- a refinação de petróleo nacional ou estrangeiro; III- a importação e exportação dos produtos e 
derivados básicos resultantes das atividades previstas nos incisos anteriores; IV- o transporte marítimo do 
petróleo bruto de origem nacional ou de derivados básicos de petróleo produzidos no país, bem como o 
transporte, por meio de conduto, de petróleo  bruto, seus derivados e de gás natural. No entanto, o art. 5º 
dessa lei estabelece que as atividades econômicas de que trata o artigo anterior serão reguladas e 
fiscalizadas pela União e poderão ser exercidas, mediante concessão ou autorização, por empresas 
constituídas sob as leis brasileiras, com sede e administração no país. 
Já o art. 26 determina que a concessão implica, para o concessionário, a obrigação de explorar, por sua 
conta e risco e, em caso de êxito, produzir petróleo ou gás natural em determinado bloco, conferindo-lhe a 
propriedade desses bens, após extraídos, com  os encargos relativos ao pagamento dos tributos incidentes 
e das participações legais ou contratuais  correspondentes. 
 
23 O Decreto Institucional nº 2.455, em 14 de janeiro de 1998, implantou a ANP, vinculada ao Ministério 
de Minas e Energia com as seguintes finalidades, definidas em seu art. 2º: promover a regulação, a 
contratação e a fiscalização das atividades econômicas integrantes da indústria do petróleo, de acordo 
com o estabelecido na legislação, nas diretrizes emanadas do Conselho de Política Energética - CNPE e 
em conformidade com os interesses do país. 
 



 18 

características dessa década na Petrobras, que são ilustrativas do rebatimento da política 

adotada pelo Governo, quais sejam: 

♣ sistemática política de corte de investimentos; 

♣ redução de 23% de trabalhadores próprios entre 1989 e 1995;  

♣ política de pessoal com foco na diminuição do efetivo operacional próprio e 

conseqüentemente aumento da terceirização nas atividades-meio e concentração nas 

atividades-fim, intensificando as desigualdades internas;  

♣ vasto conhecimento técnico dos trabalhadores próprios entram em conflito com  a 

pequena ou quase nenhuma qualificação dos terceirizados que trabalham no mesmo 

local e por vezes no mesmo cargo, mas com vínculos, salários e benefícios 

diferentes;  

♣ falta de know how pelos terceirizados, pela grande rotatividade e que traz 

comprometimentos para a segurança no trabalho;  

♣ implantação de programas de demissão voluntária para os trabalhadores próprios 

com incentivos monetários, principalmente de 1994 a 2000, o que ocasionaram 

saídas em grupo. Os que permaneceram, conviveram com a intensificação do ritmo 

de trabalho, haja vista a ausência da reposição de trabalhadores próprios;  

♣ mudanças na Lei da Previdência Social ocasionaram aceleração das solicitações de 

aposentadorias e perda de profissionais qualificados; 

♣ ausência de concursos públicos durante 10 anos, envelhecimento do contingente de 

trabalhadores próprios e intensificação do ritmo de trabalho levaram à intensificação 

de contratações e terceirizações; 

♣ inexistência de uma política que objetivava a preservação do conhecimento e da 

memória técnica;  

♣ redução de três para um dirigente sindical, com remuneração, liberado pela empresa;  

♣ decisão dos trabalhadores próprios de anteciparem o seu desligamento da empresa 

por medo de um processo de privatização que se configurava como um quadro sem 

retorno. O cenário delineado era de receio para os que iam e de angústia para os que 

ficavam; 



 19 

♣ política adotada pela empresa de alterar direitos dos trabalhadores, utilizando 

incentivos monetários como forma de barganha. Por exemplo: a venda pelos 

trabalhadores de um adicional conhecido como “dobradinha de turno” ou extra-

turno;  

♣ tentativa da empresa de também utilizar a estratégia acima para alterar o regime de 

trabalho offshore. A proposta contemplava a compra de sete dias de folgas, ou seja, 

a relação entre os dias trabalhados e os dias de folgas passaria de 14 por 21 para 14 

por 14, com indenização pela redução das folgas;  

♣ fusão de vários cargos da área de exploração, perfuração e produção, surgindo o 

trabalhador polivalente, que é aquele chamado a exercer várias funções, com o 

mesmo salário, deixando de lado a sua especialização.  

Neste quadro, a empresa passou por adequações aos novos processos 

empresariais, reestruturando seu modelo de gestão, promovendo ampla transformação 

na cadeia produtiva, através de fusões departamentais, redução de níveis hierárquicos, 

racionalização de custos, redução de pessoal e automação dos processos produtivos. 

 É no contexto dessa década que nas políticas de recursos humanos são 

introduzidas inovações que se baseiam em critérios e metas de qualidade e 

produtividade, oriundos dos preceitos dos programas de qualidade total que buscam o 

estabelecimento da cooperação e integração da força de trabalho às metas 

organizacionais.  

Paralelamente, todo o discurso da empresa também priorizava a necessidade de 

reduzir o welfare state empresarial, conquistado pelos trabalhadores, com justificativas 

simplistas de que para fazer frente às empresas concorrentes, as políticas adotadas 

teriam que ter equivalência com as praticadas no mercado concorrente.  

Os empregados cada vez mais se angustiam, pois percebem o que vêm 

ocorrendo nos processos de trabalho, no interior da empresa, com perda da qualidade e 

segurança no trabalho, desgaste de pessoal, rotatividade, dentre outros. Ao mesmo 

tempo comparam a empresa do passado e a atual; e, ainda, têm a percepção de que no 

passado eram mais reconhecidos e valorizados, eram importantes para a Petrobras e 

hoje não mais.  



 20 

Esse momento exigia do grupo gerencial o desenvolvimento de novas 

habilidades para implementar as mudanças, entre elas, dos processos de trabalho, de 

estratégias para obter melhores resultados e para gerenciar as equipes. É transferido para 

o gerente o desempenho de papéis até então desempenhados pelos profissionais de 

recursos humanos. É requerido que seja negociador, coordenador e articulador, a fim de 

obter a colaboração de suas equipes na implementação das novas medidas. 

Exige-se, portanto, um perfil gerencial, com algumas características bastante 

diferenciadas da década de 70/80, tais como:24 

♣ performance como ferramenta de comando; 

♣ as realizações da equipe são as ferramentas de seu sucesso; 

♣ é curioso e estudioso; 

♣ é independente e tem visão global das coisas; 

♣ lidera mudanças e é um facilitador; 

♣ seu salário é conquistado pelo resultado de seu trabalho e de sua equipe; 

♣ seu conhecimento é fruto do seu aprendizado. 

Do mesmo modo, o perfil do líder sindical também se redefiniu radicalmente. O 

estereótipo do trabalhador com uniforme sujo oriundo do movimento de confronto tende 

a acabar. A perspectiva é que se formem lideranças com capacidade para negociar em 

qualquer instância de decisão. 

Esse quadro sinteticamente delineado nos mostra que o cenário interno era de 

insegurança e incertezas e que toda linguagem e discursos adotados mostravam que a 

“nova Petrobras” estava completamente distante daquela de sua criação, da campanha 

“O Petróleo É Nosso”. Esta nova empresa está voltada para o seu negócio principal: a 

exploração e produção de petróleo. Tem como meta estar próxima a um referencial 

privado de gestão, com foco nos resultados econômico-financeiros que se apresentam 

                                                
24
 Matéria na Revista Veja, em outubro/94, sobre pesquisa realizada pela Organização Internacional do 
Trabalho (OIT), em vários países, inclusive do leste europeu; apresentados em palestra proferida pela 
profª Nilda Teves Ferreira, no 2º Encontro Nacional de Supervisores sobre o tema: “A Prática da 
Supervisão: perplexidade e desafios”, na sede da Petrobras, no Rio de Janeiro. 

 



 21 

como uma exigência mais relevante do que os requisitos históricos de abastecimento do 

país.  

Os acidentes ocorridos na baía de Guanabara, no estado do Rio de Janeiro, em 

2000, com vazamento de 1,3 milhão de litros de petróleo e da plataforma P-3625, em 

2001, expõem para o país e o mundo as repercussões da política adotada pela empresa 

ao longo dos últimos anos.  

Em 2000, a Petrobras comprou oito das dez áreas de exploração oferecidas pelo 

Governo através da ANP. Cabe destacar que estas áreas a bem pouco tempo, antes da 

quebra do monopólio, estavam sob o seu controle. Ainda nesse período outras ações 

foram empreendidas: a compra de duas refinarias na Bolívia; o lançamento de suas 

ações na bolsa de Nova York; a associação com empresas privadas do segmento de 

refino e a conseqüente venda de 70% da refinaria Alberto Pasqualine (Refap) localizada 

em Canoas, RS; a venda de campos de petróleo localizados na região nordeste do país, 

denominados de campos maduros. Estas são áreas que exigem altos investimentos 

tecnológicos para produção de petróleo que não mais interessam a empresa; 

reestruturação organizacional de toda a empresa, criando quatro áreas de negócios, 

como já citamos anteriormente, o que facilitaria a sua futura fragmentação; tentativa de 

mudança do nome e da marca da empresa para Petrobrax, que gerou por parte da 

sociedade um movimento de contestação à proposta, surpreendendo a alta administração 

da empresa e a decisão de engavetamento do projeto; tentativa mal sucedida de 

implantação de um novo plano de previdência complementar pela Fundação Petros etc. 

Durante as negociações do acordo coletivo de trabalho em 2001, mais um 

impasse é criado que desencadeia em uma paralisação por tempo determinado, de 24 a 

28 de outubro, que mobilizou quase que a totalidade das plataformas da Bacia de 

Campos.  

Com o processo eleitoral de 2002 e a vitória do Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT), 

vários concursos públicos foram abertos para cargos que exigem escolaridade de 

segundo grau, técnico ou superior.   

                                                
25 Abordaremos o acidente da plataforma P-36 no capítulo III. 



 22 

A aquisição da AGIP do Brasil, em agosto de 2004, elevou a participação da 

Petrobras no segmento de distribuição de gás liquefeito de petróleo (GLP) para 27% do 

mercado e consolidou a sua liderança na distribuição de combustíveis26.  

Cabe enfatizar que o exercício de 2004 foi caracterizado por importantes 

realizações na área de exploração e produção, pois foram descobertos cinco novos 

campos de petróleo em terra. As reservas provadas totalizaram, neste ano, 11,8 bilhões 

de barris de óleo equivalente27. A meta estabelecida no Planejamento Estratégico é 

atingir, em 2010, 17,3 bilhões de barris de óleo equivalente em reservas provadas28. 

Vale destacar que, no final de 2005, a Petrobras declarou descobertas de novos 

campos de petróleo e gás. Na Bacia de Santos (SP), os campos de Uruguá e Tambaú, 

situados em frente à cidade do Rio de Janeiro, a 160km da costa em lâmina d'água entre 

1.000 e 1.400 metros; Canapu, na bacia marítima do Espírito Santo, Inhambu; na bacia 

terrestre do Espírito Santo e o gigante Papa-Terra, na Bacia de Campos, com potencial 

de volume recuperável estimado entre 700 milhões e 1 bilhão de barris de óleo 

equivalente e com início da produção prevista para o final de 2011. A Petrobras, desde 

1993, tem um importante programa chamado de PRAVAP - Programa de Recuperação 

Avançada de Petróleo, com o objetivo de aumentar o fator de recuperação29 de seus 

campos, prolongando ao máximo sua produção. 

Praticamente, fechando o ano de 2005, em 19 de dezembro foi registrado mais 

um recorde de produção: 1 milhão 857.425 barris, cerca de 23 mil barris superior ao 

recorde anterior, obtido em 23 de junho de 2005 (1 milhão 835 mil barris).  

Com este resultado, a empresa consegue atender a demanda diária do mercado 

interno que gira em torno de 1,8 milhão de barris e confirmar o sucesso de seu projeto 

de alcançar a auto-suficiência, com a entrada em operação, em 21 de abril deste ano, da 

plataforma P-50, no campo de Albacora Leste, na Bacia de Campos.  

                                                
26 Dados obtidos no Relatório Anual da Petrobras 2004. 
27Dados obtidos no Relatório Anual da Petrobras 2004 incluem informações do exterior, correspondentes 
à parcela Petrobras nas associações.  
28 As reservas provadas são medidas de acordo com o critério da Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC). 
29 Explicações adicionais serão dadas no item que apresenta o processo de exploração e produção de 
petróleo.  



 23 

A Petrobras é a 14a maior companhia de petróleo do mundo30 e líder do setor 

petrolífero brasileiro. É uma sociedade anônima de capital aberto que atua de forma 

integrada em toda a cadeia de operações da indústria de petróleo, gás e energia. Desde a 

exploração e a produção de óleo e gás natural, refino, processamento de gás, 

distribuição de derivados, comercialização e transporte por dutos até a produção de 

produtos petroquímicos e a geração, distribuição e transmissão de energia elétrica. 

Possui 170 mil acionistas31, sendo controlada pela União, seu maior acionista, que 

detém 55,71% de suas ações ordinárias32 e 32,22% de seu capital social. O lucro líquido 

consolidado33 alcançou R$27,7 bilhões, recorde na história da empresa. Tem como 

missão “atuar de forma segura e rentável, com responsabilidade social e ambiental, 

nas atividades da indústria de óleo, gás natural e energia, nos mercados nacional e 

internacional, fornecendo produtos e serviços adequados às necessidades dos seus 

clientes e contribuindo para o desenvolvimento do Brasil e dos países onde atua34.  

Está presente em todas as regiões do país e também no exterior. Para executar 

suas atividades, a empresa está estruturada em 4 áreas de negócios, quais sejam: 

exploração e produção35; abastecimento que inclui refino, logística, transporte e 

comercialização de derivados e álcoois, além das participações em empresas 

petroquímicas no Brasil e duas fábricas de fertilizantes; gás e energia, distribuição de 

derivados e álcoois e gás natural veicular no Brasil, representada pela Petrobras 

Distribuidora e os negócios da área internacional que se estendem a quinze países em 

três continentes. Essa estrutura é composta ainda por uma área financeira e uma de 

serviços, onde estão incluídas pesquisa, engenharia, saúde, meio ambiente e segurança, 

dentre outras. Conta ainda com áreas corporativas de auditoria, estratégia, recursos 

humanos, comunicação etc. Também, encontram-se ligadas ao Sistema Petrobras 

empresas subsidiárias, controladas e coligadas.  

A estrutura básica de comando da empresa, internamente denominada de Alta 

Administração abrange o Conselho de Administração, a direção superior da empresa, o 
                                                
30 Segundo critérios da publicação especializada Petroleum Intelligence Weekly. (Relatório Anual da 
Petrobras, 2005). No levantamento anterior, com base no exercício de 2003, a Petrobras ocupava a 15ª 
posição (Relatório Anual da Petrobras, 2004). 
31 Dados fornecidos pelo Balanço Social e Ambiental da Petrobras, 2005. 
32 Ações ordinárias se referem ao capital votante.   
33 Dados constam do Relatório Anual da Petrobras 2005. 
34 Missão consta no Relatório Anual da Petrobras 2005. 
35 Abordaremos essa área ainda nesse capítulo.    



 24 

Conselho Fiscal, a Diretoria Executiva, os Comitês do Conselho de Administração e o 

Comitê de Negócios. O Conselho de Administração é composto por membros eleitos 

pela Assembléia Geral de Acionistas. O organograma a seguir nos mostra com maior 

clareza a estruturação da empresa.   

 

 

 
Fonte: Petrobras36 

 

 

É líder em tecnologia de extração de petróleo no mar, em âmbito internacional, 

através do funcionamento de 50 sondas de perfuração, sendo 31 marítimas; 102 

plataformas de produção, sendo 75 fixas no fundo do mar e 27 flutuantes; 13.821 poços 

produtores (665 são marítimos); 115 navios (50 de propriedade da Petrobras); 16 

refinarias, com processamento de 1.797 mil barris por dia (bpd); 30.343 km de dutos; 

                                                
36 Relatório Anual da Petrobras 2005. 



 25 

6.154 postos de combustíveis ativos e 2 fábricas de fertilizantes, produzindo 1.652 

toneladas métricas de amônia e 1.598 toneladas métricas de uréia37.  

Para desenvolver essa complexidade de negócios e atividades, possui um 

efetivo38 de 53.904 trabalhadores próprios, incluindo 6.166 da área internacional, 7.197 

das subsidiárias e 40.541 da holding. Acrescenta-se a esta última, 155.267 trabalhadores 

terceirizados39.   

Cabe mencionar que dentre os trabalhadores próprios da holding40, 43% destes 

tem mais de 45 anos de idade e mais de 18 anos de trabalho na empresa, o que 

demonstra o acúmulo de saber técnico sobre a dinâmica dos processos de trabalhos da 

empresa. Acrescenta-se a isso a qualificação e competência técnica desse efetivo, uma 

vez que 42% têm curso superior e, destes, 6,5% são mestres ou doutores. Nessa direção, 

é importante enfatizar que a necessidade de superar desafios e implementar novas 

tecnologias, na história da empresa, como já vimos anteriormente, vão exigir, 

conseqüentemente, mais investimentos em capacitação técnica. Destaca-se, portanto, o 

crescimento médio de 41%, entre 2004 e 2005, do número de participações de 

trabalhadores em treinamentos no exterior em relação a 2003.  

A multiplicidade de áreas e atividades implica, necessariamente, de acordo com 

as características e especificidades dos processos e sistemas operacionais, a utilização 

de vários tipos de jornadas de trabalho. Na Petrobras, holding, existem oito diferentes 

regimes de trabalho, sendo que 60% dos trabalhadores próprios encontram-se em 

regime administrativo, de segunda a sexta-feira, e 25% no regime de turno41, 

englobando os turnos de 6, 8 e 12 horas.  

Um outro aspecto a ser mencionado é que apesar dos vários concursos públicos 

abertos pela empresa, estes ainda não foram suficientes para reparar a defasagem na 

relação42 trabalhadores próprios e terceirizados. O efetivo próprio em 2005 foi 7,5% 

                                                
37Dados referentes a 2005 extraídos do seguinte endereço eletrônico: 
http://www2.petrobras.com.br/Petrobras/portugues/numeros/num_index.htm 
38 Dados referentes a 2005 extraídos do site www.petrobras.com.br na área Relações com Investidores.  
39 Dado retirado do Balanço Social e Ambiental da Petrobras 2005. 
40 Dados extraídos do Relatório Anual da Petrobras 
41 O regime de turno será abordado no capítulo III, tendo em vista que as plataformas da Bacia de Campos 
adotam esse regime de trabalho.   
42 Os dados relativos à relação entre trabalhadores próprios e terceirizados referem-se apenas a Petrobras 
holding, não inclui, portanto, as subsidiárias e empresas da área internacional. 



 26 

superior a 2004 e 11,5% a 2003. No entanto, em relação às contratações de terceirizados 

o crescimento entre 2003 e 2005 foi de 26% e entre 2004 e 2005, de 6%. Isso só vem 

demonstrar que o processo de terceirização, como uma característica marcante da 

década de 90, de uma política efetivamente neoliberal, pois as contratações de 

trabalhadores terceirizados permanecem crescendo comparativamente com os 

trabalhadores próprios, numa relação em média de 1 trabalhador próprio para 3 

terceirizados.  

 

 

 

1.2. Exploração e Produção – a área que cresce 

 

 A área de negócio Exploração e Produção compreende todas as atividades 

ligadas à exploração, ao desenvolvimento da produção e à produção de óleo e gás 

natural no Brasil, tanto em campos terrestres quanto em marítimos, atendendo, 

prioritariamente, as refinarias do país e a comercialização nos mercados interno e 

externo do excedente de óleo.  

 A sua estrutura organizacional contempla as seguintes sub-áreas: corporativa, de 

serviços, de exploração, engenharia de produção e sete Unidades de Negócios (UN’s), 

sendo que a Bacia de Campos engloba duas destas Unidades, quais sejam: Unidade de 

Negócio do Rio de Janeiro (UN-Rio) e Unidade de Negócio da Bacia de Campos (UN-

BC).   

É importante salientar que em consonância com os preceitos da reestruturação 

produtiva essa área, em 1995, passou por mudanças, o que somada na época à quebra do 

monopólio do petróleo, trouxe argumentos de que para fazer frente ao novo cenário 

mundial de competitividade, havia necessidade de se adequar o plano de cargos e 

salários existente, na época, por trazer limitações ao gerenciamento das equipes. Para 

tanto, implantou-se, em 1996, um processo de fusão de 15 diferentes cargos dessa área 

que foram reduzidos a apenas três diferentes cargos (BARROS, 1998:18). 

Conseqüentemente, o leque de atribuições aumentou, quantitativa e qualitativamente, 



 27 

exigindo-se uma maior capacitação técnica sobre os processos e sistemas operacionais. 

Os cargos foram alinhados de tal forma que não sofreram alterações nas respectivas 

faixas salariais. Assim, foi implantada a polivalência nessa área, com o argumento 

empresarial de que o trabalhador aumentaria a sua própria empregabilidade, pois a 

Petrobras estava entrando numa nova era de internacionalização.    

Essa estruturação de cargos permanece até os dias de hoje e exigiu desses 

homens à apropriação de novos saberes43 operários para lidarem com a intensificação do 

trabalho.   

 Para fazer frente à escalada de descobertas de novos campos de petróleo e novos 

poços descobridores, a empresa, nessa área de exploração e produção, conta um 

efetivo44 de 18.220 trabalhadores próprios e 57.112 terceirizados. Os trabalhadores 

próprios com cargos que exigem qualificação de nível médio ou técnico correspondem a 

77% do efetivo dessa área, sendo que as atividades operacionais concentram 99% do 

total destes cargos.  

Cabe mencionar que no período entre 2003 e 2005, houve um crescimento do 

quantitativo tanto de trabalhadores próprios quanto de terceirizados nessa área. Esse 

crescimento não foi proporcional, pois enquanto o efetivo próprio cresceu 15%, o de 

terceirizados aumentou em 8,9%, mostrando uma leve desaceleração no processo de 

terceirização. A relação entre o efetivo próprio e terceirizado, tomando como base 

dezembro de 2005 é de 1 próprio para 3 terceirizados. Enquanto que no último ano do 

governo FHC, essa relação era de 1 próprio para 4 terceirizados.   

Vale destacar, ainda, que no período compreendido entre 1995 e 2002, 

ratificando as características já apresentadas sobre o contexto interno, nessa época, se 

identifica que, incluindo todas as sete Unidades de negócios dessa área, o quantitativo 

de trabalhadores próprios foi reduzido em 15%.  

Os dados apresentados mostram que o processo de reestruturação produtiva, com 

a introdução de novos modelos de gestão que direcionam para a redução de efetivos 

próprios e aceleração da terceirização vulnerabiliza o próprio sistema operacional, tendo 

em vista que os processos são marcados por um alto grau de variabilidade e incerteza, 

                                                
43 O saber offshore será tratado no capítulo V. 
44 Dados obtidos pelo Sistema de Informações da Petrobras (SISE) referente a dezembro de 2005. 



 28 

apesar de todas as medidas e procedimentos de segurança45, principalmente nas 

Unidades mais antigas. (Figueiredo, 2001:92) 

 

 

 

 

1.3. O processo de exploração e produção de petróleo offshore 

 

 Após esta breve exposição sobre a empresa e sobre a área de Exploração e 

Produção, entendemos que se faz necessário descrever sinteticamente sobre as 

principais etapas do processo operacional de exploração e produção de petróleo no mar, 

na Bacia de Campos, foco de nossa pesquisa.   

 De um modo geral, é um processo que se configura em cinco fases: prospecção, 

perfuração, completação, produção e transporte. 

 A exploração de petróleo envolve estudos de duas ciências: a geologia e a 

geofísica. A primeira analisa as características das rochas na superfície e pode contribuir 

para prever o seu comportamento em grandes profundidades. Já a segunda, faz a análise 

do subsolo, através de sofisticados instrumentos que objetivam reunir informações 

indicativas, para selecionar uma área que reúna condições favoráveis à existência de um 

campo petrolífero. 

 As pesquisas geológicas e geofísicas que precedem a decisão da perfuração do 

poço pioneiro ou exploratório utilizam métodos de estudos magnéticos, gravimétricos e 

sísmicos que se configuram em métodos indiretos de prospecção que emitem dados 

sobre a espessura, constituição, profundidade e comportamento das camadas de rochas 

existentes numa bacia sedimentar, o que permite resultados ainda na superfície que 

orientam a tomada de decisão sobre a etapa de perfuração. Em decorrência da 

complexidade dos processos envolvidos, seja pela localização, profundidade e 

condições ambientais e marítimas, os custos da perfuração são elevados, o que gera uma 

análise tecnicamente criteriosa que respalde a decisão de utilizar esse método direto de 

                                                
45 As condições de trabalho e de segurança serão discutidas no capítulo IV.   



 29 

prospecção. Assim, criam-se as condições técnicas para que a perfuração de um poço 

pioneiro tenha um nível elevado de acerto.  

 Só com a perfuração do poço pioneiro é que os especialistas poderão ter a 

certeza da presença de hidrocarbonetos no local. Se as informações obtidas forem 

positivas, a partir dos testes realizados com esse poço, serão estabelecidas novas 

locações (poços de delimitação ou extensão) a serem perfuradas que irão determinar os 

limites do campo e também podem estimar a produção diária de petróleo do poço. A 

decisão de entrada em produção é tomada somente se as perspectivas do reservatório 

justificarem os pesados investimentos para a montagem do empreendimento, ou seja, se 

o volume aproveitável de petróleo for comercialmente viável.  Cabe destacar que nem 

todo o volume de óleo encontrado é extraído, pois mais da metade do total descoberto 

permanece no local, aguardando que novas técnicas sejam criadas e que viabilizem a 

extração dos hidrocarbonetos de forma economicamente rentável para a empresa. 

(CHOEURI, 1991) 

 Quando um poço pioneiro não apresenta presença de óleo é “tamponado com 

cimento e abandonado”, mas ainda assim, fornece uma série de dados e indicadores que 

se somam ao conhecimento já existente sobre a área explorada. 

 O projeto de desenvolvimento do campo estabelece as diretrizes para o 

planejamento da atividade de perfuração que pode gerar a constituição de centenas de 

poços e, conseqüentemente, levar alguns anos. No mar, a perfuração pode ser executada 

por plataformas46 fixas ou flutuantes e navios-sonda. 

 Uma outra etapa importante é a atividade de completação que visa equipar o 

poço para entrada em produção. Inicia-se com a introdução de uma tubulação de aço, 

denominada de coluna de revestimento no poço, ao qual é colocada uma camada de 

cimento entorno para impedir o desmoronamento de suas paredes e a penetração de 

fluidos não condizentes ao processo. Posteriormente, pelo interior do revestimento é 

colocado um canhão específico que, ao ser acionado, vai provocar várias perfurações no 

aço e no cimento, abrindo furos nas zonas portadoras de óleo ou gás e permitindo o 

escoamento destes para o interior do poço. Também é introduzida no poço uma outra 

                                                
46 O item 1.4. descreve os vários tipos de plataformas marítimas de petróleo utilizadas na perfuração de 
poços e produção de óleo e gás.  



 30 

tubulação de menor diâmetro (coluna de produção) que conduz os fluidos (óleo e gás) 

até a superfície. O controle destes fluidos oriundos do reservatório se dá por um 

conjunto de registros e válvulas conhecidas como árvore de natal47, que podem se 

localizar tanto acima (árvore de natal seca) quanto abaixo da linha d’água (árvore de 

natal molhada) e, nesse caso, é instalada na cabeça do poço. Esse equipamento pode, na 

segunda situação, estar exposto à água salgada do mar ou ser do tipo seca, quando 

encapsulada por um casco isolante e submetida à pressão atmosférica normal. O 

controle da vazão do poço é feito por painéis e instrumentos que emitem dados sobre 

níveis de pressão, temperatura, vazão etc.  

 Na etapa de produção, existem dois tipos de poços: aqueles nos quais os 

hidrocarbonetos são lançados à superfície naturalmente, apenas sob a pressão interna 

dos gases, que produzem por surgência e conseqüentemente denominados de poços 

surgentes ou insurgentes. E um outro tipo em que é preciso usar equipamentos para 

promover a elevação artificial dos fluidos. Esse é um poço de injeção, em que a 

recuperação primária ou natural do óleo e do gás não é suficiente, exigindo a 

recuperação adicional ou secundária. Uma técnica utilizada é a injeção de gás no poço 

ou na coluna de produção, de modo a se criar o diferencial de pressão que permita a 

saída dos fluidos, até o momento em que seja economicamente viável a aplicação de 

técnicas de recuperação. 

 Em algumas áreas existe um equipamento denominado manifold que funciona 

como um coletor de produção central. Tem o objetivo de receber a produção de várias 

plataformas que estão separadas umas das outras por pequenas distâncias e transferir 

para uma outra Unidade a produção de até oito poços, no sentido de otimizar a 

utilização das linhas flexíveis de escoamento.  

 Figueiredo (2001:75) destaca que equipamentos como árvores de natal, 

manifolds e linhas flexíveis exigem freqüentemente a intervenção dos mergulhadores 

para realização de manutenções, reparos, inspeções e instalações. No entanto, isso 

somente é possível até a profundidade de 320 metros e para as águas profundas e ultra-

profundas, a Petrobras vem desenvolvendo tecnologia, chamados sistemas diverless, 

para operar sem a necessidade desses profissionais. Nesse caso, torna-se imprescindível 

                                                
47 No anexo consta um modelo de árvore de natal. 



 31 

a utilização de sofisticados equipamentos para inspeção e manutenção submarinas, os 

denominados veículos de operação remota, ROVs (Remoted Operated Vehicle).  O 

ROV é um robô submarino dotado de sonar, bússola, câmeras de vídeo com monitores e 

sistema de gravação de imagens, mecanismos que permitem a realização de operações 

de abertura e fechamento de válvulas, dentre outras especificações. O ROV e os 

sistemas diverless citados acima, vem evitando que mergulhos arriscados sejam 

realizados. (RODRIGUES, 2001:95) 

 Muito embora existam poços que somente produzem gás, a maioria deles extrai 

a composição de óleo, gás e água salgada. Assim, se faz necessário separar esses 

componentes utilizando equipamentos chamados separadores. Essa etapa se constitui na 

fase de processamento do petróleo extraído. Nesta fase, cada componente passará por 

vários processos separadamente, diferindo apenas a depender do tipo de plataforma, do 

tipo de poço e do tipo de petróleo. Após o processamento, o óleo é enviado para terra, 

diretamente por meio de oleodutos, ou para outra plataforma que centraliza a produção 

de várias plataformas, como por exemplo: Garoupa, Enchova, Pargo e Namorado e uma 

parte pode também ser usada na injeção dos poços, de acordo com as características dos 

mesmos. O gás é exportado também para terra, após ter passado por algumas etapas de 

processamento, e a outra parte é aproveitada para a alimentação das turbinas que vão 

gerar energia elétrica a ser utilizada na própria Unidade. A água é empregada nas várias 

etapas do próprio processamento do petróleo (PESSANHA, 1994). 

 O óleo e o gás enviados para terra vão passar por outras etapas de 

processamento, nas refinarias, dando origem a uma diversidade de derivados, como 

gasolina, óleos combustíveis, querosene de aviação, dentre outros.  

 O transporte de toda produção de petróleo na Bacia de Campos é uma atividade 

complexa e realizada de forma ininterrupta. A maior parte do óleo, cerca de 80%, é 

escoada por navios-tanques e, o restante segue pela rede de oleodutos submarinos. Cabe 

destacar que a utilização dos navios petroleiros emprega-se, usualmente, um sistema de 

bóias de atracação, denominado de monobóias. O óleo é enviado da plataforma ou do 

próprio poço por meio de linhas que se conectam a monobóia e que possui um sistema 

que possibilita a atracação e abastecimento do navio e, posteriormente, o transporte do 



 32 

óleo até o continente. O gás é transportado pelos gasodutos que desembocam no 

Terminal de Cabiúnas, no município de Macaé.  

 Para operar essa rede de produção e escoamento de óleo e gás que compreende 

cerca de 4.200 quilômetros de dutos submarinos, faz-se necessário uma infra-estrutura 

de apoio técnico e operacional que coordene todas as atividades sem interrupção. 

 

 

 

1.4. Tipos de plataformas 

 

 A Petrobras possui, na Bacia de Campos, em operação dois tipos de Unidades 

marítimas48, as plataformas fixas e as que compõem o sistema flutuante, como as semi-

submersíveis, os navios-sonda, os FPSO’s e os FSO’s. 

As plataformas fixas foram as primeiras Unidades utilizadas na Bacia de 

Campos. Têm preferencialmente se localizado nos campos com lâminas d’água de até 

200m. São formadas por estruturas modulares de aço, instaladas no local de operação 

com estacas cravadas no fundo do mar. O seu projeto contempla o recebimento de todos 

os equipamentos de perfuração, estocagem de materiais, alojamento de pessoal e todas 

as instalações exigidas para a produção de poços. 

As semi-submersíveis, conhecidas como SS, são compostas de uma estrutura 

que comporta um ou mais conveses, apoiada em flutuadores submersos. Assim, devido 

à ação das ondas, correntes e ventos, sofre várias movimentações que podem causar 

danos aos equipamentos. Para se manterem no mesmo lugar, numa mesma posição na 

superfície do mar, possuem sofisticados sistemas de amarração - de ancoragem e de 

posicionamento dinâmico. O sistema de ancoragem se constitui de 8 a 12 âncoras e 

cabos e/ ou correntes que atuam como molas que produzem esforços capazes de 

restaurar a posição do flutuante quando é modificada pela ação dos agentes naturais. No 

sistema de posicionamento dinâmico não há ligação física da plataforma com o fundo 

                                                
48 Em anexo apresentamos exemplos de cada uma dessas Unidades marítimas. 



 33 

do mar, exceto a dos equipamentos de perfuração. “Sensores acústicos determinam a 

deriva, e propulsores no casco acionados por computador restauram a posição da 

plataforma49”. (PETROBRAS, 2005) 

Os navios-sonda são Unidades projetadas para a perfuração de poços 

submarinos. A torre de perfuração sustenta um tubo vertical, coluna de perfuração, onde 

uma abertura no casco permite a passagem desses equipamentos. As Unidades do 

sistema flutuante estão sujeitas a três movimentos de translação (surge, sway e heave) e 

três movimentos de rotação (pitch, roll e yaw) e estas movimentações, em decorrência 

das ondas, ventos e correntes marítimas é mais intensa nesses navios do que nas 

plataformas semi-submersíveis, por vezes causando muitos enjôos. (RODRIGUES, 

2001:100)  

Os navios adaptados, conhecidos como FPSO’s, (da sigla em inglês Floating, 

Production, Storage and Offloading) ou Unidade Flutuante de Produção, 

Armazenamento e Escoamento têm a capacidade de processar, armazenar o petróleo e 

prover a transferência do petróleo e/ ou do gás natural. Alguns são capazes de acumular 

em seus reservatórios, até dois milhões de barris, como é o caso da Unidade P-32. No 

convés do navio é instalada uma planta para separação e processamento dos fluidos 

produzidos pelos poços. O óleo é armazenado nos tanques do próprio navio, para 

posteriormente ser transferido, de acordo com um cronograma, para um petroleiro 

denominado de navio aliviador que atraca na popa do FPSO para receber o óleo 

armazenado e transportá-lo para terra. Os maiores FPSO’s têm sua capacidade de 

processo em torno de 200 mil barris de petróleo por dia, com produção associada de gás 

de aproximadamente 2 milhões de metros cúbicos por dia50. (PETROBRAS, 2005) 

E por último estão os denominados FSO’s (da sigla, também, em inglês 

Floating, Storage and Offloading) ou Unidade Flutuante de Armazenamento e 

Transferência de petróleo, construídas a partir de navios. Diferentemente dos FPSO’s, 

estes não possuem capacidade de processar o petróleo, apenas armazenam e transferem 

para outros navios.  

 

                                                
49 Dados constam no site da Petrobras, www.petrobras.com.br  
50 Dados constam no site da Petrobras www.petrobras.com.br  



 34 

1.5. A implantação da indústria offshore na Bacia de Campos  

 

 A indústria offshore no país teve início na década de 70, no entanto sem sinais 

de que grandes sucessos, que viriam somente anos mais tarde. De 1971 a 1973 foram 

perfurados os sete primeiros poços e a maioria deles apresentou indícios de petróleo, 

mas com muitos problemas operacionais. Em 1973, foi iniciada a perfuração do poço 1 

– RJS – 7, em lâmina d’água de 110 metros, encarada como a última tentativa deste 

programa de perfurações. Caso o resultado fosse negativo, certamente ocorreria um 

grande atraso no processo exploratório na região. (PETROBRAS, 1999) 

Apesar de ter sido encontrada uma zona saturada de petróleo, os testes 

mostraram vazões muito baixas, e o poço foi classificado de subcomercial. No entanto, 

este foi um marco fundamental de que havia petróleo na Bacia de Campos e, também, 

para dar continuidade ao processo exploratório. Partiu-se, então, em busca de uma outra 

locação: o poço 1 – RJS – 9, em lâmina d’água de 120 metros, perfurado pelo navio-

sonda51 Petrobras II. No entanto, por problemas mecânicos, ao atingir a profundidade de 

3.102 metros, teve que ser abandonado. Assim, repetiu-se essa mesma operação no poço 

com o prefixo 1- RJS – 9A, num ponto situado a 150 metros do original, onde as 

previsões foram confirmadas. Foi encontrada uma coluna de óleo de mais de 100 metros 

de espessura, com reservas estimadas em 100 milhões de barris. “Os testes de produção 

mostraram vazões de cerca de 3 mil barris por dia de óleo de boa qualidade”. Era o 

primeiro poço do campo de Garoupa, o primeiro a produzir em reservatórios calcários52 

no Brasil e a primeira descoberta de porte na plataforma continental. Essa história 

passaria a ficar marcada pelo pioneirismo e por conquistas tecnológicas que colocariam 

o país entre os mais avançados do setor petrolífero mundial. 

                                                
51 É um navio projetado para a perfuração de poços submarinos. Sua torre de perfuração localiza-se no 
centro do navio, onde uma abertura no casco permite a passagem da coluna de perfuração. O sistema de 
posicionamento do navio-sonda, composto de sensores acústicos, propulsores e computadores, anula os 
efeitos do vento, ondas e correntes que tendem a deslocar o navio de sua posição. 
52 No início do trabalho de perfuração na Bacia de Campos, apesar dos resultados não se apresentarem de 
imediato, o chefe da Divisão de Exploração da Petrobras, Carlos Walter Marinho Campos, determinou 
que a perfuração continuasse, lembrando-se dos calcários que produziam grandes volumes de petróleo no 
Oriente Médio, em poços com até 5 mil metros de profundidade.  



 35 

A Petrobras iniciava uma nova etapa de conquistas e descobertas quando ainda 

não se produzia em águas profundas53 em nenhum outro país (CHITA; CORDEIRO, 

1988:17 apud CHOUERI Jr, 1991). Em 1975, foi descoberto o campo de Namorado e, 

em 1977, pela necessidade de aumentar rapidamente a produção interna de petróleo, a 

Petrobrás colocou em atividade o poço 3-EN-1-RJS (Enchova número 1) situado a uma 

profundidade 118 metros de lâmina d’água (distância da superfície do mar até o fundo). 

Em 13 de agosto de 1977, o campo de Enchova começou a produzir mais de 10 mil 

barris diários de óleo, utilizando a plataforma semi-submersível Sedco 135-D. Foi 

adotado um novo conceito denominado sistema de produção antecipado54 (SPA), 

inaugurando a produção na Bacia de Campos. (PETROBRAS, 2004) 

Cabe destacar que a experiência adquirida com o sistema de produção 

antecipado permitiu transformar o que era para ser utilizado como uma medida 

provisória, enquanto eram construídas as plataformas fixas definitivas, em uma opção 

permanente. Os Sistemas Flutuantes de Produção foram largamente empregados na 

Bacia de Campos. Essa tecnologia que se tornou vanguarda no mundo do petróleo, 

levou a empresa a bater vários recordes internacionais. No processo de aprimoramento 

deste sistema, houve a completa conversão das plataformas semi-submersíveis de 

perfuração em unidades flutuantes de produção, depois dessa primeira experiência de 

sucesso.  

Um outro marco importante dessa década foi a construção das primeiras 

plataformas fixas de produção, mobilizando recursos de engenharia e tecnologias até 

então não utilizadas no Brasil. Foram instalados, em diferentes pontos do país, 15 

canteiros para a construção das jaquetas55 e módulos, chegando a empregar 25.000 

trabalhadores e a movimentar 66 fabricantes de materiais e equipamentos. 

                                                
53 Águas profundas são profundidades maiores que diferem grandemente da profundidade usual. O valor 
pode variar em função da atividade e do tempo. Em perfuração são consideradas as lâminas d’água 
maiores que 500 metros. 
54 Sistema de produção antecipado de Enchova representou para a Petrobras o primeiro marco tecnológico 
da produção de petróleo em alto mar. Significou grande agilidade, flexibilidade operacional e economia 
para as operações no mar, pois reduziu o tempo normalmente gasto entre a descoberta de petróleo e o 
início da produção comercial. O SPA consistia numa técnica até então pioneira, que utiliza uma 
plataforma de perfuração semi-submersível, como a Sedco 135-D adaptada para a produção de petróleo. 
O óleo e o gás produzidos nessa plataforma eram separados e o gás queimado. O óleo processado era 
transferido através de uma mangueira flutuante para um navio tanque ancorado nas proximidades.  
55 Jaquetas são as estruturas de sustentação da plataforma. 



 36 

Em 1977, foram descobertos os campos de Pampo, Cherne e Bonito. No mesmo 

ano, o limite de operação passou para 300m de lâmina d’ água.  

Um outro avanço tecnológico na exploração petrolífera, em 1978, é o início da 

utilização de uma técnica de sísmica para auxiliar na delimitação do campo de Cherne. 

Também foram descobertos os campos de Linguado, Viola e Corvina.  

Assim, apesar de todos os avanços tecnológicos da década de 70, ainda era 

preciso avançar muito mais na produção de petróleo, pois a média brasileira ficava em 

torno dos 200 mil barris por dia, enquanto que o consumo era da ordem de 1 milhão 

115mil barris por dia. (PETROBRAS, 1999) 

Com o crescente conhecimento geológico e geofísico da Bacia de Campos, as 

descobertas passaram a ser sucessivas, e gradativamente foram revelando o perfil da 

província petrolífera do norte fluminense. 

Com esses avanços, a década de 80 assistiu à descoberta de vários campos, como 

os de Parati, Carapeba e Trilha. Em 1982, mais um recorde foi alcançado em 

completação submarina, sendo que agora em lâmina d’água de 209m. Ainda neste ano, 

o campo de Bonito entrou em produção e, em 83, foi descoberto o campo de Moréia e 

começaram a operar as plataformas fixas de Namorado-1, Enchova e Cherne-2. Neste 

ano, foram batidos sucessivos recordes na completação submarina em lâminas d’água 

de até 307 metros. Em 1984, além da entrada em operação de mais plataformas fixas 

como as de Namorado-2, Cherne-1 e Pampo, as descobertas caminharam, como 

resultado dos estudos exploratórios, para a região das águas profundas, com o campo de 

Marimbá, localizado em lâmina d’água de até 600 metros. O poço 1 – RJS – 284 deste 

campo foi perfurado em lâmina d’água de 383 metros e entrou em produção no ano 

seguinte, batendo mais um recorde de completação submarina e um marco na produção 

em águas profundas. Soma-se a isso, ainda em 84, a descoberta do primeiro campo 

gigante do país, Albacora, com reservas de cerca de 930 milhões de barris de petróleo. 

Também neste ano, é decidido o desenvolvimento do Pólo Nordeste da Bacia de 

Campos, onde se situam os campos de Carapeba, Pargo e Vermelho. A marca histórica 

de 500 mil barris por dia no Brasil foi atingida em junho de 84, destacando que 275 mil 

barris, ou seja, 55% desta produção correspondia à Bacia de Campos. 



 37 

O segundo campo gigante em águas profundas, o de Marlim, foi descoberto em 

1985, com reservas de 2,5 bilhões de barris e se estende a mais de mil metros de lâmina 

d’água. Com o progressivo domínio da tecnologia para produzir em lâmina d’água 

acima de 400 metros, as perspectivas foram se abrindo gradativamente em águas cada 

vez mais profundas. Esse desenvolvimento foi coordenado pelos projetos oriundos do 

Programa de Capacitação em Águas Profundas (PROCAP), iniciado em 1986, que 

mobiliza profissionais de várias áreas do conhecimento com o objetivo de viabilizar 

técnica e economicamente a exploração e produção de petróleo em águas profundas e 

ultraprofundas. Inicialmente, o PROCAP tinha como foco principal a produção dos 

campos de Marlim e Albacora (ASSAYAG, 1991). Cabe destacar que ainda na década 

de 8056, foram localizados os campos de Barracuda e Caratinga, também em águas 

profundas, até que em 1996, o gigantesco campo de Roncador surgiu com reservas 

estimadas acima de 2,6 bilhões de barris de óleo e a 2000 metros de lâmina d’água. 

Recordes mundiais, resultados técnicos de ponta impulsionaram para a busca de 

novos investimentos em pesquisa e desenvolvimento tecnológico e conseqüentemente 

novos desafios. A Bacia de Campos se constituiu ao longo dos anos na área responsável 

pelo rápido crescimento e desenvolvimento da indústria petrolífera, tanto que em 1992 e 

2001, recebeu o OTC Award, o mais importante prêmio do setor concedido pela 

Offshore Tecnology Conference em Houston (EUA). (PETROBRAS, 2002) 

 Observa-se que toda essa inventividade e pioneirismo da indústria offshore 

brasileira não marcaram somente a trajetória da empresa, com a conquista de recordes e 

prêmios internacionais, mas foram ao longo do tempo, paulatinamente, deixando fortes 

marcas na auto-imagem de seus trabalhadores offshore.   

Ao se configurar como setor de ponta no cenário offshore, carrega em sua 

imagem empresarial, traços de auto-superação, de perseverança, vanguardismo, 

nacionalismo e de uma empresa conquistadora e vencedora. Nesse rastro de tradição, de 

sucessivas vitórias, foi se constituindo a identidade do trabalhador offshore. No próximo 

capítulo, iniciaremos a discussão dessa temática, foco deste trabalho.   

 

 
                                                
56 Em anexo encontra-se a série histórica dos recordes em lâmina d’água de produção. 



 38 

1.6. Bacia de Campos - E hoje, como está? 

 

 A Bacia de Campos é uma área sedimentar localizada na região sudeste do país, 

com limites ao norte, próximo à cidade de Vitória (ES) e a sul, a de Arraial do Cabo 

(RJ). Apesar de ter uma porção emersa (terrestre), sua maior distribuição é marítima, 

computando-se uma área de cerca de 100 mil quilômetros quadrados. Essa região se 

estende da costa até a lâmina d’água de 3 mil metros e a distâncias de até 200 

quilômetros do litoral.  

 Além de fazer parte de uma importante área de negócio da empresa – exploração 

e produção de petróleo e gás natural, é a responsável por praticamente toda produção de 

petróleo do país. As reservas de óleo equivalente são da ordem de 9,7 bilhões de barris, 

em profundidades de até 3.400 metros, espalhados pelos 41 campos de petróleo em 

produção, batizados com nomes de peixes da costa fluminense57.  

 A trajetória progressiva da Bacia de Campos, de conquista no fundo do mar 

transformou essa região numa gigantesca e poderosa área industrial, onde são utilizadas 

as mais novas tecnologias em produção de petróleo em águas ultra-profundas que 

servem de referencial para a indústria petrolífera mundial. Nesse percurso, muitas 

companhias estrangeiras se instalaram na região de Macaé e nos municípios vizinhos. 

Além da geração de empregos diretos e indiretos, a movimentação financeira em torno 

das operações da Bacia de Campos gerou, segundo a Agência Nacional do Petróleo 

(ANP), aos municípios fluminenses, por exemplo, de abril de 2001 a abril de 2002, 

R$534.982.759,17 em royalties (PETROBRAS, 2002).  

 A sua estrutura organizacional é formada pela Exploração e Produção de 

Serviços (E&P-SERV) e pelas duas Unidades de negócios: Bacia de Campos (UN-BC) 

e Rio de Janeiro (UN-RIO). Juntas, em 200558, tinham mais de 10.000 trabalhadores 

próprios, sendo que cerca de 79% exercendo cargos que exigem qualificação de nível 

médio/técnico. Do quantitativo total, cerca de 60% trabalham nas plataformas 

marítimas, em regime de confinamento59.  

                                                
57 Mais explicações no capítulo II que aborda a influência do mar na vida dos trabalhadores offshore. 
58 Sistema de Informações da Petrobras, em dezembro de 2005.  
59 O regime de confinamento será tratado no capítulo III. 



 39 

A área de Exploração e Produção Sul-Sudeste (E&P-SSE/SC) é o principal 

fornecedor interno de serviços técnicos para as Unidades de Negócio dessa região. 

Entretanto, algumas importantes atividades de apoio como, por exemplo, transporte, 

gestão do plano de saúde, programas assistenciais etc são de responsabilidade de uma 

outra área de serviços denominada de Serviços Compartilhados, nos quais seus 

trabalhadores não estão incluídos no quantitativo citado acima. 

 O quantitativo de terceirizados também no mesmo período era de 30.753 

trabalhadores, o que estabelece uma relação de 1 trabalhador próprio para 3 

terceirizados. Em 2002, essa relação era de 1 para 5 terceirizados, acima da média da 

área de negócio Exploração e Produção, que era de 1 para 4.  

 É importante também mencionar que, do total de trabalhadores que se 

aposentaram de 1995 a 2005, 50% destas aposentadorias se concentraram entre 1997 e 

2001, período, como já vimos anteriormente60, relativo à quebra do monopólio, à 

aceleração do processo reestruturação produtiva, fusões departamentais, implantação da 

polivalência, ameaças de reforma da Lei da previdência social e de privatização da 

empresa.  

As plataformas marítimas se localizam no norte do estado do Rio de Janeiro e 

distam em média de 80 a 100 km do litoral e erguem-se a uma lâmina d’água que pode 

chegar a 2000m. 

 Alguns consideram-nas como ilhas industriais em águas brasileiras, outros como 

edifícios com muitos andares, às vezes com 40m de altura ou até como verdadeiras 

cidades de aço e ferro, por onde circulam dutos, linhas e válvulas que carregam óleo e 

gás.   

Existem vários tipos de instalações marítimas na região da Bacia de Campos, já 

mencionadas anteriormente. No primeiro grupo estão 14 plataformas fixas próprias, de 

grande porte, responsáveis pelo início da saga da produção nessa região. Tendo em vista 

que a maior concentração de reservas de petróleo estão em águas profundas, entre 400 e 

mil metros, e ultraprofundas, a partir de mil metros, conseqüentemente, o número de 

sistemas flutuantes próprios é superior, totalizando 25 Unidades. Estes sistemas 

balançam como um navio e algumas processam 180 mil barris de petróleo por dia. A P-
                                                
60 As características da década de 90 foram descritas no item 1.1. 



 40 

32 é uma Unidade que não produz petróleo, mas é considerada uma plataforma 

estratégica, pois apesar de não possuir nenhum poço ligado a ela, recebe e processa o 

petróleo que vem de quatro plataformas semi-submersíveis.  

Acrescentam-se ainda, outros tipos de embarcações tais como: navios 

petroleiros, barcos de serviços especiais (sísmica, mergulho, robôs, lançamento de 

linhas etc) e outras utilizadas para o transporte de cargas, reboque de Unidade, 

manuseio de âncoras, resgate, controle de poluição, combate a incêndio e transporte de 

passageiros. Para apoiar toda essa estrutura são utilizados cerca de 40 helicópteros e a 

carga pesada é transportada por navios tipo plataform supply vessel, cargueiros que têm 

convés de 600 metros quadrados (PETROBRAS, 2002). 

 

 

 

1.7. A plataforma marítima de petróleo  

 

 Cada plataforma se organiza como se fosse uma determinada cidade, com seus 

sistemas operacionais próprios e sistemas de suporte necessários para seu 

funcionamento e autonomia, tais como: geração de energia, tratamento de esgoto, 

fornecimento de alimentação, remédios etc, num ritmo ininterrupto de 24 horas por dia. 

Uma das maiores plataformas marítimas existentes, a P-4361, está situada nessa 

região, especificamente no campo de Barracuda-Caratinga. É considerada uma 

plataforma gigante, tanto pelo seu tamanho e peso quanto pela sua capacidade 

produtiva. É uma Unidade do sistema flutuante de produção e localizada na área das 

águas ultra-profundas. O seu comprimento é de 337 metros, com uma altura de 65 

metros, correspondente a um edifício de 21 andares. Pode ser ancorada em lâmina 

d’água de mais de 800 metros e com uma produção diária é de 150 mil barris de óleo 

por dia. 

                                                
61 Informações da P-43 foram retiradas do site www.petrobras.com.br  



 41 

As instalações internas e externas dependem de cada tipo de Unidade marítima 

(fixa, semi-submersível, navio-sonda, FPSO, FSO), da capacidade produtiva, do porte 

etc. São divididas internamente em pavimentos ou decks em vários níveis, como se 

fossem andares de um edifício. Tem uma área externa onde se localizam, por exemplo: 

os equipamentos, os processos operacionais, a movimentação de cargas, heliponto (local 

onde pousa o helicóptero), as oficinas, as baleeiras etc. Estas últimas são embarcações 

utilizadas em situações de abandono da plataforma, fechadas à prova de fogo, com 

capacidade para 60 trabalhadores, além de um bote motorizado para resgate de homem 

ao mar. Externamente é possível circular entre as várias áreas operacionais e acessar as 

acomodações internas, pois existem escadas externas entre os pavimentos. O piso 

externo é gradeado, o que para algumas pessoas pode, num primeiro momento, causar 

sensações de mal estar. Na área interna estão localizadas as salas de controle, os 

alojamentos, a cozinha, o refeitório etc. 

O sistema de segurança contempla sensores fixos de detecção de gás 

combustível, gás sulfídrico (em algumas Unidades), gás carbônico, sistema automático 

de dilúvio, dispositivo gerador de espuma, extintores de incêndio, sinalizações, 

equipamentos de proteção individual (EPI) etc. 

 A cozinha fornece quatro grandes refeições e quatro lanches por dia. O refeitório 

é uma sala grande com várias mesas que comportam grupos de trabalhadores, possui 

uma rampa de fornecimento das refeições, geladeira com leite e derivados diversos, 

sucos, máquina de refrigerante, cafeteira, frutas e doces. 

 O alojamento conhecido como camarote possui banheiro e, dependendo de cada 

Unidade, pode comportar uma, duas ou quatro pessoas. As camas são do tipo beliche, 

com acionamento de iluminação individual e com uma cortina que quando é fechada 

pode gerar uma levíssima sensação de privacidade. Existem camarotes, em algumas 

plataformas, que estão localizados em áreas de elevado ruído, durante determinadas 

operações, o que gera a necessidade do trabalhador recorrer ao uso de protetores 

auriculares. 

Os espaços destinados ao lazer possuem TV, vídeo, DVD, jogos (sinuca, totó, 

carteado), academia com diversos aparelhos, sala de leitura com jornais e revistas, 



 42 

computadores conectados à internet e, em algumas Unidades, piscina e quadra de 

futebol.  

 A enfermaria está equipada com farmácia, leitos e equipamentos médicos 

diversos para atendimentos imediatos e de menor gravidade. Em situações de 

emergências mais graves, o enfermeiro aciona o serviço médico da Petrobras que dispõe 

de helicóptero-ambulância UTI. 

Cada Unidade marítima está a cargo de um gerente de plataforma. É de sua 

responsabilidade tanto o gerenciamento de todas as operações técnicas quanto dos 

trabalhadores próprios. Vinculado a ele estão os coordenadores de operação, 

manutenção, facilidades e turno. 

A lotação de cada plataforma depende de seu porte e das especificidades técnicas 

de seus sistemas operacionais, pois as mais novas tem maior nível de automação. Tem 

um quantitativo médio de 200 trabalhadores, entre próprios e terceirizados. 

A cada período de 14 dias embarcados, duas equipes de operação trabalham 

durante 7 dias diurnamente em turnos consecutivos de 12 horas e os demais 7 dias 

durante o período noturno, daí esse regime de trabalho ser denominado turno 

ininterrupto de revezamento (TIR). Os operadores de petróleo responsáveis pelos 

processos que envolvem as operações de produção de óleo e gás e os operadores de 

facilidades que respondem pelos sistemas de geração de energia, de água e de gás estão 

submetidos ao TIR. 

Existe também o grupo que trabalha no regime de sobreaviso embarcado, ou 

seja, durante o horário de descanso, na própria plataforma, pode ser acionado a qualquer 

momento para atendimento a emergências operacionais. Nessa condição, se encontram 

os trabalhadores da área de manutenção, mecânicos e eletricistas; das áreas de inspeção 

de equipamentos, de segurança, de enfermagem etc. 

A área de manutenção nas plataformas, na década de 90, foi praticamente 

terceirizada, uma vez que a política de pessoal vigente, como já abordamos 

anteriormente (item 1.1), priorizou a redução do efetivo operacional próprio nas 

atividades-meio, dentre estas a manutenção. Hoje, apesar dos vários concursos públicos 

abertos para cargos nesta área nos últimos três anos, o contingente de trabalhadores 

próprios, ainda, é mínimo.  



 43 

Em cada plataforma existem grupos que são acionados apenas em situações 

especiais, tais como: brigadas de combate a incêndio, equipe de parada de emergência, 

equipe de abandono e equipe de resgate. Todos são treinados e passam à bordo por 

simulações periódicas. São programadas, periodicamente, simulações de sinistro e 

abandono da Unidade, envolvendo todos os trabalhadores, excetuando-se somente os 

que estão em postos de trabalho contínuo.  

Os serviços de hotelaria e aqueles que exigem menos qualificação técnica e 

especializada na área offshore são terceirizados. Cabe destacar que o trabalho de 

mergulho, apesar de sempre ter sido terceirizado, não se enquadra nessa lógica, pois 

demanda alta capacitação e especialização técnica de seus profissionais (FIGUEIREDO, 

2001 e BARRETO, 1998). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 44 

CAPÍTULO II 

 

 

A AMBIGÜIDADE DO TRABALHADOR OFFSHORE 

 

 

 

2.1. INTRODUÇÃO 

 
Este capítulo pretende estabelecer um elo entre a trajetória histórica da Petrobras 

e a construção da identidade do trabalhador offshore. A empresa enquanto estatal e 

geradora de bens e serviços está submetida à correlação de forças, de um lado entre as 

determinações oriundas da política governamental e, de outro lado, ao processo de 

concorrência capitalista e as leis do mercado. A construção dessa identidade é 

relativamente recente, especificamente a partir do final da década de 70, quando tudo 

começou na Bacia de Campos, mas que carrega no seu ideário traços marcantes das 

décadas anteriores e que permanecem presentes até os dias de hoje. É uma identidade 

marcada pelo crescimento da exploração e produção petrolífera brasileira, baseada em 

recordes e desafios tecnológicos, e pela deflagração do processo de transição 

democrática e seus desdobramentos.  

 Pretende-se analisar também o significado e a influência do trabalho em alto mar 

na construção da identidade dos trabalhadores offshore.  

 Que identidade é essa do trabalhador offshore? Que configuração essa identidade 

assume, quais são seus contornos? 

 Essa é uma discussão complexa, tanto pelos recortes teóricos de grandes 

dimensões acerca dessa temática quanto pela realidade particular vivida pelos 

trabalhadores offshore. Assim, a concepção de identidade do trabalhador offshore não 



 45 

pode ser vista de forma isolada, mas considerando todas as esferas da vida social, como 

trabalho, vida em família, lazer etc.  

Um primeiro debate se refere à relação do indivíduo com a sociedade e deste 

com outros indivíduos. A perspectiva adotada por Goffman (1985) é de que o próprio 

indivíduo, diante dos vários espaços sociais por ele ocupados, cotidianamente, elege 

uma série de informações sobre si mesmo, que considera serem as mais importantes, 

que vão nortear as suas relações sociais.  

“A expressividade do indivíduo (e, portanto, sua capacidade de dar 

impressão) parece envolver duas espécies radicalmente diferentes de 

atividade significativa: a expressão que ele transmite e a expressão que 

emite. A primeira abrange os símbolos verbais, ou seus substitutos, que 

ele usa propositadamente e tão-só para veicular a informação que ele e 

os outros sabem estar ligada a esses símbolos. Esta é a comunicação 

no sentido tradicional e estrito. A segunda inclui uma ampla gama de 

ações, que os outros podem considerar sintomáticas do ator, 

deduzindo-se que a ação foi levada a efeito por outras razões diferentes 

da informação assim transmitida”. (GOFFMAN, 1985:12) 

 Assim, nesse processo de interação, como conseqüência das relações sociais 

estabelecidas, a identidade pessoal vai se configurando, a partir de informações que em 

alguns momentos partem da iniciativa do próprio indivíduo, mas também daquelas 

sobre as quais não possui nenhum tipo de controle, mas que são tão importantes quanto 

as demais.  

Nesse sentido, a identidade pessoal vai sendo construída como resultante da 

própria experiência cotidiana, de confronto e diferenciação, seja da auto-percepção dos 

atributos eleitos a serem transmitidos pelo indivíduo a outros, seja do que é construído e 

reconstruído no processo de relações sociais.  

“Quando um indivíduo chega à presença de outros, estes, geralmente 

procuram obter informação a seu respeito ou trazem à baila a que já 

possuem. Estarão interessados na sua situação sócio-econômica geral, 

no que pensa de si mesmo, na atitude a respeito deles, capacidade, 

confiança que merece etc. Embora algumas destas informações 



 46 

pareçam ser procuradas quase como um fim em si mesmo, há 

comumente razões bem práticas para obtê-las. A informação a respeito 

do indivíduo serve para definir a situação, tornando os outros capazes 

de conhecer antecipadamente o que ele esperará deles e o que dele 

podem esperar”. (GOFFMAN, 1985:11) 

 Esse processo não é unilateral nem mecanicista. Implica uma dialética entre uma 

auto-identificação e a identificação pelos outros, entre a identidade atribuída e a 

identidade apropriada. Esse é um movimento que exige que determinadas características 

resultantes desse embate sejam interiorizadas pelo indivíduo acerca dos vários papéis 

desempenhados em sua vida social.  

Goffman (1987) considera que no processo de construção e reconstrução da 

identidade na vida cotidiana, dependendo da vivência em determinados espaços sociais, 

o indivíduo possa ter o seu “eu” desestruturado de tal modo, que exija uma posterior 

sistemática que o reestruture e o reapresente. Esse enfoque foi discutido por esse autor 

quando adotou o conceito de instituição total62. Adotaremos, neste trabalho, algumas 

características desse conceito, a fim de explicar traços de uma identidade offshore 

marcada pela experiência em viver e trabalhar no ambiente confinado das plataformas 

marítimas de petróleo.  

 Genericamente, a identidade estabelece uma fronteira entre os conceitos de “eu” 

e o “outro” ou de “nós” e os “outros”. É possível que, aparentemente, nenhum traço 

possa fazer essa diferenciação de imediato, mas vão existir mecanismos, representações 

e associações acerca de quem é igual ou diferente, de quem é estrangeiro. 

“(...) nunca somos produtores autônomos de nossa identidade pessoal. 

Ela é dada pelo olhar de outro, de outrem, sob a forma do 

reconhecimento”. (ATHAYDE, 1996:88) 

 Nesse sentido, o processo de construção da identidade está sempre ligado ao 

“outro”, que pode servir tanto para com ele nos identificar quanto para nos distinguir ou 

separar. O conceito de identificação foi introduzido por Sigmund Freud e se refere a um 

processo psicológico  

                                                
62 O conceito de instituição total foi discutido em Manicômios, Prisões e Conventos. 



 47 

“pelo qual um indivíduo assimila um aspecto, uma propriedade, um 

atributo do outro e se transforma, total ou parcialmente, segundo o 

modelo dessa pessoa. A personalidade constitui-se e diferencia-se por 

uma série de identificações”. Pode ter dois sentidos: a ação de 

identificar, isto é, de “reconhecer como idêntico”; ou identificar-se, 

que se refere ao “ato pelo qual um indivíduo se torna idêntico a outro, 

ou pelo qual dois seres se tornam idênticos (em pensamento ou de 

fato)”. (LAPLANCHE e PONTALIS, 1979) 

Portanto, a identidade se constitui ao estabelecer parâmetros de diferenciação ou 

de igualdade em relação ao outro.  

“(...) Sucessivamente, vamos nos diferenciando e nos igualando 

conforme os vários grupos sociais de que fazemos parte (...). O 

conhecimento de si é dado pelo reconhecimento recíproco dos 

indivíduos identificados através de um determinado grupo social que 

existe objetivamente com sua história, suas tradições, seus interesses 

etc”. (CIAMPA, 2004:64) 

 Duarte (1986:71) compartilha desse foco, uma vez que para ele um dos grandes 

“embaraços” do conceito de identidade é “o da relação identidade pessoal e identidade 

social”, com o qual se articula a discussão sobre a divisão entre indivíduo e sociedade. 

Acrescenta, ainda, que este é um conceito que exige, portanto, o envolvimento de uma 

discussão interdisciplinar para abordagem do tema.   

 Ainda que ocorram diferenciações teóricas sobre a concepção de identidade 

pessoal e identidade social, corroboramos do que é citado por Durham (1986:32) de que 

a construção de uma identidade não ocorre somente de modo auto-referido, mas de 

forma contrastiva e diferenciadora. A identidade grupal é construída no contexto das 

relações e conflitos intergrupais concretos, a partir dos processos de enfrentamento, 

oposição, dominação, submissão e resistência.   

Cabe ressaltar que essa visão dicotômica entre o homem e a sociedade, entre os 

“saberes psicológicos e sociológicos” e os “reinos das emoções e da razão” denota um 

entendimento romantizado da possibilidade de exclusão das polaridades dialéticas e da 



 48 

construção de identidades autônomas, ao invés da articulação e da produção de sínteses 

que se diferenciam a partir das condições materiais historicamente dadas. 

A partir do referencial da psicodinâmica do trabalho, a formação da identidade é 

vista como um processo que se desenvolve durante a vida do sujeito, e que ocorre a 

partir do olhar do outro. Assim, semelhanças e diferenças são reconhecidas nas relações 

cotidianas estabelecidas com o outro, o que permite a construção da identidade 

individual e social. Essa se dá através dos processos e relações, materiais e afetivas, 

fazendo com que o sujeito constitua a sua singularidade em meio a diferenças. 

(LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:32) 

 Nesse sentido, o trabalho age também como “um mediador de antecipação, e 

não apenas de alienação63” (LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:20 apud DEJOURS). É 

um espaço de construção de sentido, de conquista da identidade e de historicização do 

sujeito. Configura-se como a arena onde se travam as lutas entre o mundo externo e o 

mundo interno psíquico. Ao mesmo tempo em que o trabalho é uma oportunidade de 

crescimento e de liberdade, pode se caracterizar contraditoriamente como fonte de 

prazer e sofrimento. Posteriormente, trataremos dessa temática.   

É importante enfatizar que para abordar a questão da identidade do trabalhador 

offshore é imprescindível considerar que as expectativas, as representações e os 

comportamentos desses homens não são determinados por um processo natural e 

homogêneo, mas se enraízam no processo histórico e nos aspectos sociais, políticos, 

econômicos e culturais da classe onde estão inseridos.  

“Cada gesto, cada palavra, cada reflexão, cada fantasia traz a marca 

indelével, indiscutível de sua classe social, do lugar que o indivíduo 

ocupa na produção”. (CODO, 2004:139) 

Isso porque, a identidade não pode ser concebida sem relacioná-la ao conjunto 

da vida social que dialeticamente a produziu e, as suas significações só podem ser 

apreendidas quando vistas dentro dessa totalidade. 

                                                
63 Alienação é um conceito-chave para Marx que explicita o modo como o homem não mais se reconhece 
como o criador dos bens materiais e culturais, se relaciona com sua própria atividade como algo externo a 
ele. Tudo se coisifica, o homem e suas relações.   



 49 

Mas é importante enfatizar que a identidade não se constrói como um dado 

uniforme e universalmente idêntico. É uma identidade historicamente determinada pelas 

condições e relações materiais de existência dos homens, que vai se configurando a 

partir de sua inserção no mundo, no modo de produção e de reprodução das relações 

sociais. Nessa contraditória construção e reconstrução, complexa e conflituosa, é que os 

homens compartilham modos de existência social como resultado dessas vivências, que 

explicam o sentimento de pertencer a determinados espaços e formações sociais, de 

possuir certas características comuns e distintivas, que permite o estabelecimento de 

elos de identificação. Se entendemos que a identidade envolve um sistema de 

representações que um indivíduo ou grupo constrói a respeito de si mesmo e também 

pelo que lhe é atribuído, podemos afirmar que estas representações são construídas 

pelos homens reais nas suas relações sociais concretas. Como afirmam Marx e Engels:  

“(...) Os homens são produtores de suas representações, de suas idéias 

etc., mas os homens reais e ativos, tal como se acham condicionados 

por um determinado desenvolvimento de suas forças produtivas e pelo 

intercâmbio que a ele corresponde até chegar às suas formações mais 

amplas”. (MARX e ENGELS, 1987:36) 

A identidade implica um certo modo pelo qual os homens se representam nas 

suas relações com outros homens, sendo que tais representações não gozam de nenhuma 

autonomia, na medida em que elas são determinadas pelas condições materiais de 

existência. É o que nos ensina Marx e Engels, na Ideologia Alemã. 

Dessa forma, no processo de formação da identidade estão compreendidas todas 

as formas de atividade humana por meio do qual o homem apreende, compreende e 

transforma as circunstâncias, ao mesmo tempo, que é transformado por elas. (MARX e 

ENGELS, 1987:36-38) 

Assim, o trabalho é o espaço privilegiado dessas trocas, uma vez que todo ato de 

trabalho produz muito mais que o objeto que dele resulta imediatamente. Ele produz, no 

plano objetivo, uma nova situação histórica e, no plano subjetivo, novos conhecimentos, 

habilidades etc que vão se tornando cada vez mais socializados com o passar do tempo.  



 50 

 “Ao transformar o mundo devido à necessidade de nele produzir, o 

homem é transformado em si mesmo e em sua relação com outros”. 

(SAHLINS, 1979:144) 

 Isso nos mostra que enquanto sujeitos, no desenvolvimento de novas forças 

produtivas e relações de produção, o homem desenvolve uma natureza histórica que, ao 

satisfazer suas necessidades, produzindo outras, altera as condições materiais de sua 

atividade, modifica, necessariamente, suas concepções, uma vez que estas originam “do 

seu ser objetivadas nas alterações produzidas, assim como das relações mantidas com 

os outros nessa produção”. (SAHLINS, 1979:144) 

Entendemos, portanto, que a identidade não é só determinada pela vivência na 

esfera da produção, mas também pelo espaço de luta mais geral, de construção histórica 

e política de uma categoria, pelos traços marcantes desse trabalhador coletivo em sua 

atuação frente ao maquinário e a organização do trabalho. Sahlins (1979) nos diz: 

“O homem faz a si mesmo e à sua consciência através de sua atividade 

prática no mundo, atividade que até no seu movimento mais solitário 

anuncia literalmente (visto que utiliza a linguagem) a presença de 

outros”. (SAHLINS, 1979:144) 

Expressando esta dinâmica, a construção da identidade é permeada de 

ambigüidade e tensões presentes na experiência e nas representações do cotidiano. 

Assim, os homens que multiplicam o poder do capital, embora despojados dos meios de 

produção e do produto de seu trabalho, se apropriam de um saber, de um código próprio 

que implicam não somente na habilidade de fazer, mas na construção de uma concepção 

própria de relações sociais nesse universo. (LEITE LOPES, 1978:8) 

Isso significa que a construção da identidade se faz a partir da definição e da 

relação com o diferente e, não por exclusão do que é universal ou diferente, mas por 

incorporação e superação através de sínteses, ou seja,  

“(...) por oposição entre o particular e o universal, entre o individual e o 

coletivo, (...) entre o estável e o dinâmico, através do movimento entre 

estas polaridades dialéticas que não se excluem, mas se articulam, 

produzindo sínteses que se diferenciam a partir das condições 

historicamente dadas”. (KUENZER, 2002:149) 



 51 

Assim, nesse processo de mediações, entre o singular e o particular e deste para 

o universal, a teia identitária dos trabalhadores offshore será construída. Não reconhecer 

esta dialeticidade é conferir uma pretensa e ilusória autonomia aos sujeitos e 

conseqüentemente que estes internalizem traços de uma fantasiosa identidade autônoma, 

disciplinada e de exclusão.  

Essa discussão remete a se pensar que muito embora se partilhe uma existência 

comum, produto da história coletiva, permeado de conflitos e contradições, a 

diversidade de complexidades e diferenciações mostra que nem mesmo dentro da 

mesma classe social existe homogeneidade. Há diferenças marcantes pelas quais os 

homens vivenciam suas experiências cotidianas.  

E como capturarmos essa diversidade e as particularidades dessas existências?  

Leite Lopes (1987:29), em contato direto com grupos de trabalhadores, afirma 

que a fala própria desses é atravessada pelos efeitos da diferenciação interna da classe 

trabalhadora, ou seja, pela situação e posição de classe de diferentes grupos operários, 

pelas reações específicas estabelecidas de dominação, pelas conseqüências de 

mobilizações e enfrentamentos. 

Essa fala, essa linguagem dos trabalhadores não apenas descreve a realidade, 

não é apenas uma forma de comunicação oral. Diz respeito a toda forma de expressão, 

de manifestação que atribui sentido e, assim inventa, cria algo. A linguagem tem um 

papel constitutivo, pois o acesso ao “mundo fora da linguagem”, se dá pela significação 

que é mediada pela linguagem.  

Nesse enfoque, ao mesmo tempo, que os homens transformam a natureza, 

produzindo uma nova situação histórica, a linguagem se caracteriza como uma forma de 

“interiorização dos conteúdos (experiência histórica dos homens) historicamente 

determinados e culturalmente organizados”. (JOBIM e SOUZA, 2004:125) 

Assim, se a palavra é “o fenômeno ideológico por excelência” (BAKHTIN, 

1992:36), o seu papel é o de fazer com que os homens se posicionem como meros 

depositários das idéias de imparcialidades e que representem à realidade como 

autônoma e, não em decorrência das condições históricas, ocultando, dessa forma a 

divisão e a luta de classes. É um processo que permeia todas as dimensões da vida 

social, no sentido de estabelecer uma única verdade definida pelo poder dominante.  



 52 

 Desse modo, a palavra “é o modo mais puro e sensível de relação social”. 

Configura-se como “elemento essencial que acompanha toda criação ideológica, seja 

ela qual for”. (BAKHTIN, 1992:37)  

 Assim, a palavra não é somente o signo mais puro, mas também um signo 

neutro, pois não é específica de nenhum campo ideológico, podendo preencher qualquer 

espécie de função. A palavra que permeia todos os momentos da vida dos homens, em 

todas as esferas de seu cotidiano, se efetiva como signo vivo. Enquanto signo dinâmico 

e ideológico não pode ser subtraído das tensões e conflitos sociais, pois caso contrário 

para este fim se definharia.   

Bakhtin (1992), tendo como ponto de partida o confronto ideológico dos valores 

sociais contraditórios no decorrer da história, considera que a palavra ocupa “do espaço 

privilegiado da criação ideológica”, o lugar de ser o primeiro instrumento da 

consciência individual.  (BAKHTIN, 1992:37) 

A palavra situa-se assim, como um modo privilegiado de comunicação na vida 

cotidiana, como um fenômeno que acompanha todo ato consciente, que está diretamente 

vinculada aos processos produtivos, penetrando em todas as relações sociais entre os 

homens, seja de caráter ideológico, político etc.  

Bakhtin (1992:38) afirma que “a palavra está presente em todos os atos de 

compreensão e em todos os atos de interpretação”.  

 Se os homens, ao desenvolverem a sua produção e o intercâmbio materiais 

transformam o seu pensar e os produtos do seu pensar64, poderão assim, se contrapor a 

uma linguagem coisificada, tecnocratizada, moldada e padronizada pela ideologia, que 

limita o processo de criação, que os sufocam e os aprisionam a um processo de 

massificação sem fronteiras. Essa é uma linguagem que veicula a aparência, os falsos 

valores difundidos pelo pensamento ideológico que impõe e condiciona a sociedade a 

responder de acordo com os padrões já estabelecidos. 

 “instauração de identidades e identificações sociais (...) é operada 

enquanto os sujeitos são conservados na qualidade de receptáculos 

coisificados das ‘mensagens’.” (CHAUÍ, 1983:62) 

                                                
64 Cf. Ideologia Alemã, p. 37. 



 53 

 Quando classes sociais antagônicas utilizam uma só e mesma língua, a palavra 

se torna a arena onde se desenvolve a luta de classes. É nessa encruzilhada plurivalente 

de valores sociais e contraditórios do signo onde a palavra poderá ser um instrumento de 

conquista ou de ocultação das diferenças e da luta de classes. A palavra, assim, “reflete 

sutilmente as mais imperceptíveis alterações da existência social”. (BAKHTIN, 

1992:46)  

 

 

 

2.2.Tradição 

 

A Petrobras foi gestada em um momento da história brasileira em que o Estado 

além, de fomentar e regular o desenvolvimento, também intervinha diretamente na 

produção de mercadorias utilizando as várias empresas estatais65 criadas naquela época. 

O Estado ao participar diretamente da produção de bens e serviços destinados ao 

mercado, além de ser o proprietário de uma parcela do capital do país, gerando 

excedentes, se posicionando como “ator” interessado no processo de concorrência 

capitalista, é também gestor de uma parcela da força de trabalho do país. Porém, ao 

mesmo tempo, serve como agente de regulação e está submetida às definições políticas 

impostas pelo governo. 

Essa identidade vai lhe conferir, estruturalmente, características ambíguas que 

historicamente ora trilham rumos que vão ao encontro dos interesses públicos, ora 

assumem posições que impulsionam exclusivamente para a racionalidade empresarial.  

Scaletsky (2003:170) afirma que a história do país passa por dentro da Petrobras. 

Considera que a vida intramuros na empresa, em determinados momentos históricos, 

reproduz um microcosmos da vida do país, não somente pela sua importância 

econômica no cenário nacional, mas também pelos vários simbolismos criados no 

decorrer da sua história.  

                                                
65 Dentre outras empresas que foram criadas na época com essa especificidade, destacamos a Companhia 
Siderúrgica Nacional e a Vale do Rio Doce. 



 54 

O espírito nacionalista, bandeira política no momento de sua criação, perdurou 

como símbolo de soberania nacional, internalizada por seus trabalhadores em várias 

fases políticas do país.   

Essa dupla face (SCALETSKY, 2003), privada e pública, dá a Petrobras uma 

especificidade. Sendo parte do sistema estatal, imersa na rede de organismos do Estado, 

é atravessada por permanentes tensões entre os interesses privados e públicos no 

decorrer de sua história. 

A sua natureza ambígua pública-privada vai gerar, ao longo de 52 anos, algumas 

características comuns aos seus trabalhadores e gestores. Uma presença que não se 

distingue de outros grupos de interesse da sociedade e, uma outra que expõem os seus 

interesses públicos e para a qual se reservou o papel de falar em nome da sociedade.  

Criada no interior de uma campanha popular com as cores nacionais, intitulada 

“O Petróleo É Nosso”, como já abordamos no primeiro capítulo, a Petrobras sempre foi 

alvo de polêmicas que ocuparam lugar de destaque nos veículos de comunicação. Não 

só por sua importância econômica como também em razão dos vários símbolos que 

foram se consolidando ao longo do tempo, cujos significados foram interpretados e 

reinterpretados66 por vários sujeitos envolvidos. (LEITE LOPES, 1978:8) 

Cabe destacar que no bojo de sua bifacialidade, o próprio estatuto de sua 

fundação reservava espaço que tratava das relações da empresa com seus trabalhadores, 

o que a diferenciava de qualquer outra empresa na época. Esse documento, ao mesmo 

tempo em que estabelecia responsabilidades que remetiam a idéias fordistas de 

organização do trabalho, introduzia componentes de cunho populista, comum nos 

discursos varguistas da época, e também incorporava para si a formação técnica 

especializada de seus trabalhadores. 

Assim, criava a obrigatoriedade da participação dos trabalhadores nos lucros da 

empresa (“Dos lucros da Sociedade participarão, obrigatoriamente, os seus 

empregados e os que nela servirem ...”)67 , criando para tanto normas para efetivação 

                                                
66 Leite Lopes adota o conceito de reinterpretação, ao qual nos baseamos, por identificar que os operários 
reinterpretam a organização da produção em função de seus interesses de classe. Esse é um mecanismo 
presente tanto em indivíduos quanto em grupos.  
67 Artigo 44 do Estatuto de Fundação da Petrobras publicado no Diário Oficial de 10 de novembro de 
1953 (SCALETSKY, 2003:87) 



 55 

dessa participação que levavam em conta o “salário, o tempo de serviço, assiduidade, a 

responsabilidade, os encargos de família, a eficiência, o interesse e o zelo pelo serviço” 

(SCALETSKY, 2003:87). Acrescenta-se ainda, um outro artigo que estabelece que “A 

Sociedade contribuirá para a preparação de pessoal técnico e de operários 

qualificados, através de cursos de especialização, concessão de bolsas de estudo ou de 

outros meios adequados” (SCALETSKY, 2003:87)68.  

Esse foi um período em que era recorrente nos discursos oficiais o uso do termo 

“família”, em alusão ao “espírito de colaboração e união” que deveria existir entre 

chefes e subordinados, dirigentes e trabalhadores (MOREL, 2001:49). Assim, a 

Petrobras, ao assumir um papel que era do Estado, explicitando o compromisso de 

capacitar seus trabalhadores, usando na redação do artigo que aborda a participação nos 

lucros o verbo servir e utilizando como critério para recebimento a idéia de família, a 

empresa introduzia elementos que marcaram ao longo de sua tradição, uma face pública 

de tutela que consolidou relações de trabalho carregadas de traços de paternalismo e de 

laços corporativos entre o Estado e a classe trabalhadora. Esses traços apontam para 

ambigüidades e contradições nesse tipo de gestão pois, se por um lado objetiva buscar o 

consentimento e a adesão dos trabalhadores aos propósitos empresariais, por outro pode 

também suscitar bases para reivindicações e criar expectativas de direitos.  

Do mesmo modo que outras indústrias, inclusive outras empresas estatais, como 

por exemplo, a Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN) se defrontaram na época 

(MOREL, 2001:49), com a necessidade de formar os seus próprios trabalhadores, uma 

vez que a maior parte da classe operária era composta de migrantes nacionais, recém-

egressos das áreas rurais. Nesse sentido, a Petrobras se colocava historicamente como a 

fomentadora e pioneira na qualificação de profissionais para a área de petróleo 

brasileira.  

Acrescenta-se, ainda, que ao introduzir os requisitos como salário, tempo de 

serviço, assiduidade e responsabilidade, antecipava práticas que seriam adotadas 

posteriormente por outras empresas.  

Scaletsky (2003:10) aponta que uma das características comuns aos 

trabalhadores e gestores da empresa é a existência de uma bifacialidade. Uma face que 

                                                
68 Consta no Artigo 45 do Estatuto de Fundação da Petrobras publicado no Diário Oficial de 10/11/1953. 



 56 

prioriza seus interesses privados, de lucratividade, semelhantes à de outros grupos 

empresariais e, de outra, os interesses públicos de defesa da empresa estatal, patrimônio 

da sociedade.  

Oliveira, em um estudo pioneiro, observou que  

“as empresas estatais como que anteciparam uma espécie de welfare 

state para seus funcionários, sob a forma de salários indiretos, maior 

proteção ao emprego, melhor distribuição salarial interna. A 

Petrobras nasceu com esta marca de Abel: a de uma empresa boa para 

os seus empregados. Na formação da empresa, combinaram-se 

métodos de organização industrial que pertencem a diferentes épocas 

do processo de desenvolvimento do capitalismo. Ao mesmo tempo em 

que a empresa adotou elementos do taylorismo/fordismo, assumiu para 

si a tarefa de formar o seu próprio trabalhador”. (OLIVEIRA apud 

SCALETSKY, 2003:86)  

Cabe mencionar que o fordismo, nos países centrais enquanto modelo de 

desenvolvimento gestado no pós-guerra, se fundamentava em um regime de acumulação 

em constante elevação e na produção em massa, aos quais se associavam princípios 

tayloristas que demarcavam separadamente os trabalhos de concepção e de execução, 

submetidos estes últimos a um rígido controle de tempos e movimentos. A fim de 

regular a relação entre oferta e demanda, o Estado ao estruturar o welfare state garantia 

crescente produtividade e geração de rendas excedentes. Tornou-se a “era de ouro do 

capitalismo” e sinônimo de um Estado desenvolvimentista e provedor de bem-estar. No 

entanto, a partir dos anos 70, começa a dar sinais de esgotamento.   

Importante salientar que a Petrobras, ao introduzir na organização e nos 

processos de trabalho, elementos tayloristas de gestão científica do trabalho associado à 

mecanização e, paralelamente, se colocar como provedora do bem-estar dos 

trabalhadores, em um contexto político-populista e posteriormente militar-ditatorial, 

reforçou a sua face pública tutelar que modelou, durante anos, a identidade de seus 

trabalhadores. Identidade essa delineada sob um manto de proteção das interferências 

externas, que alienam e subsumem o trabalhador. Reforçada ainda por ganhos de 



 57 

produtividade e mecanismos de regulação interna, via políticas de bem-estar e de 

fomento à especialização técnica.  

A sua face de identidade pública, apesar das metamorfoses sofridas, conviveu 

com as ambigüidades de sua face privada, como empresa submetida à lógica de 

mercado. Os traços oriundos de sua origem foram sendo reinterpretados pelos vários 

atores envolvidos, ao mesmo tempo em que outros valores foram sendo incorporados.  

Enquanto que a Petrobras da década de 50 até 1964 era a defensora das riquezas 

do subsolo nacional, no pós 64, a empresa vai se fechar, onde a presença militar marcará 

os diversos escalões da empresa. A herança da cultura militar perpassou toda história da 

empresa, determinando a sua estrutura organizacional departamentalizada, que perdurou 

até 2001 e o seu modelo de gestão verticalizado, hierarquizado e disciplinador.  

“Eu me lembro quando eu era mais novo, meu pai dizia que a 

Petrobras era o cabideiro dos militares. O militar botava quem queria 

aqui dentro”.  

A influência de uma gestão militarizada demarca traços de uma gestão baseada 

na obediência ao superior hierárquico, de não questionamento às decisões tomadas, de 

uma segmentação entre aqueles que mandam e os que obedecem.  

Esses símbolos podem ser vistos até os dias de hoje, como por exemplo, no 

nome de guerra adotado internamente, na linguagem codificada de rádio para mencionar 

as letras do alfabeto (O fala-se Oscar, W é whisky etc), dentre outros que ainda marcam 

presença. O depoimento que se segue é ilustrativa dessa realidade. 

 “A Petrobras já teve uma presença de ex-militares muito forte, tinha 

alguns navios que tinham mesa do comandante, cardápio do 

comandante, era uma coisa absurda (...). São três anos que estou 

embarcando, normalmente, existia isso lá na plataforma (...)”.  

A hierarquia e a disciplina rígidas, entre os marítimos, na Marinha Mercante, são 

justificadas pelo comando como a alternativa para se impor o respeito e a permanência a 

bordo.  O comando a bordo é a instituição personalizada do poder máximo. Assim, o 

espaço de questionamento e troca é inexistente. A fala da hierarquia é a verdade 



 58 

absoluta e inquestionável. “O trabalhador é obrigado a se calar frente às situações 

impostas pela hierarquia, temendo por seu emprego”. (SANTOS, 1999:83) 

Esse legado militar introduziu traços marcadamente de uma gestão autoritária, 

em todos os espaços de poder na empresa, inclusive nas áreas operacionais, dentre estas 

as plataformas. Cabe mencionar que a primeira grande greve na Petrobras é oriunda do 

início dos anos 80, período em que a Bacia de Campos começava a ter avanços 

produtivos significativos. Inicialmente, os trabalhadores que deram início às operações 

marítimas vinham de outras Unidades operacionais da empresa imbuídos de um caldo 

cultural de cunho impositivo, nas quais estas áreas se estruturam durante os anos de 

ditadura militar.  

Barreto (1998:146) também, ao estudar a categoria profissional dos 

mergulhadores, identificou que a herança militar norteou a formação especializada 

desses trabalhadores. Alguns são egressos da Marinha e, os que não o são, vão desde o 

curso de profissionalização até o cotidiano operacional propriamente dito, adotar a 

disciplina como uma exigência fundamental para o exercício profissional.  

Não podemos ignorar, mas ao contrário, enfatizar o fato de que no decorrer 

dessa trajetória, a empresa e especificamente a Bacia de Campos, na contraditoriedade 

da correlação de forças entre as práticas de resistência e de submissão, de aceitação e 

negação, a identidade, enquanto construção histórica, foi se delineando, se 

transformando, e se constituindo através das palavras, idéias, teorias, práticas, rituais, 

representações, símbolos e significados produzidos pelos trabalhadores.  

No entanto, os traços de pioneirismo e de competência técnica sobreviveram e se 

perpetuaram nesse percurso. Os homens do petróleo conciliaram os espaços, onde a 

técnica e o saber técnico desempenharam papéis preponderantes, ao mesmo tempo em 

que focavam as possibilidades de grandes negócios nacionais e internacionais. 

Essa trajetória de conquistas e novos desafios remetem a um sentimento de 

vitória pela tarefa cumprida. Complexidade, gigantismo e inovações tecnológicas se 

aliam à própria identidade profissional de grandeza e competência no saber técnico.  

“(...) você ta presente num momento desse de importância pro Brasil, 

ta saindo é, ta caminho pra auto-suficiência de petróleo e você ta 

fazendo parte daquilo ali, profissionalmente. Então, isso é um grande 



 59 

momento pra qualquer profissional, trabalhar numa empresa grande, 

com complexo deste tipo e você fazer parte daquilo ali. Isso é muito 

legal; é muito bom mesmo”.   

O sentimento de orgulho presente na fala do trabalhador representa o quão é de 

significativa importância o alcance dessa vitória, tão almejada, desde as origens de sua 

criação, que não é somente da Petrobras, mas do “povo brasileiro”. Além da 

importância pelo sentimento de conclusão do trabalho, pela missão cumprida, estabelece 

uma idealização69 de uma simbologia do herói nacional, enquanto um dos muitos 

pioneiros, “conectando o primeiro óleo”, que vivenciaram a experiência histórica de 

implantação e crescimento da Bacia de Campos.  

Essas representações se articulam umas com as outras, envolvendo uma 

identificação do trabalhador com a empresa, como se constituísse numa única 

identidade. O sentimento de orgulho tem como idéia central uma representação que dá 

unidade a esses trabalhadores. Todos estão juntos nessa mesma faina e alcançaram êxito 

e sucesso apesar do esforço empreendido, dos riscos, do confinamento etc. Portanto, 

pode-se observar que essa identificação, baseada na confiabilidade e no envolvimento 

do mesmo com os objetivos empresariais, se apresenta paralelamente como uma forma 

de controle não coercitiva, mas que faz trilhar pela via do consenso.    

A essa representação de uma identidade pelo trabalho offshore, o petroleiro 

incorpora a própria representação da empresa com seus atributos de grandiosidade, 

poderio e de explorador. A expressão “vestindo a camisa da empresa, pois ao invés de 

correr sangue corre petróleo” é extremamente constitutiva dessa relação, pois remete a 

traços de um processo de assimilação da identidade da empresa e também do próprio 

processo produtivo.   

A aparente vitória embute a própria natureza bifacial (público/privada) da 

empresa que historicamente construiu um discurso de que o trabalhador do petróleo 

tinha uma função, uma missão de representar o povo brasileiro dentro da Petrobras. 

Essa configuração foi fortemente alicerçada nos anos de regime militar e que perduram 

até hoje no imaginário desses trabalhadores.  

                                                
69 A idealização é um “processo psíquico pelo qual as qualidades e o valor do objeto são levados à 
perfeição. (...) diz respeito ao objeto, e pelo qual este é engrandecido e exaltado psiquicamente sem 
alteração de sua natureza”. (LAPLANCHE e PONTALIS, 1979) 



 60 

“(...) a maioria gosta muito disso aqui. A Petrobras é uma empresa dos 

petroleiros (...)”. 

 Essa questão se articula com o caráter bifacial da empresa, já abordado na 

primeira parte, pois considera que enquanto estatal é da sociedade brasileira, 

representada pelos petroleiros.  

Essa caracterização fortemente alicerçada nos anos de regime militar nada mais 

é do que a expressão sedimentada das idéias dominantes, que constituem os processos e 

as relações de trabalho na empresa. Contraditoriamente, essa idealização foi usada, em 

vários momentos importantes pelos trabalhadores, como bandeira de luta que 

congregassem interna e externamente as mais diferentes correntes ideológicas como, 

por exemplo, na revisão constitucional e na quebra do monopólio.  

O movimento sindical, como representante dos trabalhadores do petróleo, em 

nome do interesse coletivo e incorporando essa representação de falar em nome de toda 

a sociedade brasileira, conseguiu fazer frente aos interesses dominantes, representados 

em vários momentos históricos pelo capital estrangeiro, tendo como seus prepostos 

brasileiros, por exemplo, os governos Collor e Fernando Henrique.  

Todavia, contraditoriamente, a empresa se apropria da aparência dessas idéias, 

no sentido de que seus trabalhadores mantenham, coletivamente, incorporada essa 

representação de identidade empresarial.  

 A bifacialidade que perpassou a história da empresa, hoje é reinterpretada pelos 

trabalhadores como uma face incorporada pelo movimento sindical, a partir de 2003, 

tendo em vista o esvaziamento de suas bandeiras de luta e reivindicatórias que 

expressam uma convergência de interesses entre a política empresarial e a política 

sindical.  

 Uma outra representação, citada por um trabalhador, que só vem enriquecer essa 

identidade, é a identificação do trabalhador offshore como a figura do bandeirante70 

(FAUSTO, 2002) pois a expedição, além de buscar novas riquezas, servia também 
                                                
70 As Bandeiras no Brasil foram um movimento histórico que ocorreu no séc. XVII, que além do 
apresamento de índios e da busca de ouro, tinham uma outra função importante para a metrópole, a 
abertura de caminhos para o povoamento do interior, numa época em Espanha e Portugal ainda não 
tinham definido a fronteira de seus domínios no coração da América do Sul. Em algumas expedições, 
essa função se destacou. Por exemplo, a bandeira de Raposo Tavares, que deixou São Paulo, em 1648, 
para enfrentar milhares de quilômetros do sertão ao Amazonas.  



 61 

como ponta de lança para a conquista e estabelecimento de novos domínios.  Os 

“bandeirantes do mar”, ao transformarem a natureza e a si próprios pelo trabalho, 

produzem uma nova situação histórica. Desbravar o desconhecido nas profundezas 

marítimas pressupõe novas experiências históricas, técnicas e culturais, uma vez que 

nesse processo se recriam, ao mesmo tempo em que adquirem novos conhecimentos e 

habilidades. Navegar nessa bandeira é estar preparado para enfrentar bloqueios, desafios 

e novas aventuras. É ser um dos inúmeros bandeirantes offshore anônimos que nos 

primórdios, não tão longínquos da Bacia de Campos, estavam presentes e juntos a cada 

14 dias durante o ano.  

“Eram os bandeirantes do mar, o que a turma ta falando eram os 

bandeirantes, eram desbravadores mesmo. Era uma época, que você 

ficava sem contato”.   

Acrescenta-se, também, a essa identidade, a significação do trabalhador offshore 

com uma auto-imagem de guerreiro, como aparece na citação abaixo: 

“Eu to lembrando daquela foto na plataforma, com o macacão, aquela 

propaganda da Petrobras, (...) vamos que trabalha, (...) o desafio (...) 

o desafio é a nossa energia. Petrobras, aquela coisa, aquele monte de 

guerreiro. (...) De guerreiro, que vai pra luta!!”  

 A figura do guerreiro pressupõe alguém que é combativo, lutador e com 

inclinação para a guerra. Ao guerrear irá se deparar com o inusitado, com possíveis 

surpresas e situações não previstas, apesar de todas as análises e estratégias traçadas 

anteriormente. Nessa luta poderá ter momentos de êxitos e também de insucessos, em 

sua missão, quaisquer que seja, até mesmo matar ou morrer.  

 O conteúdo do discurso e a linguagem, enquanto processo ideológico, veiculada 

nos vários canais de comunicação internos e externos, vão moldando a identidade desse 

trabalhador de modo que se perceba como um homem que guerreia, um verdadeiro 

soldado.  

Figueiredo (2001:182) destaca que na trajetória dos mergulhadores observa-se 

também, a constituição do devir guerreiro, como “Highlander, o guerreiro imortal, que 

só morre se lhe cortarem a cabeça” tem uma presença marcante na constituição de sua 

identidade.  



 62 

Na medida em que as trajetórias de vida offshore são marcadas por índices 

alcançados e marcas superadas, vai se tecendo uma teia de sentidos71 que direcionam 

para a constituição de uma nova concepção de trabalhador offshore que se identifica 

como “herói”. Esse é um traço que perpassa a concepção tanto dos empregados antigos 

quanto dos novatos. A simbologia do herói se constitui como um trabalhador 

diferenciado por suas virtudes e nobreza nacionalista, que participou do processo de 

construção da empresa, das lutas político-ideológicas travadas no seu interior, com os 

blocos de poder do Estado e da sociedade civil, na consolidação do movimento sindical 

e na trajetória de sucesso da Bacia de Campos - de exploração e produção de petróleo 

em solo brasileiro.  

Barreto (1998:192), no entanto, identifica o “mito do herói” na categoria dos 

mergulhadores a partir da dimensão de gênero, uma vez que é composta exclusivamente 

de homens. Sob esse viés, o símbolo do herói aponta para um fascínio pela aventura, o 

enfrentamento do perigo e para o prazer resultante do confronto do homem com o mar. 

 Toda essa representação que remete às figuras do herói nacionalista e do 

guerreiro, se vincula de forma ambígua a auto-representação que, concomitantemente, o 

subsume ao papel de um mero espectador. Percebe-se como um mero “joguete”, 

subjugado à perversidade do regime offshore e às suas condições de trabalho. Esse 

processo de construção histórica dessa auto-imagem é carregado de uma histórica 

gestão autoritária que estabeleceu relações de tutela e salvaguarda com seus 

trabalhadores, utilizando políticas empresariais de bem-estar social. A figura do 

“coitado” os posiciona não como sujeitos de sua própria história e também da história 

da empresa, conforme ilustra a figura do “Ele” no depoimento a seguir:  

“Eu observo que toda vez que você se reúne com o trabalhador 

offshore, ele sempre tem a figura do ele. A figura do ele é a figura do 

outro. Existe sempre o outro. A culpa é da Petrobras, a culpa é do 

gerente, a culpa é do fulano de tal, a culpa é de Fernando Henrique, a 

culpa é de (...), sempre tem um culpado. Sempre existe o outro. Que 

outro é esse? Quando ele fala do outro, ta tirando a sua 
                                                
71 O sentido “é um todo complexo, fluido e dinâmico, que tem várias zonas de estabilidade desigual, 
enquanto que o significado é uma das zonas do sentido, apenas a mais estável”. (JOBIM e SOUZA, 
2004:135) 
 



 63 

responsabilidade. É igual a música do Lulu Santos: ‘não vou pousar de 

vítima das circunstâncias’. Então, eu acho que o petroleiro tem muito 

isso daí. Eu acho que (...) ta numa plataforma, num ambiente hostil, (...) 

mas nunca pode tirar o papel de sujeito, de responsável da pessoa. 

Então, toda vez que você se reúne com petroleiro, ele só sabe queixar, 

só sabe reclamar, ele faz catarse. Eu sou uma vítima, reclama, reclama, 

... Ah! eu sou um pobre coitado, ninguém olha por mim (...). Ele é um 

queixoso, é um chorão. Toda vez que você arranja um culpado, você 

não ta olhando pra si, pra sua responsabilidade”.  

 Na dualidade de suas vidas, a contraditoriedade de sua identidade vai se 

configurando de forma totalmente ambígua. Enquanto sujeitos que forjaram lutas e 

conquistas políticas e sindicais, principalmente após o período de abertura política, 

alterando rumos, servindo de parâmetros para outras categorias profissionais, relegam a 

um plano do desconhecido essa trajetória e se posicionam como meros receptáculos das 

decisões da empresa, do governo, do “Outro”.  

 Na medida em que o trabalhador não se vê como sujeito, assume para si a auto-

imagem de um mero depositário da dominação empresarial e governamental. Nesse 

momento, essas representações dissociam a sua identidade da identificação com a 

empresa. Quando isso ocorre, ocupa esse lugar, o trabalhador queixoso que se auto-

representa como vítima, produz a sua negação enquanto homem-sujeito, criando sua 

desumanidade. Esse processo, na medida em que o enfraquece, o relega a um plano de 

submissão e acomodação diante dos ditames do poder empresarial e governamental, o 

que configura a própria expressão subjetiva do trabalho alienado. 

 Assim, o processo de trabalho pode se converter apenas em meio de 

subsistência, o trabalhador o repudia, não se satisfaz, se degrada, não se reconhece e se 

nega. O seu trabalho não é voluntário, mas compulsório e “forçado” (MARX, 1983).  

 Na medida em que deixa de se auto-representar com a identificação da empresa, 

se coisifica, se aliena e se subjuga a uma relação de servidão, como mostra o 

depoimento a seguir: 

 “(...) é uma relação entre senhor e escravo. Ou você opta por ser 

escravo ou opta por ser senhor. Sabe a diferença do senhor para o 



 64 

escravo? É que o senhor privilegia a liberdade e o escravo privilegia a 

vida. Ele com medo de perder a vida abre mão da liberdade. E o 

senhor, ele ta preocupado com a vida não, ele quer a liberdade, quer 

mandar. Então, eu acho que o offshore ele não quer ter essa 

autonomia, essa liberdade não”.  

O senhor é proprietário do escravo. O escravo não tem escolha, não pode optar, 

aquele é o destino traçado e um futuro a ser construído, não existe. Ele não é sujeito. 

Encontra-se em absoluto estado de sujeição a um senhor, a um domínio. Não vê 

perspectivas para escapar das condições perversas as quais está submetido. O futuro é 

igual ao presente que foi igual ao passado.  

 Associado a esse quadro, o trabalhador offshore se vê paralelamente, sozinho, 

desprotegido da figura da mãe, na fala de que a “Empresa parecia uma mãe” ou do 

welfare state implantado desde os tempos varguistas até os anos 90. Sentimentos de 

perda e de desamparo vão permear a linguagem desses trabalhadores. O veio 

nacionalista e tutelar empresarial que unia os interesses dos trabalhadores e da empresa 

foi rompido definitivamente.  

“(...) no passado se falava a Petrobras: ‘é uma mãe e o empregado 

quer essa mãe. Agora ela não é mãe, é madrasta’. Ele não ta 

entendendo isso. (...) Então, ele sempre fica na cultura da queixa, existe 

uma cultura da queixa. O culpado é sempre o outro, o gerente, a 

empresa. Quando ele culpa o outro, ele deixa de se ver, enquanto 

sujeito desse processo, ele não vê do que muito que acontece no 

processo é consentido por ele. Há o consentimento, não é uma coisa o 

empregado é o bom, a empresa é o mal não. O culpado é sempre o 

outro. Ele nunca se vê inserido nesse processo, nessa balança, nessa 

correlação, nessa negociação”.  

À identidade de petroleiro queixoso estão ancoradas também relações de 

dependência criadas com essa realidade de trabalho. Estes consideram que apesar das 

queixas e reclamações, o trabalho offshore estabelece relações de dependência, “de 

vício meio estranhas”, pois associam-nas aos efeitos produzidos pela cachaça, que é 

amarga, mas dá muito prazer.  



 65 

É a partir dessa vivência ambígua, das experiências acumuladas e do 

enfrentamento de tantos outros elementos e questões que configuram o espaço offshore, 

que esses trabalhadores irão construindo e reconstruindo suas representações, as quais 

orientarão, por sua vez, suas escolhas e estratégias de ação individuais e coletivas.  

 

 

 

2.3. Crachá – que identidade é essa? 

 

A Petrobras, na região da Bacia de Campos, a partir de sua trajetória de 

crescimento, associada a sua história de pioneirismo, foi delineando traços marcantes de 

uma identidade corporativa aos quais se vinculam símbolos de poderio econômico-

político, status, privilégios etc.  

A identidade de uma corporação se configura paulatinamente pelas experiências 

comuns partilhadas, o papel que a empresa ocupa na sociedade, as formas pelas quais 

seus fundadores e gestores equacionam os problemas e fazem negócios, os laços criados 

com seus trabalhadores, fornecedores, concorrentes etc. (RHEIN:1999)  

Acrescenta que, principalmente, em empresas de médio e grande porte, o 

trabalhador vem assumindo a identidade da empresa como se fosse a sua própria 

identidade, nos vários espaços sociais, utilizando para tal, o seu registro empresarial, 

conhecido como crachá.  

Nessa direção, ratificando as constatações de Rhein (1999), observa-se também 

que na região da Bacia de Campos, o crachá ou lambreta, que além de demarcar a 

identidade corporativa do trabalhador, facilitando o seu reconhecimento e acesso, 

apenas no espaço institucional, extrapola a realidade de intramuros e passa a se 

constituir como se fosse a sua identidade em outras esferas de sua vida. 

Esse adereço, portanto, assume um valor simbólico, em termos de 

respeitabilidade, influência e prestígio nas outras dimensões da vida social, na região 

onde a empresa está localizada, que transcende a sua condição de trabalhador.   



 66 

 “O cara (...) ele toma a identidade, (...) assume a identidade é o fulano 

de tal da Petrobras. Não fala: Eu sou fulano. Então, tem que se 

desvincular dessa coisa”. 

A identidade corporativa assumida pelo trabalhador vem sendo moldada ao 

longo dos anos, desde a instalação da empresa nessa região do norte fluminense, a 

chegada de empresas de grande porte nacionais e multinacionais e, conseqüentemente, a 

fabulosa movimentação financeira e de serviços criada em decorrência das atividades de 

exploração e produção de petróleo e gás.  

Essa “nova” identificação do trabalhador ratifica o que já foi visto anteriormente 

e, explicita por meio de um objeto, a internalização da identidade da empresa como se 

fosse a sua própria.  

A dimensão que a identidade corporativa assume para o trabalhador sinaliza para 

uma busca de auto-afirmação, de reconhecimento, de tomar para si ou assimilar algum 

traço que pertence ao “Outro”, como por exemplo, símbolo de prestígio, além de marcar 

as diferenças sociais existentes na região.  

Soma-se a isso, pelo caráter da própria bifacialidade histórica da empresa, a 

assimilação de que enquanto trabalhador com uma missão especial, de ser o 

representante da sociedade, ao internalizar a identidade corporativa e os seus atributos, 

subjetivamente se auto-intitula “Eu sou a Petrobras”. 

Cabe destacar que a utilização do crachá, pelos trabalhadores offshore, como um 

documento, que demarca a sua auto-imagem, só vem ratificar e explicitar a identificação 

destes com os traços que marcam a identidade da empresa, como foi discutido 

anteriormente.  

 

 

 

 

 



 67 

2.4. Influência do mar 

 
 
 Que relação é essa que se estabelece entre o trabalhador offshore e o mar? 

 Muito embora existam diferenças fundamentais entre os pescadores (Duarte, 

1987), os marítimos (Santos, 1999), os mergulhadores (Figueiredo, 2001 e Barreto, 

1998) e os trabalhadores offshore, o mar, enquanto oposição às coisas da terra, onde não 

há canoas, navios, peixes, câmaras hiperbáricas e nem plataformas, é fator de 

singularidade na composição da identidade coletiva de cada uma dessas categorias 

profissionais. 

“O mundo do mar legitima assim toda uma elaboração ideológica da 

diferença. De oposição ao mundo da terra, que tende a unir nesse papel 

as situações díspares do trabalho marítimo”. (DUARTE, 1987:174)  

 O mar legitima toda uma elaboração ideológica que passa pela diferença, de 

oposição ao “mundo terrestre”, pelo sentido de poder, de superação das próprias 

adversidades e mistérios ainda a serem revelados. No mar tem abundância de vida 

marinha e petróleo que gera riqueza e energia para o país.  

“(...) eu acho assim, legal, eu não teria a oportunidade de ver ... legal... 

eu gosto de animal marinho, pó, eu consegui ver baleia, pô, se 

trabalhasse em qualquer outro lugar eu não teria possibilidade de ver, 

... cardume de peixes assim, ... pó debaixo do meu pé, praticamente, ... 

acho isso legal, golfinho, tem animais que você só vê no zoológico. 

Tubarão, no último embarque, o pessoal diz que viu, mas eu vi não. 

Golfinho, baleia com filhotinho, que legal, pôr do sol, (...)” 

  Para os trabalhadores offshore, trabalhar no mar significa, por um lado, poder 

contribuir para a auto-suficiência e soberania nacional, em termos energéticos mas, por 

outro lado, expressa viver e trabalhar de forma fracionada, em um território demarcado 

por condições e relações singulares entre os homens e pelo enfrentamento cotidiano dos 

riscos. Essa identidade ambivalente marca também as representações dos pescadores. 

O pescador vivencia essa condição comum com toda a ambivalência 

alocável a uma condição de existência percebida como estafante, como 



 68 

desumana, mas também como distintivo de capacidade, como símbolo 

das qualidades mais vivas que compõem sua ciosa dignidade”. 

(DUARTE, 1987:174)  

Na ambivalência de suas identidades, de um lado, se impõe poder e resistência 

enquanto a auto-exigência de permanecer em condições de trabalho cruéis, para os 

pescadores e, resistir ao regime de confinamento e suas conseqüências, para o offshore. 

De outro, onipotência e prepotência como características atreladas à própria figura 

masculina de força e auto-superação.  

O mar pressupõe: 

“traições e perigos, a profundidade de seu desconhecimento e a 

dificuldade de apropriação de seus recursos, ainda tão aleatoriamente 

disponíveis, demarcam uma diferença que opõe os que aí trabalham a 

todos os que se dedicam às atividades terrestres. Ir ao mar não é 

dirigir-se a um lugar de trabalho, que por si se opõe à segurança e à 

identidade doméstica”. (DUARTE, 1987:174)  

Nesse sentido, o que delineia as identidades desses trabalhadores (pescadores e 

offshore) não é apenas a sua existência fora do espaço seguro da vida doméstica 

terrestre, mas também enfrentar o desconhecido, lidar com as intempéries da natureza, se 

afastar do previsível e entrecortar a vida num movimento de tudo ou nada. 

Acrescenta, ainda, a essa identidade, exigências físicas e cognitivas, capacidade 

de conviver com o inusitado e a exigência de formação de um “saber próprio” a ser 

adquirido ao longo dos anos.   

“adjudicação ao seu desempenho de certas qualidades comuns 

próprias do enfrentamento da natureza, conformando um espaço 

semântico marcado pelas noções de força, conhecimento e disposição. 

Assim, à força dos elementos, à sua imprevisibilidade e à sua 

prepotência, se opõe uma resistência redobrada do homem em ação”. 

(DUARTE, 1987:174) 

Ao mesmo tempo que trabalhar no mar pode explicitar o desejo de sentir-se 

parte da busca e alcance da excelência nacional em petróleo e gás, expressa, também, 



 69 

elementos que se associam à vivacidade, a dominação dos mistérios e desafios do mar, a 

imensidão azul marinho, transpassado por linhas, dutos, ferros, rotas e redes de peixes, 

de homens e de tecnologia, que aprisiona e liberta, que os tornam prisioneiros e heróis, 

que estabelecem cooperação e solidariedade e que ao mesmo tempo os afasta do 

socialmente previsível.  

“(...) pra se adaptar a essa condição, tem que ter um pouco de gostar 

de viver na solidão, uma pessoa que gosta de ta isolado no mar, se não 

tiver isso não vira marinheiro, na realidade a gente é marinheiro72, 

marinheiro é um cara que gosta do mar (...)”.  

O mar enquanto elemento inibidor às relações sociais em geral, em função do 

isolamento, posiciona a categoria profissional dos marítimos (Santos,1999:79) como 

“homens especiais”. Esse significado se revela nos momentos em que realizam tarefas 

(fainas) perigosas a bordo, pois evocam o seguinte ditado: “existem três tipos de 

homem: o vivo, o morto e o marítimo”, sendo que a este último é atribuído a capacidade 

de transcender os limites entre vida e morte. O homem especial73 é capaz de 

desenvolver atividades perigosas além das intempéries do mar. 

 Figueiredo (2001:183) ao identificar o “devir guerreiro” como um traço 

marcante na identidade dos subaquáticos, destaca que os nomes74 de alguns navios 

remetem a essa simbologia.   

 Já na Bacia de Campos vamos encontrar Vermelho, Pargo, Carapeba e Pampo, 

por exemplo, que além de povoarem o mundo subaquático com seus cardumes75, entre 

os corais, as rochas, as linhas e os dutos também têm espaços reservados na superfície 

                                                
72 Marinheiro é um dos vários cargos que compõe a categoria profissional dos marítimos. 
73 A identidade do marítimo como homem especial será tratada comparativamente com o trabalhador 
offshore no capítulo V que se refere às estratégias defensivas. 
74 Highlander Hill, Star Hércules, Energy Supporter, Work Horse, Zephir (vento impetuoso). 
75 Os peixes Vermelho, Pargo, Carapeba e Pampo medem no máximo 60 cm.  Batizar com nomes de 
peixes da região as Unidades marítimas na Petrobras é uma prática adotada desde 1968, com a 
descoberta, em Sergipe, do primeiro poço de petróleo, que recebeu o nome de Guaricema. A idéia da 
empresa foi aproximar as imensas estruturas metálicas ao cotidiano das pessoas da região, já que a 
seleção dos nomes se referia a um peixe característico da área. Alguns critérios foram estabelecidos a fim 
de se garantir que não fossem escolhidos nomes que: pudessem gerar conotações “indesejáveis”, que 
criassem expectativas negativas ou que as características do animal não correspondessem “às perspectivas 
da descoberta”, muito embora em alguns casos, as expectativas iniciais do campo não se confirmavam 
posteriormente.  



 70 

da imensidão azul marinho, onde habitam milhares de trabalhadores que se alternam a 

cada 14 dias, num processo de trabalho contínuo.  

 “(...) você fica assim meio que dependente; não sei se o mar influencia 

a gente. Eu acho até que influencia até em função de que 85% do 

nosso corpo é de água. A gente vê água lá o tempo inteiro e parece que 

quando você trabalhar com o mar, você fica dependente, você não 

consegue trabalhar em outro lugar a não ser naquele, no ambiente de 

mar, de plataforma, mesmo sabendo do risco”.  

O depoimento acima explicita que se soma à representação da identidade 

offshore, aptidões, interesses e elos de dependência com a experiência marítima e o que 

é concebido imaginariamente sobre ele.  

Nessa relação que se estabelece entre os dois mundos – o marinho e o da 

superfície – a tensão se trava cotidianamente na busca de um vencedor. O mar é o elo 

entre as várias categorias profissionais, os marinheiros, os homens da pesca e os 

mergulhadores. “Se manifesta como máquina infinita, como força que sabe o que faz e 

para onde vai (...)”. Ao compartilharem essa experiência singular vivenciam o combate 

entre dois mundos, o “inesgotável” e o “inteligente”. (BARRETO, 1998:26) 

Nessa luta que se instala no cotidiano das atividades marítimas, em face às 

adversidades e limites impostos pela natureza, as relações de solidariedade são traços 

comuns entre os mergulhadores (Figueiredo:2001 e Barreto:1998), os marítimos 

(Santos1999), os pescadores (Duarte:1987) e, também, entre os trabalhadores das 

plataformas. No capítulo V trataremos dessa temática de forma mais detalhada. O relato 

a seguir nos mostra que a solidariedade é um valor tão importante para os trabalhadores 

do mar, que ganha expressão jurídica, em forma de lei76. 

Um trabalhador offshore relata que ao falar sobre o trabalho no mar, lhe fez 

relembrar de uma experiência particular e gratificante. Conta que durante o seu horário 

de descanso, foi acordado no meio da noite, por um colega, porque havia um barco 

próximo à plataforma solicitando ajuda para resgatar um pescador que estava passando 

                                                
76 Lei nº 7.203, de 3 de julho de 1984 que dispõe sobre a Assistência e Salvamento de Embarcação, Coisa 
ou Bem em Perigo no Mar, nos Portos e nas Vias Navegáveis Interiores e, a Lei 7.273 de 1984 que dispõe 
sobre a vida humana em perigo no mar, nos portos e nas vias navegáveis interiores. 
 



 71 

muito mal. Após obter as devidas autorizações de sua chefia para o socorro, tomou as 

providências necessárias rapidamente e o transbordo foi feito utilizando a “cestinha77”. 

O pescador estava sentindo muitas dores e após ser atendido na enfermaria foi 

medicado. Ficou durante algumas horas na plataforma até ter condições de retornar ao 

barco e seguir para o município de Macaé, pois o diagnóstico provável era crise renal. O 

trabalhador offshore, por sua vez, considera que não havia feito nada além de prestar 

solidariedade. Certo dia, muito tempo depois, este pescador conseguiu localizar sua casa 

e apareceu inesperadamente. O depoimento a seguir ilustra que o mar além de ser um 

elemento onde esses trabalhadores desempenham suas atividades, também estabelece 

referências de relações sociais.   

“(...) Aí, ele foi contou o episódio e disse que era o próprio, e na época 

não deu pra conversar, ele tava com crise, doendo, e a gente não 

conversou. E naquele dia, ele veio falar comigo que ele tinha rodado 

tudo, todas as plataformas ali do eixo e ninguém quis dar socorro pra 

ele, ninguém quis. ‘Olha rapaz, primeiro o seguinte: existe uma lei 

internacional que você não pode negar socorro pra ninguém, no mar. E 

como nós estávamos em águas, mar territorial brasileiro, e você tava 

precisando eu não fiz mais do que a minha obrigação. Faria por 

qualquer outro’. [E o pescador respondeu]‘Só você que conhece essa 

lei, porque todas as outras plataformas me negaram. E eu to aqui 

porque você me socorreu’. Então, isso me marcou de uma tal maneira 

que eu fiquei assim, em estado de graça, porra pelo menos eu fiz 

alguma coisa legal e ele me agradeceu pra caramba. Isso foi uma coisa 

que me marcou demais da conta e eu não esqueci (...)”.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                
77 Cesta de cordas que é usada para o transporte de passageiros de um barco para a plataforma. 



 72 

2.5. A não-visibilidade offshore 

 

O diálogo que o trabalhador offshore busca estabelecer com a família, os amigos, 

enfim, a vida terrestre, por vezes, se torna isolado e vazio. É no processo de interação 

verbal que “a palavra se concretiza como ideologia e ganha contornos e significados 

diferentes, conforme o contexto em que está inserida”. Assim, “o diálogo se revela 

como forma de ligação entre a linguagem e a vida”. A cada contexto histórico, 

segmentos sociais têm determinados repertórios de discursos que revelam e refletem o 

próprio cotidiano, que explicitam os valores fundamentais daquela sociedade e as suas 

contradições. (JOBIM e SOUZA, 1994:120)  

Nesse sentido, a palavra ocupa uma posição central na constituição das 

ideologias e da consciência dos homens. Jobim e Souza (1994) indaga: de que forma 

que a realidade determina a palavra ou como esta reflete e refrata a realidade em 

transformação? Bakhtin responde que: 

“As palavras são tecidas a partir de uma multidão de fios ideológicos e 

servem de trama a todas as relações sociais em todos os domínios. É, 

portanto, claro que a palavra será sempre o indicador mais sensível de 

todas as transformações sociais (...). A palavra constitui o meio no 

qual se produzem lentas acumulações quantitativas de mudanças que 

ainda não tiveram tempo de adquirir uma nova qualidade ideológica 

(...). A palavra é capaz de registrar as fases transitórias mais íntimas, 

mais efêmeras das mudanças sociais”. (BAKHTIN, 1992:41) 

Para ele, a linguagem não pode ser separada do seu conteúdo ideológico ou 

vivencial, pois existe uma diversidade de formas de falar que vai refletir a própria 

experiência social, que também é diversa. 

Nesse sentido, a língua enquanto uma experiência viva vai se constituindo 

continuamente nas relações verbais e dialógicas. 

“Você trabalha lá, mas o pessoal não tem visão real da situação. (...) 

tem que aproximar, porque fica tudo (...) agente fala, fala, explica (...) e 

as pessoas não conseguem imaginar. Só conhecendo”.  



 73 

Essa dificuldade de explicar o que faz, de explicitar o significado dessa 

experiência de trabalho e de vida pode partir de duas possibilidades: uma de que “os 

recursos da linguagem seriam muito rígidos para antecipar os processos reais, 

lacunares em relação à diversidade de configurações da atividade”; e uma outra de que 

“a deficiência seria imputada ao locutor, cujo domínio dos recursos lingüísticos seria 

insuficiente” (SOUZA-e-SILVA, 2004:195). Atribui-se a esta última o fato de que em 

razão da organização do trabalho taylorista que divide os trabalhadores entre 

concebedores e executores e, portanto, a estes é imputada a dispensa de falar e pensar 

intelectualmente sobre a própria atividade.   

Nesse sentido, a autora considera que se o trabalho real difere do trabalho 

prescrito, é porque os trabalhadores “estão sempre a gerenciar, antecipar os eventos, os 

imprevistos e as variáveis, das quais eles fazem parte como indivíduos singulares” e 

que a vivência do trabalho jamais pode ser enquadrada ao que é pré-concebido.  

Assim, para o trabalhador passar do trabalho para o discurso, gesto que o leva a 

pensar sobre a sua inserção na realidade offshore, os riscos aos quais está submetido e 

sobre a eficácia das estratégias utilizadas.   

Souza-e-Silva (2004:198) seleciona três características da atividade de linguagem 

em qualquer situação social que consideramos fundamentais para a análise do universo 

offshore, quais sejam: uma primeira que considera a linguagem o “instrumento ou o 

vetor de conhecimentos já elaborados pelo sujeito, que os explicitariam aos 

profissionais do trabalho encarregados de ‘extrair conhecimentos’ a partir de suas 

falas”. Permite também que ao falar o sujeito construa novos conhecimentos aos quais 

não existiam anteriormente, de forma simultânea à enunciação das palavras. Uma 

segunda propriedade se refere à concepção de que a linguagem é uma “atividade de 

significação para o outro, de co-construção na interação”. E, a última em que a 

linguagem é um processo corporal, “simultaneamente cognitivo, físico e afetivo”, pois 

os sujeitos são singulares complexos que, ao mesmo tempo, possuem e expressam 

conhecimentos, saberes, emoções e afetos.  

Acrescenta, ainda, que na relação entre trabalho e prática linguageira, a 

experiência do trabalhador em falar sobre a sua atividade, pode despertar neste um 

sentimento de incompetência lingüística. Por outro lado, ao buscar a compreensão de 



 74 

todos, produzindo uma fala clara e interpretável, corre o risco de cair num discurso 

repetitivo, rotineiro e estereotipado que não retrate a realidade de sua experiência e, com 

isso, torne-a impossível de ser partilhada com outros.  

Nesse sentido, a experiência offshore corre o risco de só poder ser compartilhada 

por aqueles que vivenciam essa realidade. Só estes é que conseguem expressar entre si, 

a verdade dessa existência. O diálogo, como forma de partilhar dialeticamente a 

percepção sobre o cotidiano de trabalho, a rede de significados que envolvem valores, 

visões, símbolos, enfim num processo de construção e reconstrução. A experiência e as 

verdades do mundo confinado permanecem coletivamente confinadas nesse mundo. 

Assim, a “falta social de produção discursiva explicaria a extrema dificuldade 

do trabalhador de dizer o trabalho em toda sua complexidade”. O domínio do trabalho 

real é pouco codificado discursivamente. A análise do trabalho vai exigir uma ampliação 

sobre a concepção de atividade. (SOUZA-e-SILVA, 2004:201) 

“Aquilo que se faz, e que se pode considerar como atividade realizada, 

não é senão a atualização de uma das atividades realizáveis na 

situação na qual ela ocorreu (...) o real da atividade também é aquilo 

que não se faz, aquilo que procuramos fazer sem conseguir – o drama 

dos fracassos –, aquilo que tenhamos querido ou tenhamos podido 

fazer, aquilo que pensamos que podemos fazer do outro modo. É 

necessário acrescentar ainda – paradoxo freqüente – aquilo que 

fazemos para não fazer o que deveria ser feito. Fazer é, com 

freqüência, sempre equivalente a refazer ou desfazer”. (SOUZA-e-

SILVA, 2004:202) 

Dessa forma, falar sobre a própria atividade implica em falar de uma realidade, 

de sucessos e fracassos, de desafios e riscos, de compartilhamentos e desavenças, de 

prazer e sofrimento, da verdade que “está no que se constrói de coletivo, na vida e na 

história”. (BAKHTIN, 1992) 

 “Na realidade, não são palavras o que pronunciamos ou escutamos, 

mas verdades ou mentiras, coisas boas ou más, importantes ou triviais, 

agradáveis ou desagradáveis etc. A palavra está sempre carregada de 



 75 

um conteúdo ou de um sentido ideológico ou vivencial”. 

(BAKHTIN,1992:95) 

Como falar pra quem está em terra, da contraditoriedade da vida e do trabalho 

offshore? Como falar dos feitos, sem mencionar o medo e os riscos? Como falar da 

segurança, dos acidentes de trabalho sem despertar preocupações? Como tornar 

compreensível a leitura desse mundo marítimo, sem falar do sofrimento em permanecer 

nessa condição de trabalho? Como explicar que quer deixar o trabalho offshore se 

existem muitos em terra que dependem do que este proporciona em relação à saúde, 

educação, habitação etc?  

Diante da impossibilidade de discutir e explicitar suas ansiedades, sofrimentos, 

os riscos aos quais está submetido, contar dos incidentes ou acidentes de trabalho com 

companheiros que desenvolviam atividades semelhantes às suas, das suas dúvidas em 

permanecer ou romper com o emprego tão aguardado etc, o trabalhador offshore opta 

por poupar sua família, seus amigos e sua rede de relações sociais dos conflitos que 

assolam os “iguais” que vivem nas ilhas de aço da Bacia de Campos. 

O sistema offshore paulatinamente vai interferindo na totalidade da vida do 

embarcado, de forma contínua e intermitente, e o impossibilita de partilhar com os 

outros, em terra, de sua experiência que se torna “intransmissível e intraduzível para a 

linguagem de todos aqueles que lhe são estrangeiros”. (LOSICER, 2003) 

“(...) cada um à sua maneira vai conhecendo a significação das 

transformações impostas pelo confinamento. (...) o embarcado sofre 

pelo não reconhecimento da sua inefável experiência. (...) descobre que 

sua experiência se torna inenarrável e é assim que ele fica 

simbolicamente confinado (...)”. (LOSICER, 2003) 

 Reconhecimento esse não recebido de seus superiores quando está embarcado, 

ao mesmo tempo em que é desacreditado e interditado de sua palavra. Em terra, sofre 

por não ter reconhecimento pelas desigualdades ao qual está exposto comparativamente 

a respeito daqueles trabalhadores que estão em terra, pela perda de sua segurança física, 

pela condição de confinamento, pela descontinuidade de sua vida familiar, social e 

sexual. Somando a isso, a não explicitação para os de terra da realidade offshore que o 

envolve e dos sentimentos e expectativas não atendidas. Que experiência é essa que é 



 76 

não compartilhável? Cada ato de fala sempre cria e recria algo novo, não repetitivo, algo 

singular que nunca existiu antes, seja pelo que é dito, pelos gestos, pela entonação, ou 

por todos os significados que não se dissociam do que é verbalmente dito. O 

depoimento a seguir exemplifica a lacuna existente que separa o sujeito embarcado do 

mundo “de terra”.  

 “(...) quando voltei para casa depois de meu primeiro embarque, fiquei 

falando sem parar para minha mulher sobre tudo que tinha vivido 

naqueles primeiros quatorze dias numa plataforma. Embarcar era um 

sonho que eu tinha desde garoto. Ela acompanhava tudo que eu 

contava. Depois do embarque seguinte falei e falei, mas já estava 

sentindo que tinha coisas que ela não entendia e ficava distraída. Das 

outras vezes contava cada vez menos, até que parei de contar, quando 

eu me dei conta que ela não ia saber mesmo do mundo que eu vivia. 

Hoje [dois anos depois] sei que vocês, de terra, nunca vão nos 

conhecer de verdade (...) não dá para falar”. (LOSICER, 2003:7) 

Os relatos a seguir mostram que desmistificar a realidade offshore é um caminho 

para tornar essa vivência repleta de fatos memoráveis e incompreensíveis em 

experiências narráveis.  

“Eu acho que a abertura que a empresa deu pra essa visita de 

familiares ajudou muito para o pessoal entender (...)”.   

“Eu já levei alguns familiares pra visitar a plataforma. Levei meu 

irmão e uma prima minha que foi visitar e ficaram conhecendo mais um 

pouco (...) mas (...) a maioria não conhece muito, não sabe como é o 

serviço (...)”. 

 Segundo Castello e Alvarenga (1993), a experiência dos familiares de 

trabalhadores offshore que visitam as Unidades marítimas, no período em que estes 

estão trabalhando, é considerada como um fator que facilita o diálogo entre o 

trabalhador e sua família; um melhor entendimento da vida e do trabalho embarcado por 

parte da família e, sobre a importância do papel da família para a dinâmica da vida 

intermitente imposta pelo regime. Relatos de visitantes e trabalhadores offshore, 



 77 

posteriormente à visita sinalizam para os seguintes aspectos: o compartilhamento de 

idéias com outros familiares que vivem situações comuns criam oportunidades para o 

início de um relacionamento entre estes, de mútua ajuda e a busca de alternativas 

coletivas de enfrentamento das dificuldades em decorrência do regime de trabalho; o 

conhecimento “in loco” da plataforma permite um esclarecimento da função, das 

atividades desenvolvidas pelo trabalhador, bem como uma visão mais realista do 

confinamento, o que gera uma melhor compreensão das questões que envolvem o 

embarque.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 78 

CAPÍTULO III 

 

 

 

VIDA E TRABALHO NO MUNDO OFFSHORE 

 

 

 

3.1. Como chegar à plataforma 

 
 

Os trabalhadores da Bacia de Campos podem residir em qualquer lugar do Brasil 

ou do exterior, a ponto de alguns levarem de dois a três dias de viagem no trajeto entre a 

sua residência e as cidades de Macaé ou Campos dos Goytacazes, de onde partirão rumo 

às plataformas. Portanto, juntam-se homens oriundos de locais diferentes, culturas 

diferentes, expectativas diversas, trajetórias singulares e histórias únicas, em um mesmo 

espaço físico por 14 dias, tendo como missão e meta de trabalho e de vida realizar 

tarefas que levem à produção de óleo e gás em águas profundas ou ultra-profundas, bem 

como suplantar os próprios recordes já alcançados.  

 O deslocamento entre o aeroporto e a plataforma se dá em vôos de helicóptero, 

com duração entre 40 a 90 minutos, para os trabalhadores próprios e contratados. 

Quando se chega no aeroporto, já existe toda uma padronização de procedimentos a 

serem seguidos. O trabalhador localiza num quadro de avisos o seu vôo e dirige-se ao 

local de pesagem dos passageiros e das bagagens. A bagagem está limitada a 15 kg, é 

pesada e vistoriada, uma vez que é, terminantemente, proibido o transporte, por 

exemplo, de armas, bebidas e drogas.  

 Posteriormente, após a chamada de seu vôo, o trabalhador encaminha-se para a 

área interna de espera, onde é submetido à revista por um segurança. Algum tempo 



 79 

depois, já na aeronave, recebe o colete inflável, a ser colocado imediatamente e assiste 

ao briefing78 de segurança do co-piloto.  

Quando o helicóptero pousa no heliponto da plataforma de destino, será 

encaminhado a um local, no casario da Unidade, onde é feita a identificação e 

posteriormente assiste a um briefing79 de segurança obrigatório.  O relato, a seguir, 

descreve a percepção de um trabalhador em seu primeiro embarque. 

“A primeira sensação que eu tive foi andar de helicóptero, primeira 

vez na vida andar de helicóptero, aliás meu primeiro emprego na 

Petrobras (...). Todo mundo falou que, (...) você está bem (...). Mas o 

subir no helicóptero, aquela coisa e chegar não saber pra onde ir, as 

pessoas iam te guiando assim, sala miúda que a gente está sempre 

acostumado com esse teto alto (...) e lá é tudo curtinho, tudo compacto. 

Então, chegar e ficar, onde eu estou, o quê que eu estou fazendo, será 

que é isso que eu quero? Aquele questionamento normal, pelo menos 

pra mim foi assim. E aí, receber aquelas instruções de como está a 

plataforma, o briefing, a primeira reunião. A gente entra e tem o 

técnico de segurança, o técnico de enfermagem, o gerente da 

plataforma, eles se reúnem e vão apresentando (...): gente oh! a 

respeito dos conceitos da segurança (...). Eles apresentam o capacete  

e tudo mais,  pra quem tava no primeiro embarque. Na época, tinha um 

videozinho mostrando procedimentos, no caso, homem ao mar como 

que deve se agir (...)”.  

Após o briefing, o trabalhador precisa se dirigir a um local denominado ponto de 

reunião para colocar um cartão que recebeu na chegada à plataforma. O ponto de 

reunião é lugar de referência que o trabalhador tem que se conduzir em caso de 

evacuação da plataforma em situações de emergência.   

Cabe destacar que até 2004 os trabalhadores que eram de empresas terceirizadas 

utilizavam embarcações velozes chamadas catamarãs com tempo médio de viagem de 3 
                                                
78 Briefing de segurança do co-piloto é uma pequena palestra que transmitirá informações sobre os 
procedimentos adequados e comportamentos corretos do trabalhador ou visitante desde a entrada na 
aeronave, durante o período de viagem e também ao descer do helicóptero na plataforma. 
79 Briefing de segurança na plataforma é realizado pelo técnico de segurança da plataforma orienta sobre 
os procedimentos a serem seguidos em caso de alarme.  



 80 

a 4 horas, dependendo da distância das plataformas e das condições do mar. Era uma 

viagem desgastante, pois muitos se sentiam mal, em decorrência de várias horas no 

“embalo das ondas”.  

“Agora todo mundo no vôo. Por que era até uma covardia, essa lancha 

aí. Tudo bem que o risco era, (...) não tinha risco, mas era um 

sofrimento (...)”.  

 O sofrimento ao qual se refere o entrevistado ocorria devido ao estado de mal 

estar que acometia muitos trabalhadores durante o período de viagem, pois “vomitam, 

caem (...) é o pessoal todo jogado no chão, sentam nas pernas do sujeito, vem 

cheirando limão, molhado do lado de fora, não dorme, treme de frio, parece um bando 

de amotinados”. (PESSANHA, 1994) 

Dessa forma, muitos trabalhadores chegavam às Unidades marítimas sem 

condições físicas para o início de suas atividades. Muitas das vezes precisavam se 

dirigir à enfermaria para serem atendidos pelo profissional da área de saúde embarcado.   

O embarque e desembarque na plataforma, no caso de utilização de lancha, 

envolvem procedimentos mais cuidadosos, uma vez que os passageiros, usando coletes 

salva-vidas, ficam se segurando na parte externa de uma cesta de cordas, conhecida 

como “cestinha”, que é içada por um guindaste até a base da plataforma. 

Segundo um representante do Sindipetro NF essa mudança ocorreu porque no 

ano de 2004, “findou o contrato com a empresa ‘Trico’, empresa que fazia o transporte 

dos trabalhadores pelo mar. A partir daí, todos os trabalhadores passaram a ser 

transportados de helicóptero. Não há opção hoje, para a forma de embarque. Todos 

viajam de helicóptero. A Petrobras percebeu que a economia que fazia, não valia a 

pena, pois eram muitos problemas com as embarcações”.  

 

 

 

 

 



 81 

3.2. O confinamento – vida e trabalho 

 

 Independentemente de se chamar Antônio, Manoel ou Francisco, a partir do 

momento que descerem do helicóptero e pisarem no heliponto da plataforma, serão por 

14 dias somente trabalhadores offshore: trabalhadores submetidos à mesma condição de 

confinamento. Durante esse período permanecerão sem contatos pessoais com os 

amigos de terra, familiares etc, sem ingerirem nenhuma bebida alcoólica, folgarem os 

finais de semana e feriados, comemorarem datas importantes, assistirem de perto os 

seus times jogarem e, muito menos faltarem ao trabalho, pois estarão isolados, envoltos 

pelo metal, pelo azul do céu e o azul-marinho do mar. 

A temática do confinamento se articula à localização geográfica das plataformas 

e ao regime de trabalho, 14 por 21. Esse regime, ao mesmo tempo em que determina 

uma dissociação radical entre a vida pública, representada pelo embarque, e a vida 

privada, pelo desembarque, cria, também para o trabalhador, no período de 14 dias de 

embarque, uma fusão desses dois espaços e tempos vividos: o público e o privado. Na 

plataforma, a vida é compartilhada vinte e quatro horas por dia durante os 14 dias, o que 

faz com que não se tenha, em nenhum momento, a percepção de privacidade. 

Demarcações meramente formais, entre público (trabalho) e privado (descanso), são 

representadas por vestuário mais leve e descontraído após a jornada, em substituição ao 

uniforme laranja, conversa informal, jogos, tv, leitura de jornais, etc ou mesmo o sono. 

Entretanto, todos mostram em verdade pouca efetividade, pois se parte dos 

trabalhadores descansam, os demais continuam trabalhando e mantendo contato com os 

que estão de folga, além de todas as condições do trabalho confinado aos quais todos 

estão submetidos.  

Essa convivência, no ambiente offshore, sob o ponto de vista da espacialidade e 

da temporalidade remete ao conceito de instituição total adotado por Goffman (1987).  

“Uma instituição total pode ser definida como um local de residência e 

trabalho onde um grande número de indivíduos com situação semelhante, 

separados da sociedade mais ampla por considerável período de tempo, 

levam uma vida fechada e formalmente administrada. (...) Seu fechamento 

ou seu caráter total é simbolizado pela barreira à relação social com o 



 82 

mundo externo e por proibições à saída que muitas vezes estão incluídas 

no esquema físico – por exemplo, portas fechadas, paredes altas, arame 

farpado, fossos, água, florestas ou pântanos”. (GOFFMAN, 1987:11,16) 

Estas instituições são relacionadas por Goffman (1987) em cinco grupos, quais 

sejam: um primeiro que agrupa instituições que cuidam de pessoas incapazes e 

inofensivas, como as casas para cegos, velhos, órfãos e indigentes; um segundo 

responsável por pessoas consideradas incapazes, não de forma intencional, de cuidarem 

de si mesmas, como sanatórios para tuberculosos, hospitais para doentes mentais e 

leprosários; um terceiro que objetiva resguardar a comunidade contra os perigos 

intencionais, como cadeias, penitenciárias, campos de prisioneiros de guerra e campos 

de concentração; um quarto que reúnem pessoas com a intenção de realizarem alguma 

tarefa de trabalho, tais como: quartéis, navios, escolas internas, campos de trabalho, 

colônias e grandes mansões e, por último, as instituições que se destinam a servir de 

refúgio do mundo e que servem também como locais de formação para religiosos, como 

abadias, mosteiros e conventos. A partir dessa caracterização, observa-se que o trabalho 

offshore se insere na descrição do quarto grupo.  

Ao se estabelecer uma analogia entre as instituições totais e as plataformas 

observa-se que independentemente da finalidade de cada uma, o confinamento é uma 

característica comum entre elas. Esse sistema fechado, fortemente instituído e que isola, 

detém o controle total da vida de seus membros, durante o período de permanência nas 

mesmas.  

Uma característica central das instituições totais se refere à ruptura que se dá 

entre as barreiras que separam as três esferas da vida – dormir, brincar e trabalhar. 

Nesses ambientes, todos os aspectos da vida são desenvolvidos em um mesmo local e 

submetidos a uma mesma autoridade. Cada etapa da vida diária é realizada na 

companhia de um grupo relativamente grande de pessoas, que são obrigadas a fazer as 

mesmas coisas em conjunto e, todas as atividades cotidianas obedecem a horários pré-

determinados e a um sistema de regras. Assim, estas são planejadas de forma a atender 

conjuntamente aos objetivos institucionais, ou seja, cabe a instituição o gerenciamento 

total da vida de seus membros (GOFFMAN, 1987).  



 83 

Losicer e Siqueira (1991:26) concluem que concomitantemente à existência de 

convergências entre as instituições totais e as gigantescas máquinas marítimas, também 

há distinções importantes entre elas, tais como: o confinamento contínuo e prolongado 

das instituições totais e o relativamente curto e intermitente das plataformas; entre um 

local que produz petróleo, ou seja, uma mercadoria, e um outro de reclusos que só 

produz técnicas de controle; e as relações de trabalho entre os embarcados e o 

inexistente entre os internados. Cabe, portanto, enfatizar que não é nosso objetivo 

afirmar que as plataformas se constituem em instituições totais a partir da conceituação 

clássica dada por Goffman. Porém, a questão do confinamento é um traço que demarca 

um elo de identificação entre estes espaços institucionais, o que vai gerar o denominado 

“efeito totalizante”, identificado por Losicer e Siqueira em seus estudos com a 

população embarcada. Os relatos que se seguem mostram o impacto, nos trabalhadores 

offshore, desse efeito que os totaliza. 

 “A primeira coisa que você faz quando você embarca é pegar uma 

folhinha daquela ali e contando os dias, o tempo passa mais rápido 

possível. Por que o mais importante é você desembarcar. Você fica 

torcendo pra passar logo o dia. (...) ele quer acelerar o tempo (...) Pra 

chegar o dia dele ir embora”.  

“(...) você fica numa ilha, a produção no mar é uma ilha, tudo lá é 

muito difícil. (...) você ta isolado de tudo.” 

Um dos entrevistados considera que o trabalho offshore lhe deu a oportunidade 

de exercitar, na prática, o aprendizado teórico discutido no período em que estava na 

faculdade.   

“Tem o livro do Goffman, Manicômios, Prisões e Conventos é sobre o 

que ele chama de instituição total. E na época, na faculdade, eu 

brincava com os professores que fazia uma revisão do livro, porque 

tudo bem, é por tempo limitado, mas ali naquele período a instituição 

tem o controle total sobre você, como tem numa prisão, num 

convento”.  

Nas plataformas não é diferente. Os diferentes espaços da vida estão integrados 

num mesmo lugar, os participantes com que se convive são os mesmos, a autoridade 



 84 

está centrada em uma única pessoa e uns poucos que recebem delegação para o 

representarem e há um planejamento conjunto desses espaços de modo que todos 

possam usufruí-lo sem interrupção do processo contínuo de produção.  

Por se tratar de uma organização produtiva, a lógica instituída que totaliza é 

demarcada por uma concepção de padronização inerente à natureza dos processos de 

trabalho, dos procedimentos operacionais e de segurança, mas que também invade a 

dinâmica das relações entre as pessoas, exigindo que sua população esteja 

permanentemente no limite de suas capacidades físicas e psíquicas.  

 “Agora, são ambientes que padronizam o comportamento, (...) 

trabalhando no mar, como dentro de uma câmara de mergulho o que 

existe em comum é que nossos comportamentos passam a ser 

padronizados (...)”.  

Estar submetido a essa ordem produtiva que engloba trabalho e descanso pode 

ser utilizado como um mecanismo de controle pela equipe dirigente. A conduta adotada 

pelos seus habitantes em uma determinada esfera da vida interna pode ser usada pelas 

chefias, a favor ou contra os interesses e necessidades da população interna. Assim, 

efetivamente não existe uma delimitação das esferas da vida (descanso e trabalho), pois 

um comportamento adotado em um determinado âmbito pode favorecer ou prejudicar o 

trabalhador em outros contextos internos. Se, nas plataformas, não existe dicotomia 

entre público e privado, o trabalhador durante o seu período de permanência na Unidade 

estará submetido a uma mesma figura de autoridade. Os comportamentos adotados pelo 

trabalhador, quando se encontra no efetivo exercício de suas atividades profissionais no 

processo produtivo pode interferir de forma intrínseca e contraditória nos demais 

momentos da vida de embarcado, assim como também pode ocorrer o movimento 

oposto. Essa não dissociação cria, de fato, um estado de vigilância constante que o 

submete psiquicamente a relações controvertidas de exploração e alienação.  

 O processo de padronização existente na realidade offshore, também se faz 

presente nas plataformas cearenses estudadas por Sampaio (1998). A tendência 

totalizante de homogeneização de todo espaço offshore, invade até a realização de 

tarefas consideradas simples e comuns, uma vez que a atenção e os cuidados com a 



 85 

complexidade de riscos80 aos quais os trabalhadores estão expostos, procedimentos 

precisam ser seguidos de forma disciplinar, o que favorece a adoção de uma conduta 

mais enrijecida.  

Pessanha (1994:96) em seu estudo sobre os operadores de petróleo da Bacia de 

Campos, afirma que: 

“(...) novos hábitos e os novos costumes com que eles são obrigados a 

conviver, parecem criar uma nova cultura. Alguns rejeitam, também, a 

profunda disciplina em que são obrigados a conviver pelos 14 dias. Um 

petroleiro (...) disse, quando se conversava sobre a rotina da 

plataforma: ‘quando a gente embarca, se programa para as refeições, 

lanches, almoço, jantar, ceia etc’ (...)”. 

Figueiredo (2001) também compartilha dessa conclusão, uma vez que na 

atividade de mergulho profundo, pela sua especificidade, pelo confinamento excessivo e 

condições de risco, a disciplina é forçosamente rígida, pois caso contrário, a não 

padronização e o não cumprimento podem ocasionar até a morte de toda equipe de 

mergulhadores. 

Acrescenta-se ainda, toda herança de um modelo de gestão ditatorial que como 

vimos no capítulo I, perpassou a história da empresa, herança dos longos anos de 

ditadura militar, deixando traços marcantes, de uma gestão hierarquizada, tecnicista e 

autoritária, na identidade de seus trabalhadores.    

O obstáculo que as instituições totais colocam entre os homens que habitam os 

seus espaços e o mundo externo assinala um primeiro corte que diferencia esse espaço 

institucional dos demais. Na vida civil em geral, tanto as rotinas diárias quanto os ciclos 

de vida não se tornam impeditivos para que um papel que o trabalhador desempenhe não 

obstrua sua efetividade e suas ligações em outro. No entanto, nas instituições totais, a 

separação entre os dois mundos perturba a seqüência de papéis, pois essa situação pode 

perdurar por muitos anos. Mesmo quando retorne ao mundo civil e restabeleça alguns 

destes papéis, muitas dessas perdas, por vezes, são irrecuperáveis. Goffman  considera 

                                                
80 As condições de trabalho e a exposição aos riscos serão discutidas no capítulo IV. 



 86 

que essas perdas apresentam aspectos relativos ao conceito de morte civil81 

(GOFFMAN, 1987:25). Nas plataformas, os trabalhadores offshore, em muitas ocasiões, 

são impedidos de exercer um dos direitos fundamentais do cidadão, ou seja, é o de ter a 

oportunidade de exercitar o seu livre-arbítrio ao escolher os seus governantes, por meio 

do voto82. (PESSANHA, 1994:85). 

Pesquisas realizadas com trabalhadores offshore no Mar do Norte, na amostra de 

marítimos por Goffman (FIGUEIREDO, 2001:162) e com os embarcados da Bacia de 

Campos (SIQUEIRA SILVA, 1991), sinalizam que o espaço de confinamento pode 

gerar graves efeitos de despersonalização83, uma vez que se caracterizam por 

“proporcionar aos seus membros um mundo próprio e apresentar uma tendência 

absorvente ou totalizadora (absorve parte do tempo e do interesse dos seus membros)”.  

 “Para o internado, o sentido completo de estar ‘dentro’ não existe 

independentemente do sentido específico que para ele tem ‘sair’ ou ir 

para fora’. (...) as instituições totais (...) criam e mantêm um tipo 

específico de tensão entre o mundo doméstico e o mundo institucional, 

e usam essa tensão persistente como uma força estratégica no controle 

dos homens”. (GOFFMAN, 1987:24) 

Essa tendência totalizadora é simbolizada pelo exercício do trabalho na condição 

de confinamento, relacionado a uma reclusão forçada que, apesar de afastar o 

trabalhador do convívio sócio-familiar, não é determinante para impedir ingressos e 

regressos. A carta a seguir nos foi enviada por um dos entrevistados, com o objetivo de 

ilustrar o sentimento de prisão sobre o trabalho offshore que atinge a todos 

indiscriminadamente.  

 
                                                
81Goffman (1987) exemplifica esse conceito afirmando que “os presos podem enfrentar, não apenas uma 
perda temporária dos direitos de dispor do dinheiro e assinar cheques, opor-se a processos de divórcio ou 
adoção e votar”.   
82 Matéria do Jornal do Brasil (04/10/94) intitulada “Frustração em alto-mar” afirma: “Trabalhadores de 
plataformas não podem votar. Quase quatro mil eleitores brasileiros não votaram nesta eleição por 
estarem em plataformas em alto-mar. (...) vão receber uma carta da empresa com chancela do TRE para, 
posteriormente, se justificar em sua zona eleitoral (...) Eu gostaria de ir às urnas: exercer o voto é exercer 
a cidadania (...)”.  
83 Siqueira afirma, com base nos estudos de Goffman, que a “condução de pessoas em massa tende a levar 
a uma uniformização destas, que embora se expresse nas roupas e nos ambientes não particularizados, por 
exemplo, relaciona-se mais à uniformização no sentido de despersonalizar, pois interfere nos valores das 
pessoas de um modo geral”. 



 87 

“Homem Offshore e a Penitenciária de Nível Superior 

 Em dado momento da história, o Brasil se viu necessitado de 

explorar riquezas em alto mar, para sua sobrevivência. 

 Colocar ilhas de ferro em alto mar requeria naquele momento, 

de um pessoal disposto a abandonar família e outros ideais. 

 Ora isso foi conseguido. 

 Depois de muito trabalho, conquistas, sucessos, até no exterior, 

acatando determinações internacionais ou simplesmente ignorando os 

direitos de quem já fez e ainda continua fazendo pela grandeza desse 

país. 

 Hoje, passados alguns anos fico eu olhando o horizonte, e nada 

vejo ... Nada a não ser o encontro do céu e do mar. 

 Há tempos atrás eu via horizontes de muitas cores. 

 Somos empurrados para um funil, onde já se encontram muitos 

amigos nossos, que sempre dividiram conosco o sucesso de tudo que já 

fora feito, embora pouco reconhecido por isso financeiramente, ou 

mesmo só por uma condecoração que se resumisse em um aperto de 

mão ou, muito obrigado.  

 Estamos prestes a terminar mais um ano de trabalho e, nesse 

momento me vejo, depois de tanta luta, como se fosse um presidiário de 

nível superior. 

Porque tudo isso? (podes imaginar...) 

Ora eis um resumo de como é nossa vida offshore. 

Venho cumprir minha pena, pelo crime de ter sido contratado 

para esse fim. 

Aqui tenho que trabalhar por 14 dias, sob vigilância constante 

de carcereiros que a todo instante vêm me mostrar falhas, só falhas ... 

E estes também, sob olhares do chefe da penitenciária, pronto a punir 

qualquer um que seja. 



 88 

Aqui minha prisão, eu tenho alguns direitos tais como me 

locomover dentro do espaço que me é oferecido, posso rir, posso 

cantar, praticar alguns esportes, cultuar minha religião ... Posso até 

falar com meu carcereiro imediato – pelo menos por enquanto. 

Tenho também direito a uma alimentação de boa qualidade – de 

algumas coisas não posso reclamar. 

Tenho também direito a uma remuneração pelo meu bom 

comportamento e pelo trabalho exercido durante meus dias de 

cumprimento de minha pena. 

Agora o que mais me deixa triste, é que apesar de toda minha 

dedicação e bom comportamento, estão cortando minha condicional. 

Sim, minha condicional de poder depois de cumprir alguns dias de 

pena, poder estar com minha família... Está sendo eliminada aos 

poucos... 

Os direitos humanos se preocupam mais dos direitos dos que 

cometem algum crime, do que os direitos dos trabalhadores que fazem 

desse país uma nação mais próspera. 

A sociedade precipita as classes trabalhadoras ao abismo, 

atendendo a apelos mentirosos de grupos que estão mais preocupados 

em satisfazer suas cobiças do que levar nossa nação ao rumo certo. 

Sou trabalhador. Estão me reduzindo o salário, dia-dia 

retirando alguns direitos. Agora, o direito de estar com minha família 

um pouco mais de tempo. 

E ainda já nos ameaçam, dizendo em aumentar o tempo para 

acabar a minha pena. 

 Quer dizer, minha aposentadoria está nas mãos de um juiz, que 

faz justiça para atender aos seus caprichos. Sua justiça não é cega, 

apenas olha pra quem lhe interessa. 



 89 

 Enquanto isso fico eu aqui vendo passar minha juventude, entre 

nuvens carregadas de dias compridos e noites estreladas de sonos e 

sonhos perdidos. 

 Nada recupera vidas!” 

A ambigüidade vem se mostrando como um traço que atravessa a identidade do 

trabalhador offshore. Ao mesmo tempo em que este se posiciona como sujeito histórico, 

símbolo da figura do herói nacional, também delega para si um mero papel de 

espectador, de não sujeito e o de prisioneiro dessa lógica que o aliena.  

Para Goffman (1987), a instituição total “é híbrido social, parcialmente 

comunidade residencial, parcialmente formal”. Destaca que em algumas instituições 

totais existe uma “espécie de escravidão”, pois o tempo integral das pessoas que lá 

convivem é colocado à disposição da equipe dirigente. Sendo assim, o sentido de eu e 

de posse dessas pessoas podem torná-las alienadas em sua capacidade de trabalho. Essa 

é uma concepção aplicada tanto as plataformas quanto aos marítimos da Marinha 

Mercante (SANTOS, 1999). 

Nas instituições fechadas, relações verticalizadas e hierarquizadas, na linha de 

comando, é um outro aspecto relativo ao efeito de despersonalização. Esse comando é 

centrado numa única figura de autoridade que transmite o seu poder por uma cadeia de 

comando vertical e rígida. Na plataforma, durante o período de confinamento, a gestão 

total da vida de seus habitantes, mesmo por um período relativamente curto, cabe, 

exclusivamente, à empresa, tendo como seu representante o gerente de plataforma 

(Geplat). Siqueira considera que no caso dos embarcados, a relação com a chefia se 

torna um dos pontos mais sensíveis para o equilíbrio emocional dos trabalhadores. 

Corroboramos dessa conclusão, uma vez que os trabalhadores consideram que além das 

funções gerenciais técnicas, o Geplat também deve exercer um papel de aglutinador das 

diferenças, para que o trabalhador realizasse suas atividades com satisfação, o que 

conseqüentemente acarreta no aumento em sua produtividade. Acrescentam, ainda, que 

o espaço offshore não pode ser considerado, exclusivamente, como um local de 

trabalho, mas de vida por 14 dias.  

Registram de forma contundente que a maioria dos gerentes de plataformas 

“estão muito atrasados no tempo”, pois relegam a um segundo plano o lado humano 



 90 

necessário para se conviver e trabalhar em um regime de confinamento. Nessa direção, 

constatam que, muitas vezes, os gerentes partem da premissa que no trabalho offshore 

só existem equipamentos e procedimentos operacionais e esquecem que precisam dos 

trabalhadores. Estes, por sua vez, assumindo um papel de sujeito do seu processo 

histórico, afirmam: “sem a gente lá nada funciona”. Assim, ao mesmo tempo em que a 

palavra é a “revelação de um espaço no qual os valores fundamentais de uma dada 

sociedade se explicitam e se confrontam”, mostram o quanto é particularmente ambígua 

e contraditória essa realidade de trabalho. 

A partir da correlação de forças entre capital e trabalho, o gerente ou supervisor 

ocupa essa posição para mediar esses interesses que são intrinsecamente contraditórios. 

Assim, premissas, diretrizes e metas de produção são definidas e ele, como 

representante do capital, tem que coloca-las em prática, atendendo aos trabalhadores, de 

modo que estes aumentem o investimento no trabalho, de forma alienada, ou seja, 

aumentem a produção. Esses condicionantes lhes impõem pressões e tensões a serem 

vivenciadas no dia-a-dia do trabalho offshore. 

 “O gerente de terra é um cara mais aberto, aceita sugestões, mas o 

cara que ta lá, não sei se é porque é gerente, fica mais isolado (...). O 

índice de satisfação84 da Unidade ta ligado quase que diretamente ao 

Geplat (,..). Geplat que não presta, índice ruim”.  

Considerando que todas as frases que dizemos na vida real possuem algum tipo 

de pensamento oculto por detrás delas (JOBIM e SOUZA, 2004:136), significa também 

afirmar que a linguagem que se estabelece nas relações entre gerentes e trabalhadores 

e/ou equipes são perpassadas por um processo unilateral e unidirecional, de cima para 

baixo. A linguagem não se constitui exclusivamente da informação, mas do 

estabelecimento de um processo dialógico nos quais ressaltam “as expressões faciais, 

os gestos, o tom das vozes e um conhecimento mútuo do tema (...)” (JOBIM e SOUZA, 

2004:134). Em uma realidade ambígua como é o trabalho offshore, a linguagem assume 

uma importância sem precedentes, pela não dissociação do espaço público e privado.  

                                                
84 A Petrobras implantou em 1996 uma pesquisa corporativa intitulada Pesquisa de Clima organizacional 
que buscava aferir indicadores que monitorassem a satisfação dos trabalhadores com as várias políticas e 
práticas de recursos humanos e com as formas de gerenciamento adotadas. Essa pesquisa passou por uma 
serie de mudanças e é usada por cada Unidade de Negocio da Área de Exploração e Produção como um 
instrumento para estabelecer o índice de satisfação dos trabalhadores naquela Unidade organizacional. 



 91 

O efeito da despersonalização além de invadir o período de embarque, é também 

determinante na imposição de interferências que assolam o período de folgas, conforme 

depoimento a seguir. 

 “(...) era sempre o outro que tava decidindo a minha vida. Então, há 

uma despersonalização, igual a prisão, você está sob o controle do 

outro. Então, é o outro é que decide quando você ta embarcado, (...) 

quando você vai desembarcar, vai trocar (...). Então, você vira um 

joguete, uma coisa na mão de quem decide, tão mandando você... não 

há um respeito a pessoa, as convicções dela, os valores dela, isso me 

marcou profundamente, essa despersonalização, essa coisa de ... como 

se eu fosse mais uma máquina ali, que pode ser trocada”.  

O sentido de máquina que invade a auto-identificação do trabalhador offshore, 

além de colocá-lo não como sujeito de sua história, exprime a percepção generalizada 

de não reconhecimento pelo trabalho que realizam e descrédito em relação ao que 

pensam e ao que dizem. Athayde (1996) afirma que “no campo social, o 

reconhecimento do ser é reconduzido permanentemente pelo reconhecimento do fazer”, 

o que na ausência deste processo, há uma desestabilização e o sofrimento patógeno 

surge no lugar do prazer. Corroboramos também da conclusão de Losicer e Siqueira 

(1991) de que a “interdição da palavra” é o efeito de maior impacto subjetivo na 

formação da identidade offshore. Os depoimentos a seguir ilustram a expectativa dos 

trabalhadores de serem valorizados e reconhecidos pelo investimento que fazem no 

trabalho.  

“Ela [empresa] funciona, graças a Deus, pelo coração, pelos braços e 

pelas pernas, que ela tem que são seus funcionários”. Se a empresa 

não valorizar isso que ela tem, ela não tem nada”. 

“As pessoas se dedicam muito no trabalho, pra produzir óleo e tem 

pouco retorno, não são reconhecidas, nem valorizadas e nem 

elogiadas”.  

“É um trabalho de risco, confinado e não tem nenhum 

reconhecimento”. 



 92 

“Eu cheguei a ver um gerente falando sobre o acidente da P-36, 

falando assim: ‘nada se perdeu ali, porque os poços ficaram 

preservados’. O cara se esqueceu dos companheiros que morreram, 

Imagina só?” 

Assim nas plataformas, existe o sentimento de que o período de permanência no 

local de trabalho é tão penoso que não existem saídas e soluções, restam apenas o desejo 

e a expectativa de que o tempo possa ser acelerado. Dessa forma, os 14 dias passariam a 

ser um “tempo morto”, ou seja, um período de vida inexistente. Essa representação se 

apresenta de forma bastante contraditória, tendo em vista que o trabalhador, como foi 

abordado no capítulo II, se vê, por toda uma história de construção e tradição na 

empresa e, particularmente na Bacia de Campos, muitas das vezes como a figura do 

herói nacionalista que descobriu petróleo em terras brasileiras e hoje integra a equipe 

que ruma em busca da auto-suficiência nacional. Essa análise também é reiterada por 

Pessanha (1994:85) ao considerar que, atrelado às marcas decorrentes da especificidade 

do trabalho offshore, existe o sentimento de satisfação e prazer em fazer parte desse 

mundo, pois além do atendimento às suas necessidades e de sua família, permite 

também a sua realização profissional.  

A situação de intermitência embarque/desembarque gera a percepção de uma 

vida sem valor e sem significado, pois alguns papéis desempenhados cotidianamente 

não podem ser exercidos de forma concomitante com outros, vive-se assim uma “vida 

não completa”. Em algumas instituições totais, como nas prisões e nos hospitais para 

doentes mentais, existe o sentimento de que o tempo passado na entidade é um tempo 

perdido, destruído ou tirado da vida da pessoa. “É tempo que precisa ser apagado; é 

algo que precisa ser cumprido, preenchido ou arrastado de alguma forma” 

(GOFFMAN, 1987:64).  

“Quer queira, quer não, 14 lá dentro equivale a trinta dias porque 

você fica vinte e quatro horas lá. Você não sai de lá do trabalho e vai 

pra casa, e vai prum hotel flutuante se desligar de todo problema. Não, 

você fica lá. Agora, os 14 dias lá realmente são os 14 dias, 

literalmente, minuto a minuto, segundo a segundo”.  



 93 

Esse sentimento se refere não exclusivamente às questões que envolvem as 

condições de trabalho, mas principalmente pelas perdas de contatos sociais. Na vida 

social cotidiana, os homens circulam e desempenham vários papéis ao mesmo tempo, o 

que é completamente cerceado no regime offshore, dando a percepção de viver, apenas, 

um pedaço de sua vida. Goffman (1987) considera que as chamadas atividades de 

distração poderiam minimizar, mesmo que momentaneamente, a situação real de suas 

vidas e essa percepção de tempo “morto”.  

Normalmente, os homens vivenciam o tempo a partir de situações que demarcam 

cotidianamente suas vidas, nos vários papéis que desempenham. Assim, suas 

experiências de vida são entrecortadas pela separação entre lugares e tempos vividos. 

Sendo assim, a relação que o homem estabelece com o tempo, não é simplesmente 

cronológica, mas principalmente demarcada pelas formas que vivenciam as 

experiências de vida no tempo. Assim, no trabalho offshore, essa vivência com o espaço 

e o tempo assume um significado especialmente particular, de um tempo que parece não 

passar.  

A organização do trabalho explora essa percepção e condição, na medida em que 

os próprios trabalhadores expressam que o ritmo intenso do trabalho lhes dá uma 

sensação de uma maior rapidez no tempo de embarque. “É como se o tempo fosse 

rapidinho”.  

O trabalhador, nessa condição de isolamento, se percebe como um prisioneiro, 

disposto a aventurar-se, no limite do suportável da vida intermitente, mas optando pelos 

ganhos salariais, em troca do seu sacrifício e daqueles com quem convive. O efeito que 

o totaliza, vai gradativamente moldando a sua identidade num processo contínuo e 

crescente de alienação. Numa primeira fase, que vai provavelmente até os cinco ou oito 

anos iniciais de embarque, ainda se questiona sobre o custo de sua vida fragmentada. 

Em uma etapa seguinte, reverter significa tomar uma decisão para desembarcar, o que 

torna-se muito difícil de ocorrer. O que mais se ouve é: “minha vida está toda 

estruturada desse jeito, agora é tocar, é ligar o automático (...)”. Assim, a alienação 

enquanto um processo social pelo qual “a humanidade no seu processo de reprodução 

produz sua própria desumanidade, sua própria negação enquanto ser humano”, do 



 94 

mesmo modo produz e reproduz não mais um trabalhador sujeito de sua história, mas 

um sujeito máquina, automatizado e totalizado.  

O depoimento abaixo apresenta dois aspectos cruciais na passagem do mundo 

offshore para o mundo terrestre. Um deles se refere ao impedimento, momentâneo, de 

exercitar a própria autonomia – liberdade de ir e vir e, um segundo que aponta para a 

dificuldade de desligamento do regime de trabalho, mesmo no período de folgas, uma 

vez que o efeito que totaliza interfere, de forma contínua e intermitente, na vida do 

trabalhador.  

 “(...) o ser humano não nasceu pra viver confinado. Nós não somos 

uma máquina pra deixar sua liberdade. (...) Você chega lá a bordo, 

você desliga um botão e esqueci o meu problema. O ser humano não é. 

E o ambiente confinado, ele não te permite saídas rápidas. Aqui em 

terra, se eu tiver um problema, se eu precisar ir a um banco, precisar 

ir a um hospital, se eu tenho um parente ou um conhecido ta 

precisando de uma ajuda urgente, eu tenho como eu conversar com 

meu gerente e preciso dar uma saída aqui rápida e você sai e resolve e 

na plataforma não. Então, o confinamento é o ponto negativo”.  

A impossibilidade de ter livre trânsito entre os espaços offshore e terrestre 

destaca que cada um a seu modo tem diferentes razões para estar e permanecer nesse 

regime de trabalho e possuir diferentes visões e atitudes com relação ao mesmo. Assim, 

“o trabalho não é, portanto voluntário, mas compulsório, trabalho forçado. (...) torna-se 

meio e não primeira necessidade de realização humana (...)” (ANTUNES, 1998:125). 

Nesse processo contraditório, o trabalhador alienado não se vê implicado, mas ao 

mesmo tempo, se percebe isolado, sujeitado e não sujeito.  

 “(...) o que não é bom, pra mim, ao meu ver são os 14 dias lá dentro 

que, não tem dinheiro que pague a sua liberdade, né; eu gosto muito de 

liberdade. Então, não tem dinheiro nenhum que pague a falta dessa 

liberdade. E lá a gente fica confinado, quer queira, quer não (...),você 

fica lá trabalhando, envolvido, tem as brincadeiras, tem o lazer, tem o 

trabalho, tem os amigos e tal. Mas, na verdade, você ta num ambiente 

que não é o seu, né; você ta confinado. Qualquer problema que tiver 



 95 

em terra com uma família, um familiar seu e tal, você não tem a 

imediata saída; dependendo do horário, dependendo da hora, do dia e 

tal”.  

Embora a liberdade enquanto a possibilidade de escolher com autonomia, de 

modo consciente e livre entre estar no mundo de casa ou da rua (DA MATTA, 1991:98) 

seja sempre relativa, no trabalho offshore essa possibilidade além de se agravar, se 

submete a determinação de uma escala de trabalho. Isso é indicativo de uma lógica 

produtiva que não estabelece uma posição intermediária entre estes dois universos, mar 

(rua) e terra (casa).  Quem ou o que vai permitir que o trabalhador possa migrar 

temporariamente para o território de sua casa é o calendário.  

“(...) É como viver em capítulos. (...) nossos desejos, nossas vontades 

estão sendo definidos em pacotes de 21 dias. Você não vive os 365 dias 

do ano, você vive pedaços desse ano, que vão se encaixar, da forma 

que a empresa quiser. Você não pode escolher, querer embarcar. Pra 

mim fica insuportável, então, às vezes eu brinco que a nossa vida de 

embarcado quem define é a escala. Então, somos quase escravos dessa 

escala”.  

“Nós somos mandados e governados pelo nosso calendário (...)”. 

“O que marca mais esse regime de trabalho, são muitas datas que a 

gente perde de estar com a família. Aniversário de mãe, filho, esposa, 

namorada, pai, do amigo (...). No Natal, no Ano Novo e pra alguns o 

carnaval (...). Eu via colegas ficarem desolados. O que marca muito no 

trabalho é esse lance de perder muito o contato de certas pessoas no 

período festivo (...)”.  

“Eu cheguei a comprar a fantasia [escola de samba] da Caprichosos 

de Pilares85, no ano que ela foi campeã, mas tive que embarcar (...)”. 

                                                
85 Caprichosos de Pilares é uma escola de samba da cidade do Rio de Janeiro, que se situa no bairro de 
Pilares.  



 96 

Estar impossibilitado de participar de eventos de significativa carga simbólica, 

como alguns citados acima, constitui um enorme sentimento de frustração para os 

trabalhadores e aqueles que deixa em terra.  

A ambigüidade de significados que perpassa o mundo offshore, remete o 

trabalhador à condição de prisioneiro de um regime de trabalho que contraditoriamente 

o encarcera e o liberta. Essa concepção de prisão pode posicioná-los como os novos 

escravos de um mundo que apenas os reconhece através dos recordes, dos prêmios e dos 

desafios, mas os desconhecem enquanto sujeitos de uma experiência particular em que 

vivem. Passam a ser escravos de sua própria experiência e “ficam simbolicamente 

confinados” (LOSICER, 2001:4) 

 “(...) até hoje ainda vejo as pessoas falando isso, quando pra algumas 

pessoas a palavra seria prisão, prisão voluntária, quando a aeronave 

chega no aeroporto, as pessoas geralmente falam assim: começou a 

minha liberdade condicional por 21 dias, por 14, quanto for, porque 

você ta condicionado aquilo, porque acabou aquele tempo, você já 

volta, a pessoa, na realidade, ela nem se desliga, ela acabou de chegar 

na folga e ela já ta pensando quando vai voltar.” 

O ciclo embarque/desembarque, além de desorganizar a vida social, cultural, 

educacional, esportiva e o lazer, também interfere de modo incisivo no relacionamento 

conjugal. Enquanto que para alguns trabalhadores, o distanciamento da família, de 

modo intermitente, pode gerar desestruturação familiar, levando a dissolução do 

relacionamento, para outros, a sensação de ausência irrecuperável do tempo e espaço, 

por parte do trabalhador, o coloca confinado em suas angústias, sendo exigido que se 

submeta a um novo condicionamento, agora, distante do sistema contínuo que não 

admite a ocorrência de falhas.   

“(...) durante um período, houveram algumas complicações na minha 

vida pessoal, (...) junta porque o trabalho offshore queira ou não ele 

envolve a família, e eu acabei me separando do meu casamento, e 

isso foi um fator complicante. Não chegou a me desequilibrar, mas 

me balançou emocionalmente”.  



 97 

Losicer e Siqueira (1991) consideram que apesar das plataformas estarem 

submetidas a um efeito que as totaliza, por terem alguns traços característicos das 

instituições totais citadas por Goffman (1987), as particularidades existentes nesse 

espaço institucional evidenciam diferenças determinantes, porque o sujeito embarcado 

além de optar por ser um “prisioneiro voluntário” “disposto a aventurar-se a trabalhar 

e viver nos confins do mundo psíquico, no limite do suportável, no fascinante e insano 

mundo das plataformas”, entendem que o trabalho offshore se configura como uma 

patologia das fronteiras, “própria das situações extremas, que gera adaptações forçadas 

e igualmente patológicas, mesmo sem manifestação exterior”, posicionando o 

trabalhador num mundo de fronteira entre o normal e o patológico (psicoses e 

neuroses). Assim, esse quadro psíquico se caracteriza nessa região de fronteira, por um 

sistema de defesas e não por uma patologia característica dessa realidade. 

O processo de inserção no mundo offshore se dá de forma gradual. Inicialmente, 

o trabalhador se entusiasma pelas expectativas do “novo, do trabalho diferente”, de uma 

condição salarial86 que eleve significativamente suas condições de vida de sua família, 

de poder gozar de 21 dias de folgas remuneradas, de estar empregado na maior empresa 

da América Latina e de todas as representações já vistas no capítulo 1, e que vão 

delineando, ao longo dos anos, sua identidade e tornando mais difícil, a cada embarque, 

romper com esse mergulho no mundo offshore. Pessanha (1994) compartilha dessa 

concepção, por considerar que o impacto da organização do trabalho sobre esses 

trabalhadores é muito maior que as questões que envolvem as inovações tecnológicas 

nos processos de trabalho.  

Alguns “borrachos87” afirmam que apesar da alta qualidade e consistência do 

aprendizado no regime offshore, não se vêem nessa mesma condição de trabalho como 

os seus colegas mais antigos, que embarcam há mais de 15 anos. Entendem que essa 

experiência marítima é uma etapa, uma fase passageira.   

                                                
86 A remuneração de um trabalhador offshore depende do tipo de cargo, do nível ao qual está posicionado 
neste cargo, se trabalha na jornada de turno ou não, se possui alguma função de supervisão, coordenação 
ou gerencial. O salário em média cresce em torno de 100% em relação ao salário dos que trabalham em 
terra.   
87 Apelido dado aos empregados novatos, independentemente do cargo, com no máximo cinco anos de 
embarque, pelos trabalhadores mais antigos. Essa denominação também é dada aos operadores novos das 
refinarias de petróleo (FERREIRA e IGUTI, 1996:107).  
 



 98 

“(...) eu to com 3 anos só, e não pretendo ficar o tempo que os 

senhores ficaram, com certeza. (...) a vida é uma só, você perde... Um 

mês tem 30, 14 você fica embarcado, você fica longe dos seus filhos, 

você fica longe de sua esposa, de seus familiares. É um local de 

aprendizagem, agora não é um local pra você ficar definitivamente.  

“(...) eu não vejo assim como carreira (...).  não vejo futuro pra mim. 

Eu pretendo assim terminar a faculdade (...) Mudar o trabalho, ir pra 

uma outra Unidade (...)”.  

“(...) O trabalho eu gosto do que faço, mas não é minha paixão”.  

Onde vive o trabalhador offshore? Onde ele está? Muitos relatos sinalizam que 

esses milhares de homens vivem em um espaço e tempo transitórios entre o mar e a 

terra. Viver na fronteira desses dois mundos é se situar num “território de ninguém88” 

(LOSICER, 2001), a não ser daqueles que vivem nas mesmas circunstâncias. Cada um 

ao seu modo, ao longo dos anos, vai se impondo as perdas do seu mundo de origem, 

mas que ainda permanece pertencendo. Sendo assim, o embarcado se situa diante do 

mundo de terra que não consegue reconhecer sua singularidade, seja pelo significado 

simbólico que ao longo dos anos vai internalizando, seja pela intenção de preservar a 

família e os amigos do reconhecimento dos riscos inerentes ao próprio trabalho e 

realidade. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
                                                
88 Losicer afirma que: “Funcionalmente adaptados ou patologicamente descompensados, a experiência 
subjetiva de viver neste imaginário “território de ninguém”, próprio das fronteiras, produzia nos 
embarcados um inefável sentimento de existir em ‘outro mundo’ e possuir um ‘outro eu’”. 



 99 

3.3. Síndrome de Offshore 

 

 Há aproximadamente vinte e três anos, em 1983, o engenheiro da Petrobras 

Leonel França, apresentava em um “Encontro Técnico da Bacia de Campos”, um 

documento intitulado “Síndrome de Offshore”, que sistematizava uma série de 

preocupações que emergiam, já naquela época, sobre a peculiaridade da realidade 

offshore, afirmando que se tratava de “uma doença coletiva e progressiva, cujo 

diagnóstico e terapia a medicina clássica desconhece”.  

 Vale ressaltar que algumas destas questões, além de permanecerem presentes até 

os dias de hoje, assumiram novos contornos e foram gradativamente configurando a 

identidade dos trabalhadores offshore.  

 O que é a Síndrome de Offshore?  

 É uma síndrome que apesar de não ser reconhecida pelo órgão previdenciário, é 

caracterizada por desequilíbrios e problemas psíquicos que geram situações nas quais os 

trabalhadores não têm mais condições de retornarem para esse regime e, em algumas 

situações, para qualquer outra atividade.  

“(...) Paralelamente a todos os desequilíbrios, a síndrome offshore 

apresenta sintoma de angústia causada pela falta de perspectiva da 

mudança de local e regime de trabalho. (...) esta angústia causa uma 

queda de rendimento impressionante (...). A motivação para o trabalho 

cai a níveis alarmantes”. (FRANÇA, 1983) 

 Entende que essa síndrome invadia não somente o trabalho na plataforma, mas 

desde o processo de preparação para o embarque, principalmente se os trabalhadores 

optassem (na época) pelo transporte marítimo, pois era uma “viagem que é um 

verdadeiro desafio ao estômago”, ou se fosse de helicóptero, deixava a família 

apreensiva, pois não se sentiam seguros. Além disso, não conseguiam acompanhar o 

crescimento dos filhos, somente “por batelada”; tinham que após embarcar, alterar 

rapidamente todos os hábitos, tendo em vista a convivência forçada com muitos outros 

trabalhadores e correndo o risco de “se tornarem alienígenas entre os seus pares”; de 

dobrarem ou triplicarem a quantidade de alimentação ingerida se comparada com o 



 100 

período de folgas e que os hábitos de lazer estariam já definidos de acordo com as 

opções existentes em cada plataforma.  

 A Síndrome de Offshore enfatizava desde a precariedade ou inexistência de 

preparação dos trabalhadores para enfrentarem o novo ambiente de trabalho nas 

plataformas marítimas, na sua fase de pré-operação até a adoção de um modelo 

gerencial-técnico que definia que de todos os serviços deveriam ser feitos na própria 

Unidade marítima. Além de resultar em um número elevado de trabalhadores 

embarcados, gerou um total nível de desconforto, principalmente por estarem em um 

local confinado, sem acomodações adequadas para dormirem e realizarem suas 

refeições.  

“(...) eram 200 pessoas de efetivo. A gente ia para uma plataforma 

destas, desconforto, porque você estar confinado com conforto é uma 

coisa, agora você estar confinado, quase batendo cabeça um com 

outro, quase com cama quente e com muitas pessoas em lugar fechado 

é horrível, você tinha que dizer às 11 horas é a primeira turma de 

almoço, outra às onze e meia, porque senão não dava. Era horrível”. 

(FRANÇA, 1983)  

 Destacava também a necessidade da empresa adotar uma política que atendesse 

às particularidades da realidade offshore, uma vez que o nível de insatisfação dos 

trabalhadores era significativo e compartilhado por toda comunidade de trabalho.  

 Acrescentava ainda sobre a existência de um sentimento “popular” sobre o 

trabalho offshore, partilhado por todos que lá estavam e tenta retratá-lo afirmando o 

seguinte: 

“sem conseguir resolver o problema de superlotação nas 

penitenciárias, decidiu-se comutar pela metade todas as penas dos 

detentos. Perguntou-se, então, como seria feito com os condenados à 

prisão perpétua. A resposta veio: isto é fácil basta embarca-los 15 por 

15!” . Acrescenta, ainda, “Exagerando, este é o sentimento latente na 

maioria dos que trabalham nesse regime que citamos. (...) está 

ocorrendo realmente este sentimento? Se está ocorrendo, quais são as 



 101 

suas causas e efeitos? Como fazer para evitar esta síndrome de 

offshore? (...)”. (FRANÇA, 1983) 

 Acrescenta, ainda, que existia necessidade de preparar os trabalhadores para esse 

regime permanente no mar e que a síndrome estava apenas no seu início.  

 Vale salientar que muitas observações existentes nesse documento sofreram uma 

série de transformações, principalmente, no que se refere às condições da hotelaria em 

geral, camarotes, refeitórios, alimentação, limpeza etc, mas uma boa parte delas 

permanece até hoje, atravessando a identidade desses trabalhadores.  

  
 

 

 

3.4. TPE, TPD  

 

 Embarque e desembarque são momentos de passagem que demarcam, para o 

trabalhador offshore, despedidas e recomeços. Seja despedida dos 21 dias de folgas, do 

mundo de terra, da convivência familiar, social e afetiva para retorno ao mundo 

marítimo; seja o movimento oposto, de volta ao território tão desejado e a convivência 

tão aguardada.  

“Nós temos TPE – tensão pré-embarque e TPD – tensão pré-

desembarque”.  

 TPE e TPD são “síndromes89” que acometem os trabalhadores offshore, durante 

os dias que antecedem o período de embarque ou de desembarque, respectivamente. 

Esses dois tipos de tensões ocorrem de forma sistemática ao longo dos anos. 

Particularmente, a TPE foi mencionada, à exceção de um único trabalhador, por todos 

os demais como uma ocorrência que se faz presente e incorporada às suas vivências.  

                                                
89 São denominações usadas pelos trabalhadores offshore para caracterizarem as alterações 
psicossomáticas que ocorrem no período antes de embarcarem e quando da proximidade do desembarque. 
Estamos considerando-as como síndromes que acometem os trabalhadores offshore sem, no entanto, até o 
momento, não ter nenhum respaldo por parte do órgão previdenciário.   



 102 

“(...) Dois, três dias antes do embarque, é uma sensação 

desagradabilíssima. É aquele negócio (...). Você ao desembarcar você 

procura esquecer um pouco a plataforma e passa a conviver num novo 

ambiente e de repente quando você se vê na eminência de ter que voltar 

para o trabalho sabendo que você vai encarar 15 dias, em 

confinamento, isso de alguma forma cria uma certa angústia, um certo, 

eu vou dizer assim, uma certa depressão. É bem verdade que isso é uma 

coisa assim, eu diria até que incontrolável, porque é uma coisa que 

acontece, acontece e paciência. Mas isso é até o dia que você embarca. 

Depois que passou 1 dia, 2 dias embarcado, acabou isso. Aí começa a 

contagem regressiva, exatamente. Agora tensão pra desembarcar”. 

 A angústia a qual o trabalhador se refere, expressa um estado de tensão interna 

que é experimentado por este, “como desagradável e penoso”. Wisner (1987) estabelece 

uma diferenciação entre ansiedade e angústia. Entende que poderia substituir a 

concepção de ansiedade por “medo”, mas que não o faz pelas conotações pejorativas 

ligadas a este. Portanto, a ansiedade diz respeito a um estado de expectativa de um 

acontecimento potencial que poderia colocar em perigo a própria integridade do sujeito. 

É uma resposta a um risco, a um perigo latente que pode, em algum momento, vir a se 

concretizar. Constitui-se numa ameaça que está situada fora do sujeito e é independente 

de sua vontade. Retornaremos a abordar esse conceito no capítulo V sobre estratégias 

defensivas adotadas pelos trabalhadores offshore.    

 A angústia é também um estado de espera, mas a ameaça é subjetiva, de origem 

individual e endógena e, está relacionada à estrutura da personalidade de cada pessoa 

(WISNER, 1987).  

 O estado de ansiedade que assola os dias de pré-embarque invade não somente a 

vida do trabalhador, alterando seus comportamentos e rotinas, mas afeta também suas 

relações sociais e afetivas.  

“Antes do embarque, a gente fica meio calado, muito quieto, não 

conversa muito, quase que preparando uns dois dias antes. Na minha 

opinião, o meu comportamento é esse. (...) daqui há pouco eu vou ter 

que ir lá cumprir o meu dever e tal. Só que com aquele negocinho na 



 103 

cabeça, ‘caraca mais que droga tenho que me afastar’ e tudo e aí as 

pessoas que estão à nossa volta fica também, ‘o quê que foi? É por que 

vai embarcar?’ É eu falei: ‘Ah, mas não fica assim, daqui a pouco você 

está de volta, são só 14 dias e tudo’. Mas aí engraçado, quando a 

gente, chega, pronto. Acaba aquela angústia e tudo, acaba, parece que 

a gente também, (...) fica aquela coisinha de você poder pegar teus 

problemas e colocar de lado e ver uma outra coisa.”  

 A TPE é uma síndrome extremamente “democrática”, pois atinge a todos, sem 

distinção de raça, gênero, idade, escolaridade e estado civil. Tende a se manifestar de 

diversas formas, inclusive por reações de natureza física, psíquica ou psicossomática. 

Diferenças vão existir nas particularidades de suas manifestações, tendo em vista as 

vivências, individuais e coletivas em cada equipe de trabalho, mas o processo ocorre de 

forma muito semelhante. 

“(...) eu lembro uma vez antes de embarcar me deu até febre. Do nada 

mesmo. Antes de embarcar geralmente o cara, acho que a maioria tem 

esse tipo de preocupação também. Cada embarque é um (...) a gente 

não sabe o que vai acontecer?”.  

Diante do desafio do imprevisível, da fragilidade humana frente às condições 

materiais de existência dos homens, a TPE se caracteriza como uma forma psíquica de 

resistência individual, frente ao sofrimento e a busca de prazer.    

Siqueira (1997), ao estudar sobre os efeitos do trabalho offshore na família, 

conclui que o stress e a tensão decorrentes do desgaste do processo de trabalho em 

situação de risco se manifestam na etapa do pré-embarque. A ansiedade gerada a partir 

das experiências vivenciadas num espaço confinado e de alto risco cria um estado de 

tensão que invade as relações familiares.  

“(...) a minha mãe virou pra mim e disse: estamos na semana do 

embarque? Ela falou que eu fico meio diferente, fico mais calado... Eu 

sei que eu fico, mas eu não sabia que as pessoas percebem. Mas é 

normal, eu fico um pouco mais ansioso, minha ansiedade é em chegar”. 

Sevá Filho (2000), além de corroborar das observações do referido estudo, 

acrescenta que os outros profissionais que vivem no offshore do norte fluminense, como 



 104 

marítimos e mergulhadores (FIGUEIREDO, 2001), também compartilham dessa 

síndrome. 

A TPE exprime a ambigüidade entre sofrimento e prazer, gerada pela iminência 

do rompimento de laços de afetividade, de amizade, conjugais, de companheirismo etc, 

que o trabalhador deixa em terra. A irritabilidade, distúrbios do sono, a culpa, a 

quietude, o isolamento, a depressão são alguns dos sinais que, periodicamente, 

dominam o trabalhador e as pessoas que estão a sua volta nesse período.  

“(...) em relação à família, (...) Eu acho que interfere. Interfere porque, 

sabe você fica diferente. Acho que cai um pouco a sua, como eu diria, 

você fica meio (...) tipo entristecido. Mas confiante de que você precisa 

ir, não tem jeito. Então, é claro que isso reflete, reflete, você não é a 

mesma pessoa, pelo menos nesse periodozinho. (...) esse 

entristecimento, nesse período (...) é a mesma coisa ao longo do 

tempo”.  

Como já mencionamos, as muitas tensões existentes no mundo offshore invadem 

o mundo de terra. A TPE, como um desses momentos de passagem, explicita 

sentimentos vivenciados que estão presentes na sua dinâmica de vida social. O grupo 

familiar e outros grupos de convivência mais próxima vão compartilhando de forma 

intermitente essas vivências subjetivas.   

“(...) três dias (...) eu já começo a ficar meio estressado, (...) me 

aporrinho por pouca coisa (...) qualquer coisinha já te enche o saco, 

você reclama, se tiver um carro estacionado perto da sua garagem, não 

está nem na frente, você reclama por que o carro está estacionado 

perto da sua garagem. (...) a minha mãe já se acostumou já me ignora 

já, nem leva a sério mais. A minha noiva também não me leva a sério, 

sacaneia pra caraca, eu fico puto. Mas aí é essa coisa do pré-

embarque, eu acho que é mais a coisa responsabilidade, eu sou muito 

sistemático já separa a passagem muito tempo antes e tal, prepara a 

mala toda certinha, a preocupação de estar no dia lá, talvez também 

aquela ansiedade de saber que você vai ficar 14 dias lá e daquele 

tempo pra cá você só vai poder ligar pra saber como é que estão as 

coisas, não vai ver ninguém. Então, é um estresse danado. (...)já é uma 



 105 

fase minha já. Estou tentando melhorar faz um tempo pra ver se eu 

paro um pouco com isso mas por enquanto está na mesma”.  

“Quem tem filho também de idade que dá pra perceber (...) também é 

muito difícil. A minha filha menorzinha, ela percebia a diferença 

quando eu tava próximo a embarcar, aí ela mesmo perguntava: pai 

você já vai? Tinha que ajeitar a mala, uma roupa, coisa e tal”.  

 

 
 
3.4.1. Como esses trabalhadores enfrentam os efeitos da TPE? 

 
 
 A TPE se manifesta de forma isonômica, tanto nos mais experientes quanto nos 

“borrachos”. Cada um ao seu modo vai estruturando formas de lidar com as rupturas 

impostas pela condição de confinamento.  

 Para alguns trabalhadores, a TPE tende a ter reduções significativas na medida 

em que os laços de amizade, na plataforma, vão sendo fortalecidos ao longo dos anos. O 

trabalhador, gradativamente, vai criando mecanismos para lidar com a própria 

ansiedade, tanto em relação ao pré-embarque quanto ao pré-desembarque. Consideram, 

ainda, que existe um período mínimo, que varia de 5 a 8 anos, de embarque para que 

esses efeitos sejam minimizados.  

“(...) antigamente, quando ia chegando o período de embarque, (...) 

meu astral já tava caindo bastante. Eu saía, mas não me divertia (...). 

Logo no inicio que eu comecei a embarcar, porque eu não me 

acostumava mesmo de ta trabalhando embarcado, sempre gostei mais 

de ficar em terra, mas (...) salário, a folga (...). Só que com o tempo, a 

amizade, do grupo, a gente se encontrava ai (...) já tava mais 

ambientado no trabalho, eu não esquentava mais com isso. Inclusive 

quando o tempo fechava justamente no período que eu tava pra 

desembarcar (...) aí me dava um desespero, eu doido pra ir embora, ai 

eu ia ter que ficar mais um dia ou mais dois, (...) hoje acabou isso tudo 



 106 

(...) Eu acho que depois uns 8 anos (...) uns 5, ... 8 anos depois (...) eu 

já tava assim (...) já tava legal (...)”. 

Outros, ainda, julgam que independentemente das relações sociais e dos vínculos 

criados na plataforma, o estado de desconforto que antecede o dia do embarque não 

apresenta alterações, permanecendo com a mesma intensidade ao longo dos anos, até 

para os profissionais mais experientes que estão nesse regime há cerca de 20 anos.  

“(...) Ninguém acostuma embarcar. Se você perguntar a qualquer 

pessoa que embarca há 20 anos, você acostumou? Não. É véspera de 

embarque (...) 2, 3 dias, perto do embarque (...). Nós embarcamos 

terça-feira. Domingo, não olhe muito pra mim não que eu já começo a 

desconfiar. Pelo menos comigo acontece isso. Quanto mais no dia, é 

fogo. Porque, olha eu vou te contar: você às vezes você dormir do lado 

da mulher em casa , tem dias que você se apurrinha, a mulher toda 

cheirosa, você vai dormir lá na sala, com raiva, imagine na 

plataforma? Você fica 14 dias dormindo do lado de 3 macho, 

roncando?”.  

A utilização de bebidas alcoólicas nos dias ou na própria noite que antecede o 

embarque é uma conduta considerada bastante rotineira e sistemática, adotada como 

forma de buscar uma compensação pelas privações aos quais ficarão submetidos. 

Profissionais terceirizados, como é o caso dos mergulhadores da Bacia de Campos, 

também buscam o álcool com esta finalidade (FIGUEIREDO, 2001). Sevá Filho 

(2000:184) compartilha dessas colocações, afirmando a proporção relevante de práticas 

de automedicação e dependência química, com destaque para o alcoolismo. 

“(...) tenho um colega (...) três dias antes de embarcar ele bebia direto, 

era sempre isso. Eu achava aquilo meio complicado, achando que 

poderia acontecer comigo. Mas depois dos 8 anos embarcado, começou 

a acontecer comigo, dias antes de embarcar, 3 dias antes de embarcar, 

3 dias logo depois que eu embarcava, eu ficava com uma tosse 

improdutiva. E antes de desembarcar também e 3 dias depois que tava 

em terra ainda ficava. E comecei a perceber que isso era tensão do 

embarque, aí eu comecei a mudar um pouco o estilo de vida, comecei a 



 107 

buscar algum tipo de atividade, além de estudo, além de minhas 

atividades normais do dia-a-dia (...)”.  

Existem também aqueles trabalhadores que fazem mudanças no estilo de vida, 

buscam atividades físicas, esportivas, esotéricas, religiosas, enfim, algum investimento 

que minimize esses sintomas.  

Uma outra conduta é um processo de antecipação do próprio regime de 

confinamento, mas residencial. Busca não estabelecer contatos com outras pessoas que 

não seja da própria família, não tem disponibilidade para resolver questões do cotidiano, 

não sai de casa. Inicia, ainda junto da família, uma fase de pré-confinamento.  

“(...) dois dias antes de embarcar você começa, sabe, (...) tipo assim 

(...) Não vou ao banco, não quero saber mais disso, não quero mais 

saber mais daquilo. E começa a concentração pra você fazer o 

embarque (...) dois dias pra embarcar, (...) em casa, enclausurado, 

dentro de casa, brincando com meus filhos, com a minha mulher (...) 

(...) alguma coisa pra fazer, (...) só vou fazer depois, né. Então, eu acho 

que isso acontece com 90% do homem offshore. E tudo embola (...) 

durante o finalzinho da tua folga. Embola tudo, não vai dá tempo e eu 

tenho que embarcar. Aí entra nessa, nessa neura de ter que resolver. 

Eu não quero saber; se tiver problema, larga pra lá. (...)”. 

 As síndromes explicitam uma vida polarizada e submetida às tensões 

contraditórias, específicas da ambigüidade de suas vidas. A esses “momentos de 

passagem”, quase obrigatórios, aos quais se associam sentimentos de dúvida, desejo, 

obrigação etc, a linguagem e as expressões são atravessadas por alterações de humor 

(alegria/tristeza), distúrbios do sono (insônia/sono sobressaltado), e de apetite 

perturbações no aparelho digestivo, dentre outros.   

 “O último dia de folga pra mim, já é pra pensar arrumar uma mala, aí 

fico meio triste, mas vai fazer o quê? Tem que ir. Aí vou já pensando 

nos 21 de folga, vou fazer minha missão lá e vou voltar”.  

 Os trabalhadores, ao seu modo, vão criando alternativas e estratégias que visem 

superar as tensões oriundas da polaridade e ambigüidade.    



 108 

Viver na transitoriedade entre os dois mundos traz reflexos não somente para o 

trabalhador, mas também para a sua família, nas expressões mais triviais do dia-a-dia. 

Siqueira (1987) identificou no estudo junto aos familiares dos trabalhadores offshore 

algumas dessas manifestações que assolam a vida privada, quais sejam: alterações na 

rotina familiar; distanciamento no relacionamento familiar, com expressão associada de 

instabilidade e tensão emocional da família (medo, solidão, insegurança e sentimento de 

desproteção); e problemas no relacionamento conjugal.   

A TPE, além de acometer o trabalhador, também se manifesta nos filhos, 

principalmente nos menores. Reações psicossomáticas ou de rejeição a figura paterna 

são alguns exemplos mais explícitos de uma TPE infantil que poderá se mostrar 

“intransmissível e intraduzível” para a linguagem do mundo adulto.  

“(...) meu primeiro filho, quando eu embarcava, ele começava a dar 

febre, toda vez (...)”.   

“(...) a rejeição ao pai logo que desembarca é evidente (...) quando 

começa a acostumar de novo, já ta na hora de embarcar novamente. A 

criança se sente abandonada”.  

 Bartolotti (1999) constatou que o trabalho embarcado ocasiona uma série de 

problemas para os filhos dos trabalhadores, pois a criança em seu estágio de 

desenvolvimento não é capaz de verbalizar todos os seus sentimentos e entender que o 

trabalho offshore impõe uma dinâmica de vínculos paternos de forma fragmentada.   

 Nesse sentido, o confinamento extrapola o mundo do mar, se instala no mundo 

de terra, pois é uma experiência que se inicia, simbolicamente, antes mesmo dela 

ocorrer de fato, com reflexos importantes na educação e formação dos filhos e no 

convívio afetivo.   

Na inevitabilidade do embarque, o trabalhador se transfere física e 

simbolicamente e se isola no mundo offshore.  

“Eu faço isso lá, eu pego, quando eu subo, eu pego todos aqueles 

problemas é, prova, às vezes uma discussão com a namorada, um 

desentendimento com alguém, eu pego tento abstrair90 tudo isso e 

                                                
90 Abstrair significa, neste contexto, deixar de lado, não pensar sobre esse assunto no momento. 



 109 

coloco na cabeça, pára, é a plataforma, quatorze dias pro meu 

trabalho acabou. (...). Então eu começo a estudar, coisas técnicas, 

matérias envolvendo elétrica. Isso me ajuda muito, por que eu 

mantenho ocupada minha cabeça, vou evoluindo lá dentro e tudo. Eu 

sou tão rigoroso com isso que às vezes, eu esqueço de ligar pra casa 

(...)”. 

 Esse mergulho alienante transcorre até alguns dias imediatamente anteriores ao 

desembarque, pois nesse período muitos trabalhadores começarão a apresentar um novo 

sintoma: a TPD. Este se constitui em um misto de euforia e ansiedade que contagiam até 

mesmo aqueles que ainda não estão próximos de “descer”. “Subir e descer”, na 

linguagem offshore, significa, respectivamente, embarcar e desembarcar.  

“(...) você começa a perceber que seu grupo está indo embora, está 

todo mundo cantando, já no banheiro coletivo, tu já vê que têm umas 

cinco, seis pessoas cantando. Aí você já fica, caraca está todo mundo 

pra desembarcar, você vê um sorriso diferente um tratamento melhor e 

aí está preparado?” 

“(...) quando eu vou descer (...) três dias antes (...) pode me xingar: tu é 

feio, tu é viado, você é uma merda, (...) ta certo, entra num sai no outro, 

não to nem aí”.  

“(...) o pré-desembarque é aquela coisa a busca da satisfação eterna 

né? Tem aquele momento de (...) nasce uma luz no dia, que você vai 

embora. (...) é um dia extremamente esperado, ele é desejado. (...) 

modifica as pessoas (...) as pessoas ficam mais felizes mais alegres, 

relaxam. Existe a brincadeira que o pessoal fala lá, pra quem vai 

amanhã falta muito (...)”.  

 Ao desembarque se associa uma série de expectativas de que no período de 

folgas, todos os desejos vão se realizar, que vai se alcançar o prazer e a satisfação plena 

no desempenho dos vários papéis, em terra. O nível de tensão, ansiedade e todos os 

sentimentos relativos a TPE vão também ficar de folga, aguardando os dias que 

antecederão o próximo embarque. As brincadeiras mais picantes são bem vindas e o 



 110 

nascer do dia do desembarque é um momento que simboliza felicidade e alegria para 

iluminar a todos que vão descer.  

Se para alguns, os dias intermediários entre os primeiros de embarque e os 

últimos para desembarque são considerados relativamente tranqüilos na medida em que 

o trabalhador já entrou no ritmo da plataforma, para outros o conhecido “décimo dia” 

acaba se tornando o limite suportável para permanecer embarcado. Em alguns casos 

existe necessidade, inclusive, de se fazer uso de medicação.   

“Eu passo por isso também, mas eu já passei, (...) Teve uma fase há 

alguns anos atrás que eu não agüentava ficar mais de 12 dias 

embarcado não, ficava 11, depois do décimo dia, 11, 12, aí eu 

começava ficava todo tremendo. Eu a partir do décimo dia, eu falo por 

mim, desde 97, eu tomo um calmante, um (...), porque não tem mais 

jeito”.  

 Os relatos abaixo mostram que a TPD se expressa em cada trabalhador de 

formas particulares, mas se concentram principalmente em relações de trabalho mais 

amistosas, em um estado de euforia que contagia a todos, uma ansiedade criada pelo 

desejo de chegada do último dia de embarque e uma possível redução da produtividade 

por não realizar todas as tarefas previstas, deixando para a equipe que vai embarcar as 

atividades que não se caracterizam como emergências. Vale destacar que o 

gerenciamento dessa passagem pode implicar uma elevação no grau de intensidade dos 

riscos. Essa temática – segurança e risco será discutida, posteriormente, no capítulo IV.    

“Quando chego nos últimos (...), a última semana já está dando 

ansiedade pra vir embora e tal, eu não consigo dormir antes de meia-

noite, acordo, olho pro relógio. Pô, está quase na hora de acordar e 

durmo de novo, as vezes passa da hora, aí eu levanto correndo. 

Quando está chegando nos últimos dias nada me aborrece lá(...)”.  

“Nos dois últimos dias, brincadeira! Você fica ansioso. No início não, 

mas com o passar do tempo, você começa a ficar ansioso pra descer, já 

não começa agüentar mais, de ficar ali preso e o que você puder passar 

pro seu back, você vai passar. Só quando pinta alguma coisa de 



 111 

emergência, de urgência que você vai lá resolver. Fora isso, não é 

contigo”.  

 Situações e sentimentos explicitados durante a TPE revelam que a palavra é a 

chave da compreensão da unidade dialética entre pensamento e linguagem. Assim, na 

luta que se trava entre as figuras do trabalhador herói e do trabalhador prisioneiro, a 

palavra, enquanto instrumento da consciência, moldou historicamente essas 

construções, como um “espaço privilegiado da criação ideológica”. (JOBIM e SOUZA, 

2004:126) 

 Essa estória é contada por sujeitos históricos que, num processo de interação 

dialógica, constroem cotidiana e coletivamente sua identidade, atravessada, 

intermitentemente, por síndromes carregadas de expressões e significados. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 112 

3.5. O desembarque - os 21 dias de folgas 

 

 

“(...) nesses 21 dias, 7 ele fica se desintoxicando, 7 ele 

aproveita e 7 vive da ansiedade e tensão de embarcar 

novamente. (...) ele tem todo um momento de preparação 

pra embarcar de novo. (...) Tem um momento de preparação 

pra desembarcar, que gera aquele estágio do décimo 

dia,(...) Uma ansiedade logo pra viver (...)”.  

 

 

3.5.1. O significado do desembarque  

 

 

Num primeiro momento, o desembarque para o trabalhador offshore simboliza a 

possibilidade de retomar a convivência em um espaço e tempo estritamente privados. 

Significa o retorno ao convívio familiar, com os amigos, de restabelecimento das 

relações afetivas, sociais, culturais e do compartilhamento das alegrias e tristezas com 

aqueles deixados em terra durante 14 dias. 

“(...) Isso é ótimo, hoje é quarta feira, em plena quarta feira, parece 

ser domingo pra mim. (...) Ah! e embarque também que você fica 

afastado do mundo, é como se você tivesse (...), quando você volta é 

uma sensação parece que mudou o clima entendeu, o ambiente é 

outro. Seus amigos nunca sabem quando você está, então você tem 

que sempre ficar procurando o pessoal pra falar, ah! eu estou aqui 

oh!, vamos fazer alguma coisa (...)”. 

A folga sempre é citada pelos trabalhadores offshore como “o lado bom do 

embarque”, é o que vale a pena após 14 dias de confinamento. É o período sonhado e 

aguardado por todos.  



 113 

“(...) pra mim a parte boa é justamente a folga né, a folga que é legal, 

tem essa possibilidade. Quem não estuda, quem não tem outra fonte de 

renda, na folga consegue, dá pra despressurizar legal”. 

Apesar de já estar espacialmente no mundo de terra, ainda encontra-se submetido 

às pressões psíquicas impostas pela realidade offshore. Sente-se, também, sob os efeitos 

deletérios da condição de confinamento. A percepção de relaxamento vai se 

estabelecendo gradativamente, pois o trabalhador simbolicamente permanece, ainda, 

implicado no universo fechado da ordem produtiva.  

“E aí a gente desce e tudo e fica meio aéreo, sente o chão balançar 

(...). (...) parece que seu corpo ainda está naquele balanço e a gente 

fica aéreo. (...) os três primeiros dias, em casa, assim se desliga, às 

vezes está conversando com uma pessoa assim aí pensa no trabalho. 

O exercício agora é o contrário (...)”. 

Se na fase preliminar ao embarque havia necessidade de uma preparação para 

permanecer 14 dias em alto mar, a exigência, agora, no desembarque é de busca de 

outras referências que estruturam a sua vida em terra. Mesmo estando desembarcado, 

muitas vezes, as sensações físicas permanecem se manifestando como se ainda estivesse 

frente às adversidades do ambiente do mar. Equilibrar no desembarque o estado de 

vigília-sono é, por vezes, uma grande dificuldade, principalmente, para os trabalhadores 

que permaneceram, na segunda semana de embarque, no turno noturno. Isso significa 

que trabalhava à noite e descansava e dormia durante o dia. Quando retorna para terra, 

num primeiro momento, vai precisar de um período de tempo para equilibrar suas 

funções fisiológicas e psíquicas.  

“(...) quando desembarca, você está virado, você demora (...). Eu 

demoro cinco dias pra desvirar. (...) Isso. Quando você está de noite 

pra desvirar, demora uns cinco dias pra ficar legal. [Esse legal 

significa?]É o sono, começar a dormir a noite toda, parar de dormir, 

sei lá, meia noite, acordar as três horas da manhã e ficar acordado, 

não conseguir mais dormir. Demora uns cinco dias pra (...) 

estabilizar. O organismo sente, sente muito, eu sinto muito”.  



 114 

É um processo de reinserção na realidade de terra, onde sua família, seus amigos 

obedecem a uma outra dinâmica de espaço e tempo. Um espaço representado pelos 

vários papéis desempenhados, de forma concomitante, e um tempo vivido marcado 

socialmente pelas datas festivas, pelos cerimoniais, pelas experiências de vida. Nesse 

sentido, o trabalhador offshore estava off da vida social, fora do espaço e tempo sociais 

compartilhados. Retornar ao convívio de casa é resgatar o que não pode encontrar no 

mundo público, no mundo da rua. “Se no universo da casa sou um supercidadão, pois 

ali só tenho direitos e nenhum dever, no mundo da rua sou um subcidadão, já que as 

regras universais da cidadania sempre me definem por minhas determinações 

negativas: pelos meus deveres e obrigações, pela lógica do não pode e do não deve” 

(DA MATTA, 1991:100).  

 Cada um à sua maneira, tanto o trabalhador quanto aqueles com quem convive, 

buscam compensações pelo tempo de embarque. Entretanto, nem sempre o regresso ao 

mundo doméstico transcorre sem divergências, distorções e ambivalências. Siqueira 

(1997) conclui que ambos (marido e mulher) buscam formas para compensar o tempo 

de embarque. “Ele [trabalhador] em busca do tempo perdido, ela [companheira] em 

busca de reverter o que denomina de ‘egocentrismo’no marido e, os filhos, através de 

alternância comportamental e distúrbios psicossomáticos conforme presença/ausência 

do pai”. O depoimento a seguir só vem corroborar das conclusões citadas acima.  

 “Ele (...) volta pra família e a família funcionava de uma 

determinada forma, quando ele volta pro seio da família, ele tem que 

reprogramar tudo, (...) e causa até uma disfunção familiar”. 

Bartolotti (2002) afirma que no momento do desembarque existe uma tensão, 

durante os primeiros dias, stress e irritação afetando a vida familiar desse petroleiro, 

mas todo esse quadro se atenua, quando há apoio e compreensão por parte dos 

familiares e entendimento da necessidade do emprego para sustento da casa.  

Enquanto que na plataforma, por 14 dias, o trabalho é inerente a todas as esferas 

da vida; no mundo de terra, as várias dimensões que compõem a vida dos homens, 

ocupam espaço e tempo diferentes, o que gera para o trabalhador um confronto entre as 

duas realidades e, conseqüentemente, um período de adaptação. Este intervalo de 

acomodação, tanto no desembarque quanto no embarque não acontecem de forma 



 115 

mecanicista, como um comando on/off de um equipamento qualquer. Ocorre um 

movimento de transição gradual, sob condicional, do mundo offshore. Do mesmo modo 

que as síndromes TPE e TPD, o processo de desembarque ocorre de forma progressiva. 

É como se o trabalhador estivesse em trânsito. “No desembarque passa-se da 

adrenalina total a zero, como no embarque passara-se do zero para a adrenalina total” 

Sampaio (1998:76). O regime offshore, com todas as suas particularidades, pressupõe 

níveis de adrenalina mais elevados. Assim, a variação nessa taxa, crescente ou 

decrescente, é intimamente determinada pelo trajeto a ser cumprido pelo trabalhador, se 

está subindo ou descendo, conforme relato a seguir: 

“(...) leva dois dias pra relaxar, pra sair daquele momento de 

transição de desembarque. No primeiro dia, segundo dia, você se 

sente ainda que embarcado, ainda meio peixinho fora d’água, até 

voltar a sua vida normal (...). Aí, no terceiro dia (...) agora to em 

terra”. 

A descontinuidade da sua vida familiar, social e afetiva deixa o trabalhador 

embarcado “dividido e optando pelo sacrifício de sua vida pública (na cidade, nos 

territórios culturais, políticos etc) e institucional (a família, o lar, a sexualidade, a 

organização ‘normal’ do trabalho etc) e fatalmente confinado num espaço de absoluta 

indiscriminação público-privado” (LOSICER, 2003:7). Fora do mundo de terra, 

enquanto sujeito confinado, o petroleiro tem sua vida totalmente sujeitada ao domínio 

da ordem produtiva e empresarial.  

É incipiente a participação desses trabalhadores em grupos, organizações ou 

associações nas cidades onde residem, pois o trabalho offshore, pela sua característica 

básica que é o confinamento, condiciona essa desmobilização. Pelo conseqüente 

afastamento do espaço social e familiar, a maioria dos trabalhadores, no seu período de 

folgas, prioriza o resgate e manutenção das relações afetivas e materiais do grupo 

familiar e também aquelas voltadas para o descanso e o relaxamento91. (PETROBRAS, 

1991) 

Seligmann-Silva (1994:55) constatou que trabalhadores em turnos noturnos, em 

terra, também apresentam dificuldades por vivenciarem um cotidiano diferente, em 

                                                
91 Pesquisa realizada com amostra de trabalhadores embarcados. 



 116 

geral, do restante das pessoas. Existem interferências negativas no relacionamento com 

familiares que tende a se deteriorar em função do cansaço, irritabilidade, desânimo do 

trabalhador, necessidade deste de dormir durante o dia e se ausentar à noite e, por vezes, 

nos fins de semana. A sua participação em atividades que demandam uma regularidade 

de horários, como cursos: eventos em clubes ou em espaços religiosos, atividades em 

sindicatos ou uma prática esportiva com os amigos que não são do turno, fica 

extremamente comprometida. 

 

 

 

3.5.2. As dificuldades e angústias do desembarque  

 

 O desembarque é uma experiência complexa tanto para o trabalhador quanto 

para aqueles com os quais convive nesse período. O descompasso que a vida offshore 

impõe ao trabalhador leva-o a criar uma visão mágica e idealizada, quase utópica do 

período de desembarque. No entanto, gera vivências subjetivas que advêm do 

sentimento de solidão, frustração e da impossibilidade de poder compartilhar os 

usufrutos de seu trabalho.   

“(...) dificuldades de chegar e querer fazer alguma coisa e não poder, 

por que todo mundo está lá no sentido da vida e você chega em outro. 

(...) chega, vamos pro bar, vamos beber vamos pra festa e tal. ‘Não 

cara, que é isso? Amanhã é quarta, amanhã é segunda’ e a gente 

totalmente fora da ordem”.  

 Essa incompatibilidade entre o seu tempo vivido e a distribuição temporal das 

atividades daqueles com quem convive pode ser considerado como um fator de estresse 

para ambos os lados. Assim, a autopercepção de que está off do contexto da vida social 

pode estimular a criação de hábitos solitários ou de isolamento criando assim uma 

realidade de confinamento simbólico. 

 “(...) antes pra poder ir pra uma festa a gente tinha que juntar um 

dinheirão e hoje a gente vai pra festa, quer chamar os amigos e 



 117 

ninguém pode ir. (...) vamos acampar (...) aí começo a ligar pros 

meus amigos, não dá, ta todo mundo fazendo alguma coisa. Então eu 

me sinto até excluído às vezes, por que o quê adianta você ter um 

emprego, mas os seus amigos anteriores (...) às vezes a gente se 

distancia um pouco”.  

“(...) quando chega aqui você quer fazer tudo isso que você não faz lá. 

(...) rever seus amigos, sua namorada, (...) ficar com seu pai, com sua 

mãe e não dá tempo pra tudo (...) aí você sente um sentimento, meio 

frustrado”.   

A ansiedade e as expectativas tão aguardadas de liberdade, de reencontro dos 

espaços de socialização, quebra das rotinas e disciplinas, de compartilhamento das 

experiências pitorescas offshore e de “colocar em dia” a vida sexual e afetiva, implica 

um reordenamento da lógica de vida das pessoas com quem convive ou pode gerar 

sentimentos de frustração, pela impossibilidade de realizá-las.   

Compatibilizar as expectativas e desejos dos trabalhadores offshore de usufruto 

de suas folgas de acordo com o que foi planejado durante o embarque, pode ocasionar 

desilusões e tristezas, pois as pessoas com as quais se relacionam, em terra, não têm 

total autonomia para gozarem os 21 dias de folgas, do mesmo modo que estes 

trabalhadores.  

“Ninguém vai faltar trabalho, ninguém vai faltar aula pra poder ficar 

com você, pra poder conversar com você. Aí marca uma coisa, mas a 

pessoa que ta relacionando, não pode, e você fica meio (...)”.  

Cabe destacar que o compartilhamento compulsório do espaço coletivo das 

plataformas tende a condicionar no período de folgas a busca de privacidade e a 

manutenção de poucos contatos com os colegas de trabalho, no sentido de estabelecer 

um distanciamento, uma ruptura total entre o espaço de trabalho e o de descanso, na 

tentativa de apagar essa lembrança, durante esses dias, de sua memória. No entanto, 

muitas das vezes estes colegas se constituem nas pessoas mais próximas que estão 

disponíveis nesse momento.   

“Aí acaba que você fica em casa e não fizer alguma coisa também, 

não procurar fazer uma faculdade ou um curso, você vai fazer o quê 



 118 

sozinho? Ou então tu liga pra quem está embarcado, mas você não 

quer ver aquela pessoa, (...) que é uma forma de lembrar (...)”.  

 Por vezes, encontrar os amigos de plataforma acaba sendo também uma tarefa 

difícil, principalmente para aqueles trabalhadores que residem em cidades mais 

distantes em que a vivência offshore não faz parte de sua realidade. Quando existe na 

cidade um clube dos empregados da Petrobras (Cepe92), este passa a ser um local de 

encontro para os que querem rever os amigos de trabalho e favorecer os contatos entre 

os familiares que compartilham de experiências semelhantes. No entanto, a internet hoje 

é o meio de comunicação que substituiu todos os outros.  

Um mecanismo destacado por um trabalhador como um facilitador na retomada 

dos caminhos e projetos terrestres, é estar atrelado a alguma atividade específica que 

preencha o sentimento de vazio que pode surgir por não estar inserido em nenhum 

processo produtivo durante os 21 dias de folgas.  

 “Quem está fazendo alguma coisa, fica muito mais fácil. (...) eu 

rapidamente eu me adapto ao mundo porque eu to estudando, já entra 

naquele ritmo (...). Pra pessoa que não está fazendo assim, ah! vou 

pra casa relaxar, deve ser muito difícil (...) todo mundo sendo útil pra 

sociedade e você deve ter aquela sensação, sou um vagabundo, 

durante vinte e um dias.  

Os sentimentos de esvaziamento e vagabundagem apontados pelo entrevistado 

acima, remetem a uma auto-representação alienante, uma vez que não se vê como 

trabalhador e sujeito histórico. Cabe destacar que o modo como esses trabalhadores 

vivenciam a realidade offshore tem a ver com suas histórias individuais, permeadas 

pelas diferenciações de idade, etnia, etc. Já a experiência coletiva é influenciada pela 

história anterior de lutas sindicais, estratégias, tradições, capacidade de organização e 

resistências. 

O efeito que o totaliza ultrapassa os obstáculos da distância marítima e o 

aprisiona no invólucro da culpa, por não estar momentaneamente inserido em nenhum 

processo produtivo no seu período de folgas. Sente-se na condição de excluído, à parte 
                                                
92 Os Clubes dos empregados da Petrobras se localizam em vários municípios do país, onde existem 
instalações da empresa e tenham um significativo contingente de trabalhadores residindo. No Rio de 
Janeiro, este clube se situa no bairro do Recreio dos Bandeirantes, zona oeste da cidade. 



 119 

dos processos e relações estabelecidas entre os homens, em terra. Assim sendo, o 

confinamento que o encarcera fisicamente, o aliena e molda a sua própria identidade. 

Assim, os 21 dias de folgas representam na vida do trabalhador offshore a 

possibilidade de poder ocupar exclusivamente o seu espaço privado. Exercitar o livre-

arbítrio em ir e vir, de estar com quem quiser, no horário e tempo que desejar, ter a 

receptividade das pessoas de seu convívio, ser incluído nos vários grupos dos quais 

participa, se sentir protegido em sua casa, no aconchego das relações de afeto, de 

praticar hobbies e de realizar outros projetos de vida, além do trabalho. Mas isso, em 

muitas situações não se dá sem dificuldades e problemas. 

Cada trabalhador ao seu modo vai criando condições e caminhos para “curtir” as 

suas folgas da maneira mais conveniente e prazerosa. Alguns preferem estar com os 

amigos, sem horário, sem compromissos pré-definidos; outros consideram que dar 

continuidade aos estudos e resgatar as aulas e provas perdidas, talvez não sejam o 

melhor a fazer, mas é uma necessidade. Contudo, a maioria valoriza a vida familiar e 

preocupa-se em compensar com os filhos e a família o tempo em que fica ausente. 

Alguns relatam que antes da chegada dos filhos as folgas eram mais bem aproveitadas, 

pois muitos viajavam com a esposa/namorada. Posteriormente, as preocupações e a 

necessidade de permanecer em casa aumentaram.  

Se por um lado, para alguns trabalhadores, a alternância entre a sua presença e a 

sua ausência, enriquece e fortalece o relacionamento conjugal, evitando desgastes ao 

longo da convivência cotidiana, pois quando chega “ta com saudade, é só amor pra 

dar”; por outro, implica alterações da rotina familiar, com sobrecargas de 

responsabilidade feminina na formação dos filhos e condução da dinâmica interna da 

família, o que por vezes pode levar a conflitos pela não concordância do trabalhador, no 

período de folgas, com os encaminhamentos dados pelo cônjuge.  

 Alguns trabalhadores consideram-se como que poupados pelas esposas dos 

problemas do cotidiano doméstico, dos detalhes da dinâmica da casa e da educação dos 

filhos, quando inseridos de volta à vida familiar. Outros declaram o oposto: o que mais 

encontram na volta são problemas. Se por um lado, essa dinâmica se refere basicamente 

aos trabalhadores que já constituíram família, por outro lado, trata-se da maioria dos 

trabalhadores embarcados, pois a média de idade é de aproximadamente 45 anos.   



 120 

Bartolotti (2002) considera que durante os 14 dias em que o marido ou 

companheiro está trabalhando, é ela, a mulher, quem fica com todas as 

responsabilidades da família – pagar contas, educar e cuidar dos filhos etc. “A mulher 

do petroleiro fica numa posição desconfortável. Precisa assumir um posto de comando 

quando o parceiro sai (...). A mulher passa a ser responsável por tudo que acontece em 

casa e é cobrada por isso pelo parceiro”.  

Sampaio (1998), Losicer e Siqueira (1991) e Pessanha (1994) afirmam que o 

processo de intermitência, embarque/desembarque, desenvolve sentimentos de ameaça, 

pelo fato do trabalhador não ter o controle sobre o que pode ocorrer durante sua 

ausência. Os desgastes oriundos do distanciamento familiar, de forma intermitente, e as 

conseqüências decorrentes podem gerar desestruturação dos laços afetivos, levando a 

dissolução do relacionamento. Acrescenta-se a esse quadro, a criação de uma “cultura 

do medo do adultério e receio do Ricardão”. Um trabalhador entrevistado afirmou que: 

“(...) na verdade eu tenho uma sistemática, tenho uma política a ser seguida. O negócio 

é não deixar o boi morrer e urubu ficar com fome”.  

Para aqueles que a conclusão de um curso superior faz parte de um sonho, o 

regime offshore traz uma complexidade a mais em suas vidas. Os investimentos para 

permanecer estudando, no período de embarque e desembarque, lhes consomem a maior 

parte das suas horas de descanso. Concatenar o cansaço do trabalho embarcado com os 

estudos e quando chega em terra, conciliar as horas de descanso, o lazer, o resgate da 

convivência familiar e dos amigos com as exigências das instituições de ensino têm se 

apresentado como um grande desafio.  

“(...) nesses vinte e um dias (...) eu geralmente estou na faculdade (...) 

a gente sofre um pouquinho, mas geralmente está dando sim. Atrasa 

uma matéria também, mas (...) está dando pra levar (...). Semestre 

passado eu puxei seis matérias, consegui me dar bem só em três, as 

três mais fáceis também. Aí pô, fiquei com as três principais do curso, 

do currículo presas, aí eu tentei fazer essas três esse semestre e puxar 

mais uma do segundo, aí eu puxei uma do segundo, sendo que aqui o 

pessoal da UFF é, o pessoal da física é totalmente inflexível. Então 

todo período, todas as provas, todas as três que teria que fazer tava 



 121 

no período de embarcado, (...) se faltar uma já é um problema sério, 

faltar três vezes (...)”. 

Entretanto, nem todos estão tendo possibilidades e condições de dar 

continuidade aos estudos, pelo fato das universidades não terem um calendário 

antecipado que lhes dêem condições de se organizarem para a realização das provas, 

que muitas vezes caem no meio da quinzena de embarque. Afirmam que estão 

“sofrendo muito por causa dessa incompatibilidade”, pois as muitas horas de estudo 

acabam sendo em vão. Alguns professores criam facilidades, aplicam provas substitutas, 

porém os mais conservadores não apresentam outras alternativas, apenas prova final.  

Desse modo, para alguns trabalhadores, a única saída é deixar a universidade, relegar 

para o futuro a realização desse sonho, outros vêem o ensino a distância ou 

semipresencial como a única chance viável para sua consecução.   

No entanto, outros preenchem os 21 dias de folga, com atividades realizadas de 

forma sistemática, já há alguns anos, como professor ministrando cursos e aulas, 

administrando pequenos negócios e realizando pequenos serviços relacionados a sua 

área de formação técnica, como por exemplo: mecânica, elétrica, eletro-técnica etc. 

Embora quando retorne ao mundo civil possa resgatar vários espaços 

temporariamente perdidos, alguns vivem essa ausência como se tratassem de perdas 

irrecuperáveis, o que pode originar, em algumas situações, quadros depressivos e 

refúgio no álcool e/ou em outras drogas.  Siqueira Silva (1997) afirma que esses 

métodos químicos permitem uma “elevação ilusória do nível de suporte à frustração93”. 

Alguns trabalhadores explicam que muitos colegas, ao desembarcarem no aeroporto, 

seguem diretamente para um bar, muitas das vezes chegando em sua residência um ou 

dois dias depois.  

Por outro lado, para o trabalhador offshore, o período de folgas pode ser 

programado de várias formas, de acordo com o estilo de vida de cada um e de sua 

respectiva família. Alguns, por residirem em municípios próximos a Macaé, sede da 

                                                
93 Siqueira Silva afirma que o “nível de suporte à frustração depende em parte da capacidade de controle 
emocional eficaz do sujeito e em parte dos estímulos que a ele são adversos (no sentido de provocadores 
de frustração). Estabelece relação com as ambições do sujeito trabalhador, com o atendimento da 
seguridade do grupo familiar e pessoal e com o atendimento das necessidades básicas, afetivas e sociais, 
sendo tanto menor a exigência de elevação do nível deste suporte, quanto menores forem os índices destes 
atendimentos”.  



 122 

Bacia de Campos, onde há uma concentração maior desses trabalhadores, as reuniões e 

as partidas de futebol com os colegas de plataforma são bastante freqüentes e sempre 

acompanhadas de bebidas alcoólicas.  

“Em condições normais, os amigos dos petroleiros são os petroleiros 

que folgam, residem nas mesmas cidades”.  

“(...) Campos, (...) o número de pessoas de petróleo é muito maior, e 

lá a gente se encontra em toda esquina (...). (...) lá tem muito disso, de 

manter o vínculo com os amigos de plataforma. Aí é churrasco, 

cerveja no fim de semana”. 

 Diferentemente das cidades onde não existem concentrações significativas 

desses trabalhadores ou nas grandes capitais, os contatos entre os colegas de trabalho 

raramente ocorrem, pois vão exigir, em algumas situações, pequenos deslocamentos ou 

verdadeiras viagens. Assim, o telefone e/ou a internet se constituem como as principais 

alternativas de ligação.  

 O depoimento que se segue traça um comparativo entre o tempo de embarque e 

os vínculos de amizade, demonstrando que a cada etapa da vida offshore, os grupos se 

constituem com contornos diferenciados e, ao mesmo tempo, sendo impactados pelo 

contexto político-econômico nacional. 

“Vamos pegar o cara que tem 10 anos de empresa, embarcado. O 

amigo dele é o de plataforma, ele vive mesmo na folga aquele grupo. 

A instituição total, aquele comportamento padronizado (...). Ele fica 

muito preso a esse grupo, vira um gueto. Eu acho que o cara de 20 

anos, hoje Petrobras, ele já passou por essa fase e também se sentiu 

excluído do processo, ele ta (...)na minha percepção, ele não fica mais 

só preso, ele procura freqüentar outros ambientes também, porque ele 

se sentiu ameaçado no governo Fernando Henrique. O empregado, no 

governo Fernando Henrique, se sentiu muito ameaçado de ir pra rua, 

de perder o emprego, então ele sentiu necessidade de estabelecer 

outro tipo de vínculos, além de Petrobras. (...) a tendência natural é 

ele freqüentar guetos para o que ta entrando agora, pra o que tem 10 

anos ele ainda continua nos guetos, mas esse que já experimentou o 



 123 

período do Fernando Henrique, esse cara procura estabelecer outros 

vínculos, a Petrobras não é mais o projeto de vida , é um dos, é um 

meio para atingir o projeto de vida dele maior. Uma coisa é você 

considerar o seu projeto de vida, e a outra não, é um instrumento pra 

você alcançar um projeto de vida maior, mais ampliado, mais de 

qualidade de vida”.  

Cabe lembrar aqui que a década de 90, como já vimos anteriormente (item 1.1), 

foi marcada por um processo de reestruturação produtiva que causou impacto 

diretamente na empresa e nos seus trabalhadores, inclusive os offshore. Assim, é 

possível estabelecer esta década como um marco que separa os períodos que antecedem 

e precedem o governo FHC. Antes, existiam relações de trabalho estáveis, lineares e 

sem ameaças, baseadas em valores de compromisso e lealdade que se enraizaram na 

construção da história da empresa, traços estes característicos de uma lógica fordista. E 

pós FHC? A palavra “flexível” invade a vida dos trabalhadores. Relações de trabalho 

flexíveis, relações sociais instáveis, a experiência vai perdendo valor e “as ligações de 

longo prazo, os fortes laços sociais como a lealdade deixaram de ser atraentes”. 

(SENNETT, 2003:25)  

A experiência paradoxal de satisfação/prazer e de desencontros/perdas 

caracteriza os habitantes do arquipélago de aço, padroniza comportamentos e vai 

moldando, simbolicamente, a sua identidade. As dificuldades destacadas pelos 

trabalhadores mais jovens, já foram ultrapassadas por aqueles que foram pioneiros na 

região. O desejo de colocar em prática outros projetos no período de desembarque, se 

confronta com as exigências relativas a dinâmica de outros espaços institucionais. Desse 

modo, a experiência offshore torna-se às vezes incompreensível e inaceitável para os 

outros, considerados estrangeiros, que não compartilham essa vivência.  

“(...) me chama muito a atenção pessoas que levam 25 anos 

reclamando da vida offshore, se aposentam, entram numa empresa 

terceirizada e voltam a embarcar. (...) Um dos fatores é que o 

indivíduo volta pra família, ele não ta mais acostumado (...), ele volta 

e tem que readaptar. (...) muitas vezes, ele não se adapta igual ao 

presidiário, que volta pra sociedade e não se adapta a sociedade”.  



 124 

CAPÍTULO IV  

 

 

 

O TRABALHO OFFSHORE NA BACIA DE CAMPOS 

 

 

 

 

4.1. O enfrentamento do risco 

 
 
 Como já vimos no capítulo I, a indústria petrolífera brasileira vem a passos 

largos avançando rumo à auto-suficiência94 do tão cobiçado “ouro negro”. Para alcançar 

as metas e resultados previstos, pesados investimentos vêm sendo feitos na introdução 

de modernas tecnologias que objetivam elevar a produção de petróleo e gás.  

 Nesse sentido, Sevá Filho (2000) parte da premissa de que em todas as 

atividades e etapas na indústria do petróleo, existam “riscos intrínsecos e variados”, 

provenientes dos numerosos processos físicos e químicos que compõe a lógica do 

processo industrial. 

 Ao pesquisar sobre a indústria petrolífera, Sevá Filho (2000) define o risco nessa 

área, como sendo “técnico, coletivo e ambiental”. Considera que riscos técnicos são 

aqueles que tenham “origem em eventos tecnológicos e em condições organizacionais 

ou que tenham origens naturais agravadas pela tecnologia e pela organização; que 

vitimaram e podem vitimar indivíduos e coletividades humanas dentro e fora dos locais 

de produção; e que já resultaram e resultarão em alterações ambientais significativas, 

                                                
94 A auto-suficiência foi alcançada em 21 de abril deste ano, com o início da produção de petróleo na 
plataforma P-50, localizada na Bacia de Campos, como já abordamos no capítulo I.  



 125 

sejam eventos agudos, destrutivos, sejam processos latentes, combinações inéditas, 

efeitos cumulativos em parte desconhecidos” (SEVÁ FILHO, 1997).  

 Assim, o espaço offshore, bem como os seus processos, já descritos no capítulo 

II, implicam necessariamente, atividades complexas, perigosas, contínuas e coletivas e 

que envolvem os mais diversos riscos (FERREIRA e IGUTI, 1996). Acrescenta-se a 

essa complexidade, a permanência durante 14 dias em confinamento em alto mar, o que 

eleva substancialmente as proporções do resultado dessa equação para os trabalhadores.  

 Cabe ressaltar que não é nosso objetivo comparar uma refinaria com uma 

plataforma marítima. No entanto, a caracterização acima apresenta por Ferreira e Iguti 

(1996) para o trabalho nas refinarias é ratificado por Pessanha (1996), Choueri (1991) e 

Figueiredo (2001). Além disso, os depoimentos dos trabalhadores offshore corroboram 

os atributos destacados pelas autoras e reafirmam que na condição de confinamento 

estes assumem mais intensidades. A fala, a seguir, de um trabalhador95 no início das 

operações na Bacia de Campos remete a essa analogia. “(...) o que é a plataforma? Não 

se sabia nem o que era uma plataforma. (...) a gente desconhecia tanto que considerou 

que era uma refinaria (...)”. 

 Sevá Filho (2000) considera que no trabalho offshore exista uma multiplicidade e 

simultaneidade de riscos, principalmente, aqueles que se referem às atividades, de 

“mineração subterrânea”. Neste, estão incluídos também os “riscos milenares da 

navegação”, os riscos mais recentes da “atividade subaquática” (FIGUEIREDO, 2001 e 

BARRETO, 1998) e os “riscos da aviação”.  

“Toda atividade nossa, embarcado, em plataforma, até um 

administrativo (...). Quando você ta embarcado, ta correndo risco. Em 

toda unidade de produção, em toda parte (...). O transporte é arriscado, 

por exemplo, ontem, teve uma pane, no helicóptero, o pessoal voltou pro 

aeroporto. Se acontecer alguma coisa lá, a evacuação é arriscada, é 

difícil. (...) é local confinado, equipamento pressurizado (...), o risco 

existe”. 

                                                
95 A fala desse trabalhador consta da pesquisa de PESSANHA, 1996.  



 126 

Nesse sentido, os riscos do trabalho offshore assumem complexidades e 

proporções singulares na vida dos trabalhadores. As características das atividades se 

configuram marcadamente como tarefas complexas (FERREIRA e IGUTI, 1996). No 

seu cotidiano manipulam uma série de variáveis que estão em íntima correlação uma 

com as outras, as quais podem assumir contornos diversos, dependendo da situação.  

 Nessa direção, o trabalho offshore se configura como perigoso e insalubre. A 

condição de perigo consta da NR-1696, para os trabalhadores que se encontram em 

atividades e operações perigosas com inflamáveis. É estabelecido o pagamento de 30% 

sobre o salário-base correspondente a título de um adicional de periculosidade. Na 

verdade, a existência do adicional formaliza a atividade como perigosa, mas não exime 

a empresa de sua responsabilidade. Isso não quer significar que o fato de ser indenizado 

pela condição de perigo seja o suficiente para que o trabalhador se submeta a qualquer 

situação de risco. 

A indústria extrativista de petróleo e gás natural, no quadro de classificação 

nacional de atividades97 é posicionada em relação ao grau de risco, no último ponto da 

escala, 4, o que demonstra a diversidade e complexidade desses riscos.  

“A gente tem o risco 4, grau máximo, sabe que trabalha com vasos sob 

pressão, com tanques, com dutos de gás, linhas de 100, 120 e tantos 

quilos. (...) Não é tranqüilo. A gente fica tranqüilo sabendo que os 

equipamentos são confiáveis, mas são passíveis de falhas. E a gente é o 

ponto vulnerável. A gente, qualquer coisa morre, é igual a um 

passarinho. Você coloca um passarinho na mão vivo, pergunta pra uma 

pessoa, ele ta vivo ou ta morto? Depende do grau de pressão que você 

der nele. Então é o ser humano nessa estória toda. Um mar de ferro, 

cheio de interfaces aqui, ali e você como a peça chave que comanda, só 

que você é o mais frágil”.  

 Esse depoimento exemplifica a percepção que os trabalhadores offshore têm 

sobre as várias condições de risco aos quais estão submetidos durante o confinamento 

                                                
96 NR-16 é a norma regulamentadora 16 que trata das atividades e operações perigosas. 
97 Quadro I – Classificação Nacional de Atividades Econômicas consta do Item C (Indústrias Extrativas), 
11.20-7 (Serviços relacionados com a Extração de Petróleo e Gás) da Norma Regulamentadora 4 (NR-4). 
A NR-4 trata dos Serviços Especializados em Engenharia de Segurança e em Medicina do Trabalho. 



 127 

de 14 dias. Sentem-se completamente fracos, sem possibilidades de expressar nenhuma 

reação contrária, tornam-se presas fáceis diante da potência dos equipamentos, das 

cargas etc, suscetíveis e com uma vida efêmera. Entendemos que o sentimento que 

sintetiza e mais se aproxima dessa fala é o medo, que será detalhado no capítulo V. 

Uma outra condição do trabalho offshore se refere à insalubridade. Existem 

riscos decorrentes do próprio processo, de vazamentos e de toxidade dos produtos nele 

utilizados que podem causar danos à saúde dos trabalhadores ou até mesmo grandes 

emergências. Dentre estes se destacam: ácido sulfídrico, monóxido de carbono, etc.  

 Soma-se a esse quadro, a exposição aos riscos ambientais, que se referem aos 

agentes físicos, químicos e biológicos, que estão definidos na NR-9 e às questões 

ergonômicas, referente à NR-17. No entanto, essas regulamentações sobre as condições 

de risco partem de uma análise estática do posto de trabalho, de uma avaliação das 

condições adaptativas, sem considerar a dinâmica do processo de trabalho.  

É neste contexto que é inserida a concepção de carga de trabalho, de modo a 

romper com a visão simplista e fragmentada presente nas NRs, que procura empreender 

a dinâmica que envolve os processos e as relações de trabalho a partir da análise do 

trabalho real.  

Nesse foco Laurell e Noriega (1989:109) conceituam a categoria carga de 

trabalho no sentido de destacar os elementos que interatuam entre si, em movimento e 

com o corpo do trabalhador, criando processos de adaptação que se traduzem na perda 

da capacidade potencial e/ou efetiva corporal e psíquica. Essa categoria pode ser 

agrupada do seguinte modo: físicas, químicas, biológicas e mecânicas que têm 

materialidade externa ao corpo, pois ao atuarem sobre o corpo, sofrem alterações de 

qualidade, tornando-se processos intracorporais complexos que, por exemplo, podem 

desencadear mudanças nos processos fisiológicos. E as cargas fisiológicas e psíquicas 

só adquirem materialidade através de suas manifestações sobre o corpo. 

São exemplos de cargas físicas: ambiente mal iluminado, temperaturas anormais, 

umidade, vibrações, radiações, pressões anormais, ruídos etc. Este último, por exemplo, 

pode atuar “sobre as células do ouvido médio e interno, porém também sobre o sistema 

nervoso e provocar mudanças em alguns processos fisiológicos” (LAURELL e 

NORIEGA, 1989:110).  



 128 

As cargas químicas são fumos, gases, fibras, poeiras, vapores, sólidos, líquidos, 

neblinas, névoas, explosivos, corrosivos, radiações etc; as mecânicas se constituem de 

choque elétrico, quedas, máquinas e instrumentos sem proteção etc; as biológicas de 

contato com microorganismos (bactérias, vírus etc), animais peçonhentos (cobras, 

escorpiões etc), insetos transmissores de doenças etc e, as cargas mecânicas que são as 

mais visíveis, por se caracterizarem em uma ruptura instantânea do corpo, como as 

fraturas, contusões etc. As cargas ergonômicas que se relacionam ao trabalho repetitivo, 

ao ritmo, à postura, ao dimensionamento e arranjo das estações de trabalho etc, donde a 

alternância de turnos traz reflexos negativos nos ritmos fisiológicos básicos. Já as cargas 

psíquicas não podem ser compreendidas à margem das relações entre os homens e das 

condições que as geram; precisam também ser consideradas a intensidade e como são 

socialmente produzidas. Aqui estão incluídas, por exemplo, a monotonia e o trabalho 

desqualificado, relações autoritárias, percepção de perigo etc.  

É importante enfatizar que não se trata de considerar essa classificação de forma 

segmentada e isolada, mas de mostrar a complexidade que envolve a análise das 

condições de trabalho98 e a análise dos riscos, de modo que a concepção sobre as 

principais causas dos acidentes de trabalho deixe de focar uma exclusividade de “culpa” 

nos trabalhadores e, particularmente, no offshore.  

A fala de um alto executivo99 na área do petróleo é ilustrativa para demonstrar a 

complexidade de riscos que envolvem a indústria do petróleo: “Duvido que haja outra 

indústria que tenha uma porcentagem mais alta de seus trabalhadores submetida a 

risco”.  

 Diante desse contexto delineado de riscos que envolvem o trabalho offshore, 

partilhamos da conclusão de Sevá Filho (2000) de que o “risco técnico é intrínseco e 

muito característico da indústria do petróleo”. Destaca três razões para justificar a sua 

afirmação, quais sejam: 

“porque é atacada a epiderme da terra, interferindo na geomorfologia e 

na mecânica do subsolo, inclusive do subsolo marinho; porque se 

trabalha com hidrocarbonetos que evaporam, se incendeiam ou 

                                                
98 Laurell e Noriega (1989), Seligmann-Silva (1994), Dejours (1988, 1994, 2004), Wisner (1987), Sevá 
Filho (1997, 2000). 
99 Oil and Gas Journal, 27/10/1983 apud Choueri Jr, 1991. 



 129 

explodem e com compostos químicos que contêm ou se transformam em 

substâncias tóxicas para os homens, sua água, seus alimentos; e porque 

são operados sistemas e máquinas que podem desencadear acidentes 

poderosos, os quais chegam a matar e ferir várias pessoas ao mesmo 

tempo”.  

Acrescenta, ainda a essa caracterização, mais um atributo de que é também um 

risco coletivo, uma vez que pelos efeitos poluidores e patológicos das operações 

industriais, envolvem não somente os seus trabalhadores, mas também regiões vizinhas 

às suas instalações. No caso offshore, trata-se dos riscos ao meio ambiente.  

Assim, por se constituírem com alta complexidade e alto risco, a ocorrência ou 

não de acidentes nesses sistemas e sua gravidade “dependem diretamente dos padrões 

reais de funcionamento e do preparo de seus trabalhadores, além do estágio de 

depreciação” (SEVÁ FILHO, 2000:177). Estas três fontes de riscos (funcionamento das 

operações dentro dos padrões, qualificação técnica e prática dos trabalhadores e 

manutenção dos equipamentos e instalações) deveriam ser priorizadas, no sentido de 

minimizar ao máximo as possibilidades dos acidentes se concretizarem. Cabe destacar, 

que por estarem intrinsecamente interligados, as probabilidades é de que sempre 

aconteçam em alguma instalação (SEVÁ FILHO, 2000:177). 

A complexidade do sistema não se baseia, necessariamente, em determinismos, 

apesar de toda tecnologia e automação já implantada, implica fundamentalmente que a 

imprevisibilidade é intrínseca e, apesar de todos os sistemas de controle existentes, 

ainda assim há o “caráter aleatório e imprevisível” das ocorrências. Isso significa que 

investimentos preventivos devam ser sempre priorizados.  

 Toda essa complexidade exige por parte dos trabalhadores um estado de alerta 

constante, a fim de detectar e sanar os pontos de não-conformidade, a partir da análise 

dos procedimentos prescritos e do saber prático real. 

 Um outro aspecto decorrente do sistema complexo é a possibilidade de que as 

ocorrências possam se dar de forma lenta e “invisível” tanto para os sistemas de 

controle quanto para os trabalhadores. Esse efeito de uma invisibilidade aparente gera, 

além de um estado de alerta maior, efeitos que podem surpreender até mesmo os 

profissionais mais experientes. Acrescenta-se a todos esses contornos, a simultaneidade 



 130 

de tarefas que, além de exigir procedimentos e sistemas já adotados, também mais uma 

vez requer desses trabalhadores conhecimento para compreender, analisar e intervir nos 

processos, oriundo de toda experiência acumulada durante anos.  

 Um outro traço marcante do trabalho offshore é a interdependência dos serviços, 

como Ferreira e Iguti (1996) destacam quando se referem às atividades da indústria do 

petróleo. Esse sistema tecnológico em rede que impede que se possua um controle total, 

submetido a um determinado grau de imprevisibilidade e desencadeamentos 

conseqüentes se reflete, por sua vez, nas tarefas dos trabalhadores, criando um trabalho 

que é coletivo. Esse contorno de malha entre as equipes só vem reforçar o que já vimos 

anteriormente em relação ao espaço confinado, como um território de caráter coletivo e 

público.  

Porto e Freitas (1997:63) consideram que em sistemas complexos altamente 

interligados, alterações numa determinada área, podem desencadear um chamado 

“efeito dominó” e levar conseqüentemente a acidentes. Acrescentam que métodos de 

análises de riscos vêm sendo desenvolvidos, no sentido de avaliarem os riscos antes que 

estes se transformem em acidentes. Cabe aqui destacar, a pesquisa feita por Figueiredo 

(2001) sobre a segurança e a confiabilidade dos sistemas complexos, como é o caso da 

indústria petrolífera offshore, na atividade de mergulho.  

 Por se constituírem em sistemas complexos, o risco técnico coletivo assume 

significativas probabilidades de ocorrências. Decorrem dos “reais padrões de 

funcionamento dos sistemas e do preparo de seus trabalhadores, além do estágio 

preciso de depreciação técnica” das instalações e equipamentos. Entende, ainda, que 

relações hierarquizadas de produção levam a não participação efetiva do pessoal de 

operação e de manutenção nas fases de concepção e projeto de equipamentos e sistemas, 

o que vai gerar a execução a posteriori de “instruções operacionais claramente 

equivocadas ou bastante arriscadas”. Esse entendimento é corroborado por Llory 

(2003) em que destaca o grande distanciamento existente entre o pessoal da base, da 

operação e o da engenharia e também por Dejours (1994) quando analisa os 

trabalhadores da usina nuclear.  



 131 

  Além disso, no sentido de elevar a complexidade dos riscos já descritos, soma-se 

ainda, o processo de terceirização que atravessou os anos 90 e que praticamente dominou 

os serviços de manutenção na empresa.  

  Corroboramos da concepção adotada por Ferreira e Iguti (1996) de que os 

serviços de manutenção na indústria do petróleo são definidos como estratégicos, pela 

grande quantidade, especificidade e complexidade dos processos e equipamentos, 

exigindo, portanto, profissionais altamente especializados. Falhas que venham a ocorrer 

no funcionamento de equipamentos e instrumentos podem acarretar além de graves e 

longas interrupções na produção, danos materiais, gerando alto custo financeiro, bem 

como acidentes com perdas humanas. Dessa forma, os investimentos em manutenção 

precisam atuar, paralelamente, em dois níveis, na prevenção e na correção. 

“o preventivo, para garantir o bom funcionamento dos equipamentos e 

instrumentos e que exige um cuidado constante para detectar pequenas 

alterações e providenciar para que elas não se alastrem, e o que 

poderíamos chamar de corretivo, que atua quando já ocorreu um 

problema: consertar, reparar o equipamento”. (FERREIRA e IGUTI, 

1996:75) 

  Sevá Filho (2000) afirma, de modo enfático, que a racionalização da manutenção 

técnica é o fator determinante em muitos acidentes. Pela atividade offshore concentrar 

sistemas complexos e tecnologias de alto risco, sabe-se que a ocorrência ou não de 

acidentes estão diretamente relacionadas aos “reais padrões de funcionamento, ao 

preparo de seus trabalhadores e ao estágio preciso de depreciação técnica”. E por serem 

intrínsecos, tais situações de risco são “probabilísticos” e sempre acontecem em alguma 

instalação. Assim, todos esses fatores deveriam ser altamente combatidos, o que muitas 

vezes não ocorre. As gerências, apesar das instalações estarem com problemas e com 

“gambiarras”, definem na “prescrição formal de trabalho, nas instruções operacionais e 

nas programações de produção” que as operações devem estar no fluxo máximo do 

processamento. Cabe enfatizar que essa estratégia evidencia, nos anos 90, um modelo de 

gestão que priorizava “desorganizar o trabalho” para “desorganizar os trabalhadores”, 

sem “desorganizar a produção”. O boom dos processos de reengenharia que invadiu esse 

período, não priorizou a manutenção técnica e nem a reforma estrutural das instalações. 



 132 

  Cabe destacar que a função de manutenção, nas indústrias de processo, 

principalmente, tem que ser priorizada, uma vez que uma pane em uma atividade 

interfere nas demais, muitas vezes com um efeito propagador imprevisível e devastador 

para as demais e sob o ponto de vista econômico, trazendo elevados prejuízos. Nesse 

sentido, algumas empresas vêm reavaliando sua política de subcontratação, implantando 

um processo de primeirização dessa atividade, retornando assim, o controle da 

manutenção preventiva aos trabalhadores próprios, deixando as tarefas corretivas, apenas 

para os terceirizados. 

  Esse quadro só vem enfatizar o elevado grau de exigência de se estabelecer uma 

estreita e intensa articulação entre a operação e a manutenção. O que se vê, a partir de 

uma maior evolução e complexidade dos sistemas produtivos, é uma maior aproximação 

entre as funções de fabricação e manutenção, sendo que essa deixa de ser acionada 

apenas em situações problemáticas.  

“É uma função cada vez mais imbricada tecnicamente no processo de 

fabricação, uma dimensão permanente da atividade produtiva na 

qual o preventivo, a antecipação deve, cada vez mais, substituir o 

enfoque meramente corretivo”. (VITOR et al., 1999 apud ARAÚJO, 

2001:26) 

  É importante mencionar que, nos últimos anos, a Petrobras vem contratando 

novos trabalhadores próprios para essa área nas plataformas, com a realização de 

concursos públicos. No entanto, o déficit, segundo depoimentos, ainda é muito grande. 

Assim, o que ainda se constata é que, atualmente, os trabalhadores terceirizados, que 

muitas das vezes carecem da qualificação necessária para desempenhar a função numa 

área de alto grau de risco, são os responsáveis por transmitirem aos “borrachos” o saber 

prático operacional100, de fundamental importância na atividade offshore. O depoimento 

que se segue é apenas um exemplo disso.  

(...) a gente que é novo não tem muita experiência (...). Aí tem aquela 

questão que você não está realmente seguro pra fazer aquilo por 

mais que você tenha conhecimento da escola, mas não tem aquela 

segurança de chegar e botar a mão na massa. Por isso que também 

                                                
100 O saber operário será discutido no capítulo V. 



 133 

tem essa mescla, de contratado e Petrobras, por que aí bem ou mal 

tem gente contratado que trabalha na plataforma há uns cinco anos, 

seis anos (...). Essa troca a gente aprende bastante, mesmo que não 

tenham tido a possibilidade de ter diploma, tem uns lá que não tem 

diploma que trabalham como eletricista por experiência, fizeram isso 

trocentas vezes, fazem e sabe que dá certo mas não sabem por que 

(...) E se tiver uma hora que acontecer diferente, como fica?”. 

  O enfrentamento dos riscos inerentes à atividade offshore pressupõe, dentre 

outras exigências, um aprendizado que vai sendo adquirido, paulatinamente, com os 

profissionais mais experientes, como veremos no capítulo V. No entanto, cabe aqui 

registrar que, na área de manutenção, esse saber específico está sendo transmitido pelo 

contingente de trabalhadores terceirizados que, via de regra, têm baixa qualificação e 

competência técnicas. Enfim, o que fica como questionamento, é se os trabalhadores 

“borrachos” de hoje, serão os técnicos respeitados do futuro que, sozinhos e/ou com seus 

pares, saberão como agir em situações de perigo, de risco e de sobrecarga?   

 

 

 

4.2. Trabalho offshore em turnos 

 

 A característica de continuidade inerente ao trabalho offshore, uma vez que os 

processos e operações funcionam de forma ininterrupta, exige apenas substituições nas 

equipes que se revezam durante os 365 dias ao ano, ocasionando uma troca de equipes 

sistematicamente a cada período de 12 horas.  

 Inicialmente, cabe configurar o que é o trabalho em turnos. É caracterizado pela 

“continuidade da produção e uma quebra de continuidade no trabalho realizado pelo 

trabalhador” (FISCHER; MORENO; ROTENBERG, 2003:6). A continuidade do 

trabalho (produção ou prestação de serviços) é obtida pela participação de várias turmas 

que se sucedem umas as outras nas atividades de trabalho. Essas turmas são formadas 

por grupos de trabalhadores que trabalham juntos no mesmo local, nos mesmos 



 134 

horários, sucedendo-se uns aos outros, ou seja, em processo de revezamento. As turmas 

podem alterar ou permanecer em horários fixos. O trabalho pode ser realizado de forma 

ininterrupta ou pode ser interrompido durante algumas horas durante a noite, no final de 

semana ou em dias predeterminados. 

 O que se vê é uma diversidade de turnos de trabalho101 existentes nas empresas e 

até mesma numa única empresa, tendo em vista a natureza de suas operações. Alguns 

setores econômicos reduzem temporariamente suas atividades em determinadas épocas 

de menor demanda de produção, como por exemplo, as usinas de cana de açúcar 

(LEITE LOPES, 1978). Outras mantêm bastante regularidade nos turnos, inclusive 

permitindo que os trabalhadores tenham os seus respectivos calendários de trabalho 

anuais, facilitando conseqüentemente a sua vida fora do trabalho. Dentre estas, estão 

incluídas as indústrias do ramo químico, petroquímico e de petróleo.   

 O turno pode ser diurno ou noturno. No primeiro, o trabalhador tem jornadas que 

correspondem a horários de trabalho usualmente entre 5 e 18 horas do dia e, no 

segundo, as atividades ocorrem no período noturno que, de acordo com a legislação 

brasileira, se refere às 22 horas de um dia até às 5 horas do dia seguinte. O turno 

também pode variar de acordo com três tipos de unidade de tempo de trabalho de 6, 8 

ou 12 horas. 

 A legislação brasileira102 prevê para o trabalhador noturno a redução da hora de 

trabalho para 52 minutos e 30 segundos e, também, um acréscimo de 20% na 

remuneração em relação à hora diurna.  

 E o trabalho offshore?  

A Constituição Brasileira de 1988 em seu artigo 7 inciso XIV previu a jornada 

de seis horas para o trabalho realizado em turnos ininterruptos de revezamento (TIR), 

“salvo negociação coletiva” (Brasil, 1988). Sendo assim, a partir do acordo coletivo de 

1989, assinado entre a Petrobras e os sindicatos dos petroleiros, o regime offshore foi 

alterado para jornadas de 12 horas durante 14 dias, desembarque no 15o dia e mais 20 

dias de folgas, o conhecido 14 por 21, inclusive para os trabalhadores offshore em 

regime de sobreaviso. Essa mudança não atingiu os trabalhadores terceirizados que, 
                                                
101 FISCHER; MORENO; ROTENBERG (2003) apresentam as várias modalidades de turno adotadas 
pelas empresas. 
102 Consolidação das Leis do Trabalho, CLT, seção IV, Do trabalho noturno. 



 135 

ainda, permanecem até os dias de hoje, com a mesma relação trabalho/folga, adotada 

pela Petrobras, antes da mudança constitucional, ou seja, 14 por 14. 

A partir do final da década de 90, uma outra relação trabalho/folga começou a 

ser implantada na Bacia de Campos, em algumas plataformas, correspondente a 14 dias 

de trabalho offshore por 28 dias de folgas, o que acarreta o não usufruto do gozo de 

férias anuais de 30 dias, pois os dias referentes ao período de férias ficam diluídos nos 

períodos de folgas. Atualmente, essa modalidade não é mais implementada, 

prevalecendo apenas o regime 14 por 21.   

 Dessa forma, o trabalho em turnos gera, necessariamente, alteração de horários 

que implicam em mudanças de hábitos alimentares, de sono e de descanso, que resulta, 

muitas vezes, em distúrbios fisiológicos, psicossomáticos ou mesmo sintomas como a 

irritabilidade e um estado constante de tensão. Cabe enfatizar que os trabalhadores 

associam, também, à condição de confinamento alguns distúrbios e sintomas 

semelhantes aos descritos como conseqüências do regime de turno. Acrescenta-se a esse 

quadro, toda a complexidade das condições de risco, abordada anteriormente.    

 Os efeitos relativos ao trabalho em turnos se referem a alterações no denominado 

ciclo circadiano nos trabalhadores de turno de revezamento. Este ciclo é dado por uma 

espécie de relógio biológico que cada pessoa tem dentro de si e que faz com que ela 

tenha comportamentos diferenciados durante as vinte e quatro horas do dia. Associado 

ao ciclo claro/escuro, o período do ciclo circadiano depende de cada espécie. No 

homem, o normal é que fique acordado durante o dia e repouse durante a noite. Quando 

se troca o dia pela noite, como quem trabalha em turnos de revezamento, o relógio 

biológico pode se confundir e provocar alterações no ciclo vigília-sono, levando o 

trabalhador a sentir dificuldades de dormir de dia e não ter sono quando trabalha à noite 

(FISCHER; MORENO; ROTENBERG, 2003). Os trabalhos que precisam manter o 

mesmo nível de rendimento em todas as horas do dia são mais cansativos se realizados à 

noite. “Pesquisadores suecos puderam demonstrar que os erros são especialmente 

freqüentes às 15h ou às 3h da manhã. O número de erros, em contrapartida, entre 8 e 

10h ou entre 17 e 19h é claramente inferior”. (RUTENFRANZ; KNAUTH; FISCHER, 

1989) 



 136 

 Efeitos negativos no ritmo circadiano podem comprometer o desempenho 

profissional, impedindo o bom rendimento físico como também diminuindo o nível de 

atenção, coordenação motora e ritmo psíquico. Essas são funções empregadas em 

muitos processos de trabalho, inclusive no offshore. “Os períodos de duração de sono 

são, em média, de sete horas e meia antes do turno matutino, de nove horas depois do 

turno vespertino e de seis horas depois do turno noturno”. Assim, muitos turnos 

noturnos consecutivos levam a um acentuado déficit de sono. (RUTENFRANZ; 

KNAUTH; FISCHER, 1989:53) 

 Cabe destacar que em 12 de maio de 1999 foi publicada no Diário Oficial da 

União a nova regulamentação sobre as doenças profissionais e doenças relacionadas 

com o trabalho, regulamentando o Decreto 3.048, de 06 de maio de 1999. Esta nova 

orientação inclui os benefícios a serem recebidos pelos trabalhadores em caso de 

acidentes e doenças profissionais e do trabalho. Assim, o trabalho em turnos e noturno 

foi incluído como “agente etiológico ou fator de risco de natureza ocupacional, sendo 

descrito como má adaptação à organização do horário de trabalho – trabalho em 

turnos e trabalho noturno para o desenvolvimento de transtornos do ciclo vigília-sono 

devido a fatores não orgânicos, e de distúrbios no ciclo vigília-sono” (DIÁRIO 

OFICIAL DA UNIÃO, 1999 apud FISCHER; MORENO; ROTENBERG, 2003: 16). 

 Ao mesmo tempo em que essa regulamentação representa avanços, pois 

posiciona a legislação brasileira à frente de outros países em relação ao tratamento do 

tema, deixa claro, a caracterização de que as conseqüências para o trabalhador, oriundas 

do trabalho em turnos, têm como causa uma má adaptação deste ao regime de trabalho. 

 Essa linha de abordagem vai ao encontro de uma visão que responsabiliza os 

trabalhadores pelos incidentes e acidentes de trabalho e a sua não capacidade de se 

adaptar aos riscos, ao regime, ou seja, ao que está prescrito no âmbito da organização e 

dos processos de trabalho.   

 Os trabalhadores offshore que trabalham em turno iniciam sua jornada às 7:00h 

sendo mais fácil esse horário para aqueles que tem características matutinas, com 

preferências em acordar cedo de manhã, ter atividades físicas e intelectuais no período 

da manhã, dormir cedo, em geral até às 22h e, conseqüentemente, com dificuldades de 

se manter acordadas tarde da noite. Outros muito vespertinos gostam de acordar mais 



 137 

tarde (após às 9h), preferem entrar no trabalho às 12h, ir dormir mais tarde à noite e 

realizar atividades físicas e intelectuais preferencialmente no fim do dia. As pessoas 

vespertinas suportam melhor ficar acordadas até de madrugada, em comparação com as 

matutinas (FISCHER, 2003:66). No entanto deve-se considerar que a maioria da 

população tem hábitos de matunidade e vespertinidade moderados (FISCHER, 

2003:66). Pesquisa (PETROBRAS, 1991) realizada com trabalhadores offshore 

identificou que a maioria destes, que se encontram em regime de turno, alega sono 

durante o trabalho, principalmente no período noturno. 

Cabe destacar que a medida que a pessoa envelhece há uma tendência a 

apresentar maior matutinidade e suscetibilidade à ocorrência de perturbações mais 

marcantes nos ritmos biológicos (RUTENFRANZ; KNAUTH; FISCHER, 1989:69). 

Essa explicação é corroborada em vários depoimentos de trabalhadores mais 

experientes, conforme o exemplo a seguir, considerando que a média de idade destes 

gira em torno dos 45 anos.  

“Os primeiros três anos, depois que mudava o turno, pra conciliar o 

sono era muito difícil, tem um horário que o sono batia que não tinha 

jeito, a gente ficava muito aéreo, quando bate o sono. Por mais que lave 

o rosto, que tome café, ande na área (...) mas hoje eu to mais cansado e 

depois de uns 8 anos mais  ou  menos, que eu senti que me prejudicava, 

(...) meu sono”. 

Alegam que as dificuldades para dormir bem e descansar na plataforma se 

referem a algum tipo de ruído, às mudanças de alojamento e ao compartilhamento dos 

camarotes com colegas que estão em turnos diferentes e que possuem hábitos diversos, 

que normalmente em outro local não seriam tão valorizados, mas que naquelas 

circunstâncias assumem outras dimensões como, por exemplo, fazer qualquer tipo de 

barulho, acender a luz, conversar quando entram no camarote etc.  

“Às vezes tem um barulhinho, o mínimo barulhinho na plataforma um 

martelinho lá no fundo, e aí aquilo ali é o suficiente pra você não 

conseguir dormir”.   

Pessanha (1994) ao pesquisar os operadores offshore constatou que “20% dizem 

que freqüentemente, têm dificuldade de sono nos dias em que trabalham a noite; 69% 



 138 

costumam sentir vontade de cochilar durante o trabalho noturno; 51% afirmam que, às 

vezes, dormem mal durante o repouso quando estão trabalhando à noite”. 

Abaixo seguem dois quadros que apresentam exemplos de escala de turnos 

offshore. O quadro I em que o trabalho inicia às 7:00h e termina às 19:00h, quando a 

segunda equipe assume e larga às 7:00h, em um processo de revezamento ininterrupto. 

O quadro II já mostra o trabalho iniciando-se às 12:00h e sendo repassado para a 

segunda equipe às 24:00h (FISCHER, 2003:13). Existem apenas duas equipes se 

revezando a cada turno de 12 horas. A equipe que trabalha, inicialmente, durante os 7 

dias diurnos, trocará com a segunda equipe que está trabalhando no turno da noite. Essa 

passagem do diurno para o noturno e vice-versa é denominada de “dia da virada”, que 

se constitui em um dos grandes desgastes para os trabalhadores. Neste dia, por exemplo, 

no quadro I o trabalhador necessita descansar durante o dia antes de “pegar” o turno da 

noite, ou seja, necessita se adaptar forçosamente a dormir durante esse período para ter 

condições de trabalho no período noturno. Essa mudança brusca além de trazer 

conseqüências diretas para os ritmos biológicos, demanda cansaço adicional, 

principalmente em tarefas que exijam trabalho mais cognitivo, com maior concentração.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 139 

        Quadro I                                                                      Quadro II 

 

Dia Entrada no Saída do   Dia Entrada no Saída do  

trabalho trabalho trabalho trabalho 

01 07:00 19:00   01 12:00 24:00  

02 07:00 19:00   02 12:00 24:00  

03 07:00 19:00   03 12:00 24:00  

04 07:00 19:00   04 12:00 24:00  

05 07:00 19:00   05 12:00 24:00  

06 07:00 19:00   06 08:00 16:00 Dia da 

07 07:00 15:00   07 00:00 12:00 Virada 

08 00:00 12:00 Dia da  08 00:00 12:00  

08 22:00 07:00 Virada  09 00:00 12:00  

09 19:00 07:00   10 00:00 12:00  

10 19:00 07:00   11 00:00 12:00  

11 19:00 07:00   12 00:00 12:00  

12 19:00 07:00   13 00:00 08:00 08h de 

13 19:00 07:00   13 16:00 24:00 descanso 

14 19:00 07:00 08h de  14 12:00 24:00  

14 15:00 24:00 descanso  15 DESEMBARQUE - 09:45 

15 DESEMBARQUE - 09:45      

 

 “Biologicamente é horrível por que você está acostumado a almoçar, às 

vezes, meia noite. E aí de repente na virada você vai ter que almoçar 

meio dia quando antes você estava dormindo. É estranho o organismo se 

adaptar aquilo, daí você não sente fome ou sente fome na hora que não 

era pra sentir, na madrugada, por exemplo, fica difícil pra dormir. Você 

vem trabalhando uma semana a noite faz a virada, sabe que tem que 

dormir, por que se faz a virada, trabalha, depois vai dormir de novo. Só 



 140 

que depois nessa de depois vai dormir de novo o sono não vem, então 

tem que forçar. A virada é uma das piores coisas que acontecem na 

plataforma”.  

As modificações de horário de trabalho, de refeições e de dormir, em decorrência 

do regime de turno, causam distúrbios de apetite. Isso, sobretudo se dá no horário 

noturno, já que durante a noite, especialmente de madrugada, quase não se aceita mais 

alimentos103. (RUTENFRANZ; KNAUTH; FISCHER, 1989:57) 

“Quando chega no dia da virada você tem quatro horas pra dormir, 

então parece que a gente tomou uma surra, levanta, os olhos super 

vermelhos. (...) por exemplo, você vai dormir sete da noite pra pegar uma 

hora da manhã. Aí dá um choque, aquela coisa e é muito preocupante 

por que é nessa hora que a plataforma fica vulnerável de um acidente. 

Então essa parte é ruim. Pra gente fica difícil escovar os dentes, 

levantar, se situar(...)”.   

 Para aliviar as conseqüências físicas ocasionadas pela virada do turno, cada 

trabalhador, à sua maneira, vai buscando alternativas para minimizar esses efeitos. 

Alguns buscam reforçar a alimentação durante a primeira semana para que o corpo 

consiga suportar os distúrbios em decorrência da virada, e não adoeçam. Um deles 

afirma: “Na virada, minha imunidade cai. Basta um resfriadinho pra alterar tudo, é 

muita dor de cabeça, tudo aumenta, é incontrolável”. 

Rodrigues (2001) ao pesquisar os trabalhadores offshore da área de perfuração 

na Petrobras, identificou que o sono a bordo, quando o trabalhador encontra-se no turno 

do dia apresenta-se próximo à qualidade do sono durante a folga. Já o sono a bordo 

quando está no turno da noite, ou seja, dorme-se durante o dia, revela perda de 

qualidade em relação à duração, continuidade e efeito restaurador. Cabe destacar que o 

alojamento, em sua maioria, se posiciona em local com menor ruído. Acrescenta, ainda, 

que o turno da noite é o preferido pelos trabalhadores para iniciar o período de 

embarque, pois objetivam desembarcar no turno do dia.  

                                                
103 Essa explicação tem relação com o fato de, por exemplo, a secreção do suco gástrico necessário para a 
digestão praticamente não se dar durante a noite. Por isso os trabalhadores de turno, no período noturno, 
têm com “freqüência dificuldades com a alimentação, já que não podem tomar seu ‘café da manhã’ à 
meia noite, nem têm vontade de ‘almoçar’ às 4h da manhã”.  



 141 

 Um número bem menor de trabalhadores prefere trabalhar no período da noite, 

pois consideram-no mais tranqüilo, com menos pressão, sem trabalhos de manutenção e 

com menor carga psíquica. Provavelmente, trata-se de pessoas mais vespertinas. 

 Existem trabalhadores que por iniciarem o trabalho na plataforma no período 

noturno e executarem atividades em locais sem visibilidade externa e apenas com 

iluminação artificial, declaram que por vezes ficam durante toda semana sem ver a luz 

natural, pois quando terminam o horário de trabalho, vão direto para os camarotes e 

refeitório pelo acesso interno da Unidade e, no dia seguinte, retornam a sala de trabalho 

da mesma forma. Afirmam: “Às vezes eu não sei se é noite ou se é dia. (...) É ruim, eu 

me sinto muito mal”.   

 Não obstante, cabe destacar que o regime de sobreaviso offshore, apesar de não 

estar submetido à mesma lógica do turno, também traz desgastes para os trabalhadores. 

Muitas vezes, pelas exigências operacionais, a jornada de trabalho ultrapassa as doze 

horas diárias. Além disso, a qualquer tempo e hora, o trabalhador de sobreaviso poderá 

ser acionado, mesmo que não tenha concluído as suas doze horas de descanso.  

 Tanto o trabalho em turnos quanto o sobreaviso podem criar perturbações da 

ordem temporal, do sono e da vida familiar dos trabalhadores. As conseqüências são 

geralmente cansaço, agravamento de doenças, maior suscetibilidade a agentes nocivos, 

envelhecimento precoce, alteração dos hábitos alimentares, gastrointestinais, de humor, 

da rotina das necessidades fisiológicas e sofrimento mental. (FERREIRA, 1987) 

“O risco se agrava conforme se dissemina e se aprofunda a ‘fragilização 

humana’: os homens com o ritmo circadiano alterado pelo regime de 

turnos, de plantão e de sobreaviso, com tempos de sono e vigília 

desencontrados, vão sendo vitimados por surtos epidêmicos de 

adoecimentos e por ciclos de desgastes pessoais. Isto rebaixa o seu grau 

de atenção, embaralha a percepção do próprio risco e atrapalha a 

disposição humana e coletiva que se requer para a correção do 

incidente, para o combate à seqüência acidental – e também para a 

delimitação e diminuição dos seus efeitos”. (SEVÁ FILHO, 2000:188) 

 Fischer (2003:65) destaca um trecho clássico sobre a percepção que os 

trabalhadores de turno têm sobre as causas e os efeitos desse tipo de jornada de trabalho: 



 142 

“O estresse objetivo resultante das modificações e dessincronização dos 

ritmos biológicos causados pelo trabalho em turnos e as dificuldades e a 

lentidão de ressincronização destes ritmos às modificações do ciclo 

vigília-sono induzem a um estado de desgaste no trabalhador em turnos 

que pode afetar sua eficiência no trabalho, sua saúde física e 

psicológica, seu bem-estar, sua família e vida social”. 

 

 
 
 
 
4.3. Os acidentes do trabalho matam 

 

  Como já vimos, as plataformas de petróleo configuram no mesmo espaço uma 

série de riscos típicos de muitas atividades de produção, manutenção industriais de 

refinaria, tratamento de unidades de produção de energia com outros próprios das tarefas 

relacionadas com a exploração de gás e petróleo, como a perfuração e os poços de 

produção, associados aos de transporte aéreo e marítimos, de construção civil nas 

atividades de reparo, construção e reforma, de mergulhos rasos e, principalmente, 

profundos, entre outros. (OIT, 1993 apud FREITAS et al., 2001:119) 

  Nesse sentido, a ocorrência de incidentes e acidentes de trabalho de menor ou 

maior gravidade ou mesmo os denominados acidentes ampliados fazem parte da 

memória viva dos trabalhadores offshore.  

  Os acidentes de trabalho se configuram como representações concretas dos 

efeitos destrutivos do trabalho sobre o corpo. Por ocorrerem de forma repentina não 

possibilita o seu ocultamento, pois os reflexos são imediatos e, por vezes, visíveis e em 

alguns casos fatais. Ao mesmo tempo em que gera prejuízos a saúde do trabalhador, 

explicitando de forma mais evidente o nível de sua exposição e de sua fragilidade diante 

das possibilidades de ocorrências, explicita também as debilidades dos sistemas 

operacionais.  

  Cabe aqui mencionar que tanto os acidentes de trabalho quanto as doenças 

ocupacionais são oriundos do mesmo contexto de trabalho. Enquanto que os acidentes 



 143 

apresentam conseqüências imediatas, as doenças vão minando e acumulando ao longo do 

tempo os seus efeitos, dificultando a sua identificação e avaliação. 

  Os primeiros modelos que explicam a produção de acidentes deixam de lado o 

contexto da atividade e seus determinantes. Tais exposições buscam explicar o acidente 

com o trabalhador acidentado por meio da teoria da culpa, da propensão da vítima ao 

acidente. (DUARTE; VIDAL, 2000) 

  Nessas abordagens considera-se apenas o aspecto localizado do acidente, 

explicando-o como resultado de uma falha gerada e efetivada em que se deu a 

ocorrência. Assim, configura-se o evento como uma falha cuja responsabilidade recai 

sobre o faltoso, que via de regra é o trabalhador. É a conhecida “não-conformidade aos 

procedimentos”. 

  Na compreensão do processo produtivo e das origens dos incidentes e acidentes 

do trabalho, os conceitos de atos inseguros e condições inseguras, ainda bastante 

utilizados por engenheiros e técnicos da área de segurança, não mais fornecem as 

respostas à complexidade de riscos, exigindo novas técnicas de análise de riscos e de 

análise de confiabilidade, que não fazem parte desse estudo. 

  Essa tendência de atribuir aos próprios trabalhadores a responsabilidade pelas 

ocorrências pelas quais são vítimas, já foi alterada na Europa (WISNER, 1994). Uma 

nova visão vem se consolidando no sentido de deixar de responsabilizar os trabalhadores 

por falhas individuais e focalizar para as falhas no gerenciamento de riscos, desde a 

concepção tecnológica até as estratégias de treinamento, manutenção e produção que as 

empresas adotam (PORTO; FREITAS, 2001:64). Contudo, ainda aqui no Brasil, 

inclusive na Bacia de Campos, os denominados atos inseguros ou condutas negligentes 

ainda são mencionados como explicações que fazem aumentar essas estatísticas.  

  O foco de culpabilização do trabalhador, a partir de uma concepção ideológica de 

que o acidente teria um faltoso como causa, se sustentou durante décadas, entre técnicos 

e tecnocratas. Era alicerçado numa teoria de que a maioria dos acidentes de trabalho 

tinha como causa o “ato inseguro” da vítima. Essa abordagem foi largamente difundida 

em congressos promovidos pelo Ministério do Trabalho, nas semanas internas de 

prevenção de acidentes, nos cursos de engenharia de segurança e medicina do trabalho e 



 144 

nos de técnicos e “cipeiros”. O efeito desse modelo ideológico ainda encontra-se 

impregnado nas consciências dos trabalhadores.  

  Esse referencial parte de uma abordagem disciplinar compartimentada de análise 

dos riscos e seus efeitos sobre a saúde do trabalhador e o meio ambiente. Assim, implica 

em uma visão fragmentada que utiliza como base as condições ambientais de trabalho 

descritas, estáveis e idealizadas, o que gera um distanciamento das situações de trabalho 

reais, nas quais os trabalhadores exercem suas atividades e, conseqüentemente, os 

acidentes ocorrem.  

  Contudo, a análise de causas de acidentes com abordagens e disciplinas 

específicas, predominantemente as engenharias, e frequentemente desarticuladas uma das 

outras ainda é o referencial adotado geralmente pelas empresas.  

  Apesar de ser legítimo concentrar a análise nas causas mais imediatas, isso não 

pode se tornar um fator delimitador na compreensão da gênese dos acidentes, podendo 

gerar, conseqüentemente, análises enviesadas e conclusões tendenciosas.  

  Estabelecer uma maior aproximação entre o trabalho realizado no dia-a-dia dos 

processos produtivos, valorizando a “memória e o conhecimento dos trabalhadores” e, a 

análise do processo de trabalho como fundamental para contextualizar o acidente, 

considerando aqui falhas subjacentes de natureza organizacional e gerencial, são algumas 

das estratégias que vem sendo defendidas por PORTO e FREITAS (2000). 

  O depoimento a seguir explicita a lacuna existente entre o trabalho prescrito e o 

trabalho real, evidenciando que as orientações de segurança se baseiam na idealização 

dos procedimentos prescritos, via de regra contraditórios, com as exigências previstas 

para o atendimento de prazos, metas de produção e resultados esperados, que por vezes 

se constituem nos próprios recordes a serem alcançados.   

(...). O melhor momento pra você atuar nem sempre é o melhor. Você 

tenta se preservar de todo jeito, com protetor auricular, mas ainda assim 

é um ambiente muito grande, muito complexo, muitas pessoas, muitas 

variáveis. (...) mas o perigo ta ali pertinho. Acumulado ali”. 

  Nesse sentido, as análises para identificar as causas não podem se basear em 

posições normativas e de julgamento, desconsiderando as experiências vividas de 



 145 

trabalho, das diferentes maneiras de trabalhar e de diferentes pontos de vista a respeito da 

realidade técnica, mas considerar dentro do contexto de trabalho, todas as variáveis que 

permearam a situação de ocorrência.  

  Desconsideram-se, portanto, as reais condições nas quais o acidente ocorreu 

dentro de um contexto de riscos complexos e multicausais. 

  Assim, o ato inseguro é classificado como o distanciamento do trabalhador das 

informações e instruções formalmente recebidas para realização das tarefas. Laurell e 

Noriega (1989:264) assim o definem: 

“O conceito de ato inseguro projeta, portanto, a causa do acidente como 

sendo a indisciplina do trabalhador frente às normas e as regras 

estabelecidas. Ele é o culpado de sua própria desgraça”. 

  Cabe destacar que o mero registro e relato do acidente não são suficientes para 

buscar explicações sobre suas origens, mas a base referencial que está se utilizando para 

análise. Se técnicos e gerentes, sejam nas áreas corporativas ou operacionais, 

permanecem, no seu dia-a-dia, fundamentando em suas análises o referencial dos atos 

inseguros, conseqüentemente as informações obtidas sinalizarão para esse caminho. A 

dicotomia entre o trabalho prescrito e o trabalho real não só atravessa o espaço dos 

trabalhadores que operam os sistemas, mas também a quem cabe o gerenciamento dessas 

questões.    

  Duarte e Vidal (2000:86) afirmam que em termos de segurança no trabalho, as 

atuações práticas nas empresas e a legislação no país podem ser caracterizadas por um 

referencial protecionista em contradição a uma referência prevencionista, na medida em 

que se objetiva evitar a ferida e não prevenir de fato o acidente. Nesse sentido, se 

desenvolveu uma concepção que considera o acidente como um “elemento exógeno  ao 

processo de trabalho e não como um de seus resultados, mesmo que não previstos”. É 

nessa ótica que os autores acima criticam os regulamentos de segurança e os 

equipamentos de proteção individual, EPI104.   

                                                
104 A NR-6 regulamenta sobre o uso de equipamentos de proteção individual (EPI). “Estabelece e define 
os tipos de EPIs que as empresas estão obrigadas a fornecer a seus empregados, sempre que as 
condições de trabalho o exigirem, a fim de resguardar a saúde e a integridade física dos trabalhadores”.  
 



 146 

  Os EPIs, na verdade, são uma solução muito elementar e de pouca eficiência, na 

maioria das vezes, pois se constituem em uma proteção que não interfere nas causas dos 

acidentes. 

  Nessa direção, corroboramos da análise feita por Duarte e Vidal (2000) de que o 

modelo brasileiro de segurança do trabalho de referencial norte-americano veicula na sua 

base uma concepção ideológica focada no signo da proteção, que mascara a possibilidade 

de intervenção na técnica, criando uma representação equivocada de que “proteger o 

trabalhador significa resguardá-lo do mal veiculado pelo processo técnico”.  

  Verifica-se, portanto, que apesar da utilização de EPIs adequados, estes se 

constituem em uma falsa proteção, pois não impedem a ocorrência de incidentes e 

acidentes e, muito pelo contrário, são o reconhecimento do risco e de que nenhuma ação 

foi tomada no sentido de sua prevenção, configurando-se como um “atestado de 

produção insegura” (DUARTE; VIDAL, 2003:87).  

  O uso de capacete, protetores auriculares, luvas, máscaras, além de se 

constituírem em instrumentos de proteção individual, vão se configurar, 

permanentemente, como um alerta sobre os riscos de incidentes ou acidentes.  

 “Toda atividade nossa, embarcado (...) ta correndo risco. (...) é local 

confinado, equipamento pressurizado (...). Eu mesmo, já sofri uma lesão, 

no ouvido, por causa de um erro operacional. Tava dentro do 

equipamento e o pessoal fez uma manobra errada e aquilo bateu, o 

líquido lá, o petróleo bateu no vaso e eu fiquei um tempo sem ouvir, eu 

tava com um plug e um abafador. Eu tava lá dentro, fiquei desnortiado, 

sai rápido e tal. Mais tarde eu fui atender o telefone, achei que o telefone 

tava com problema, quando eu passei pro outro ouvido, aí entendi ...”.   

  É fundamental mais uma vez enfatizar a complexidade dos sistemas tecnológicos 

e operacionais, tendo em vista suas interligações em rede e enfatizando que o 

funcionamento da Unidade só é possível pelo trabalho em equipes, a fim de evitar as 

imprevisibilidades.  

  Alguns princípios norteadores são definidos para a concepção e avaliação dos 

EPIs: (WISNER, 1979 apud DUARTE; FREITAS, 2000:86) 



 147 

- Está em conformidade com a exigência da tarefa? 

- Está de acordo com a necessidade do operador durante a tarefa? 

- Protege de forma eficaz contra os riscos? 

- Sua utilização assegura um mínimo de conforto compatível com o tempo de utilização? 

 Nesse sentido, cabe destacar a análise de Figueiredo (1995:139) que cita a 

inadequação na utilização de dispositivos protetores contra ruídos, nos tubulões de ar 

comprimido, por reduzirem ou mascararem sinais acústicos fundamentais para o 

desempenho da tarefa. 

  O depoimento que se segue, retrata uma visão de que a origem dos acidentes 

ultrapassa os muros do espaço industrial, de que somente os trabalhadores, no final da 

cadeia hierárquica de um processo produtivo, que executam no cotidiano as tarefas 

contínuas, perigosas, complexas e coletivas são os únicos que falham.   

“(...) os acidentes são cometidos (...) você tem que mudar porque você 

é responsável pelo processo. (...) você ta trabalhando ou na base dos 

projetos ou na base da informação. Essa cadeia toda você ta 

ajudando, de alguma forma, ou a melhorar ou a manter essa 

quantidade de mortos. A gente tem que mudar”.  

 Nessa direção, soma-se ainda a exigência de não se limitar à análise das causas 

imediatas, mas também aprofundar as causas subjacentes, ampliando-se assim a análise 

multicausal, de forma a estabelecer uma relação com o contexto de trabalho mais geral. 

Isso pressupõe que ao se associar um entendimento sobre as origens e causas de 

situações que podem gerar um acidente, estará se introduzindo a este a noção de 

prevenção. Para tanto, torna-se necessário estabelecer pontos de contato entre 

abordagens de casos singulares e situações coletivas, podendo assim, contribuir para a 

construção de políticas de segurança mais efetivas.  

 Assim, torna-se enfático superar as concepções monocausais que tendem a culpar 

os trabalhadores pelos acidentes e que criam obstáculos para que as organizações 

industriais aprendam com suas próprias falhas.  



 148 

 O depoimento a seguir explicita essa exigência de integração da “rede de fatores 

causais e imediatos” que facilitam a ocorrência de acidentes, considerando as questões 

gerenciais e organizacionais.  

“Deve ter uns seis meses, por aí. O cara eletrocutado em PNA-1, um 

operador de petróleo, Petrobras, experiente, era o que mais conhecia 

em elétrica na plataforma, ele que ensinava os borrachos. E agora 

recentemente houve um funcionário da Mendes Júnior que foi abrir 

um lançador de pig, pig é um cilindro que você lança no oleoduto 

para limpar o oleoduto, pra tirar as impurezas dentro do oleoduto. 

(...) quando ele foi abrir, deu uma porrada no peito dele, ele vazou 

longe e morreu. O que existe em comum nos dois casos? (...) No 

primeiro caso, ele fiscalizava o trabalho do terceirizado, então o 

terceirizado tava fazendo o trabalho no painel elétrico e (...) só que 

ele foi se meter a executar uma coisa que ele fazia no passado, tava 

muitos anos afastado só fiscalizando, ele perde o feeling da execução, 

porque ele vira virgem dando aula de educação sexual pra prostituta. 

(...) Você tem que passear entre planejar, fiscalizar e executar, porque 

o corpo da gente aprende. (...) ele negligenciou determinadas coisas 

que pra quem estaria executando seria fácil. (...) E o segundo, no caso 

do lançador de pig, (...) eu fazia essa operação todo dia quando era 

operador. O cara quando foi abrir... Existe lá na parte inferior da 

plataforma, o cellar deck, a mais próxima do mar, quando você vai 

abrir a câmara pra botar um pig, você tem que fechar tudo quanto é 

entrada e saída de gás tem que tá zerada, aí você abre, aquilo tem que 

ficar aberto, você bota ali dentro, fecha e a pressão que pega atrás da 

coisa e manda. Você faz isso no gaseoduto, bota a própria pressão do 

gás, do óleo e empurra aquilo ali. Aí, sabe que o operador falou, 

operador Petrobras, ‘é muito dura, não to conseguindo abrir isso aqui 

que ta muito duro, vamos chamar o caldeireiro pra abrir isso aqui na 

marra, entendeu?’ Qualquer pessoa que tivesse a vivência cotidiana, 

como eu fazia aquela operação diária saberia que um dos sinais que 

você tenta abrir um equipamento e vê ta duro é que ele pode estar 



 149 

pressurizado, ele pode não ta duro porque, não é calderaria não, é 

pressão. Se você tem um lugar com pressão e outro zero, existe uma 

diferença de pressurização, você não pode abrir. (...) qualquer um que 

tivesse experiência cotidiana, o feeling da execução, ele veria que não 

poderia abrir aquilo ali. O cara da Petrobras que tava fazendo a 

operação chamou o novato e abre aí. O cara abriu e tum, bateu no 

peito, matou o caldeireiro. Ele ainda ficou uma hora agonizando e 

morreu uma hora depois.  

  Esse depoimento sinaliza para a exigência de articulação e análise entre 

múltiplos fatores geradores de um acidente, pois uma análise simplista e superficial pode 

ocasionar resultados equivocados. E, também, sobre a importância da experiência prática 

na execução das tarefas enquanto um diferencial que pode salvar vidas e evitar acidentes. 

A qualificação técnica permanente, além de conter conhecimento técnico formal, 

fundamental na formação dos trabalhadores, não é suficiente para a operacionalização 

das tarefas, o que torna o saber operário imprescindível no mundo offshore, ou seja, o 

popular “botar a mão na massa”. No capítulo V trataremos dessa temática. 

 Machado, Porto e Freitas (2000) consideram que, no sentido de ultrapassar as 

abordagens normalmente utilizadas no país, torna-se inevitável vincular a ocorrência dos 

eventos aos aspectos sociais, gerenciais e organizacionais, integrando a dimensão social 

à técnica, de modo a permitir uma compreensão mais ampla dessa dinâmica. 

  Nesse sentido, Machado et al. (2001) afirma que para cada acidente analisado, 

podem ser atribuídas várias razões, principalmente as subjacentes, pois estas se referem a 

um conjunto de decisões e ações tomadas ao longo do tempo e que se conjugam, ao final, 

no acidente propriamente dito. A declaração abaixo exemplifica a importância do 

gerenciamento em atividades de risco.  

“(...) ocorreu um acidente lá por causa da ansiedade de descer de vir 

embora. Pra mim foi uma falta de atenção, foi até uma pessoa que 

estava agendada pra desembarcar no dia anterior e por questão da 

plataforma (...) pediu pro menino terminar o serviço, adiantar o 

serviço pra descer (...). (...) ele já estava trabalhando sob regime 

confinado de sobreaviso e aí (...) um serviço que era pra ser feito em 



 150 

doze horas, ele teve que fazer em seis. Andou, correu e fez o serviço 

todo certinho, um defeito, na hora de tirar a tampa do local que estava 

aqui, pra tampar ali, ele foi arrastar a tampa, só que nisso que foi 

botar a tampa, caiu nesse buraco. (...) foi só falta de atenção dele. Mas 

tem muitas coisas que estavam atrás dele (...), a pressão, o tempo, o 

supervisor (...)”.  

  A concepção e gestão inapropriadas transformam os possíveis acidentes em 

eventos que devem fatalmente ocorrer. Assim, o surgimento de incidentes que não 

podem ser controlados pelos trabalhadores acabam sendo inevitáveis.  

  A atividade de controle em uma indústria de processo contínuo, como é o caso 

do trabalho offshore, não deixa dúvidas da importância dos gestores, técnicos de 

segurança e operadores para confiabilidade dos sistemas. 

  O relato que se segue, de um técnico de segurança offshore, pontua, a partir de 

observações acumuladas durante muitos anos de embarque, a constatação de uma maior 

incidência de acidentes, no início ou ao final da quinzena.   

“(...) se você for fazer uma estatística, se pegar os acidentes do 

trabalho, vai ver que no início e no final é aonde se dá maior número 

de acidentes. É por que? O cara (...) quando chega, ele não tá 

pensando na plataforma, ele ta pensando em terra; e quando ta no 

final, ele já não tá pensando mais na plataforma, ele já ta pensando o 

que vai fazer quando chegar na folga. Então, o descuido, (...) bota aí, 

50% de chance de acontecer alguma coisa, e o pior: o cara não 

produz (...). (...) Com oito dias, ele ta no pico da produção, sem 

problema porque ele tá ligadaço na questão de meio ambiente, 

segurança, operação, tudo. Aí, no décimo primeiro, no décimo 

segundo, ele começa a declinar. Então, se você pegar a curva, você vai 

ver que no décimo terceiro em diante cai vertiginosamente”.  

  O embasamento para essa explicação já foi abordado105, anteriormente, no 

capítulo III, uma vez que os trabalhadores offshore vivem na transitoriedade dos dois 

mundos: o do trabalho e o mundo terrestre. Essa vida alternada suscita manifestações ou 
                                                
105 Cf. capítulo III.  



 151 

síndromes106, denominadas de TPD e TPE. Estas são desencadeadas, respectivamente, 

como já vimos no capítulo III, quando o trabalhador toma consciência do tempo que falta 

para o seu desembarque e quando está em terra, da proximidade da data do embarque.  

  No entanto, pesquisa realizada por Freitas et al. (2001) identificou entre os 

operadores offshore, no período compreendido entre 1995 e 1997, que os erros (falhas 

humanas) apontados como causas imediatas dos acidentes e incidentes ocorridos se 

referem a apenas 10% do total de eventos. Contudo, em 86% das ocorrências, as causas 

imediatas eram remetidas às falhas de componentes e à corrosão de equipamentos.  

  O que se constata em casos de acidentes nas plataformas é que estes ocorrem 

principalmente com os trabalhadores terceirizados107. Na Europa, (OIT, 1993 apud 

FREITAS et alii, 2001) os trabalhadores terceirizados chegam a representar de dois 

terços a três quartos do total do pessoal das plataformas. É um quadro preocupante, tendo 

em vista que o descontentamento e o estresse são maiores, devido às próprias 

características imprevisíveis do trabalho e por não usufruírem dos mesmos rendimentos e 

perspectivas de carreira do pessoal das empresas exploradoras de petróleo, pelo 

despreparo técnico para as atividades offshore, uma vez que, a maioria das atividades 

mais perigosas é realizada por estes homens e a falta de clareza em relação aos riscos 

(SAMPAIO; BORSOI; RUIZ, 1998; OIT, 1993 apud FREITAS et al., 2001). É 

importante chamar atenção para o fato de que medidas precisam ser tomadas para alterar 

esse contexto e não reforçar uma abordagem de culpabilização quando se tratar de 

trabalhadores terceirizados. Situação semelhante108 ocorre na Bacia de Campos, pois três 

quartos de todo efetivo offshore é terceirizado.  

  Em relação às estatísticas de acidentes fatais que envolvem a atividade offshore, 

na Bacia de Campos, vale destacar que estas ratificam a constatação apresentada 

anteriormente de que a maioria dos trabalhadores envolvidos é formada por terceirizados. 

A figura abaixo apresenta a série histórica de falecimentos, de 1998 a 2004, na região da 

Bacia de Campos. (SINDIPETRO NF, 2005) 

 

                                                
106 TPE e TPD foram abordadas no capítulo III. 
107 Esta temática já foi abordada neste capítulo no item 4.1, sobre o enfrentamento do risco. 
108 Essa discussão será retomada, ainda, neste capítulo no item 4.3., Os acidentes do trabalho matam. 



 152 

Ano Total Terceirizados Petrobras 

Óbitos Óbitos Óbitos 

2004 10 09 01 

2003 11 07 04 

2002 06 05 01 

2001 16 05 11 

2000 09 08 01 

1999 12 10 02 

1998 11 09 02 

 75 53 22 

 

  Observa-se que do total de 75 falecimentos, 70,6% correspondem a trabalhadores 

terceirizados. Em todos os anos, o número de óbitos entre os trabalhadores terceirizados 

é sempre muito maior, acima de 64% em relação aos trabalhadores da Petrobras, 

excetuando-se apenas o ano de 2001, em decorrência do acidente e afundamento da P-36. 

  Dados fornecidos pelo Sindipetro NF (2005) demonstram, ainda, que no período 

entre 2002 e 2004, ocorreram 56 acidentes de trabalho fatais na Petrobras, sendo que o 

setor de exploração e produção é o que apresenta maior percentual de óbitos, em torno de 

59%, pois 48% do total se referem à Bacia de Campos.  

  Estas estatísticas ratificam os dados apresentados por Freitas et al. (2001:124) 

nos quais a maior taxa de freqüência de acidentes de trabalho, em 1995, foi de 16,7 no 

âmbito da exploração e produção. 

  É importante enfatizar que as questões que envolvem risco e acidentes de 

trabalho se restringem praticamente em sua totalidade somente ao âmbito privado da 

empresa, chegando apenas ao conhecimento da opinião pública quando o evento assume 

um vulto de alta gravidade que extrapola os muros empresariais. Dessa forma, por 

exemplo, as explosões ocorridas na P-36, em 15 de março de 2001, que ocasionaram a 

morte de 11 trabalhadores da Petrobras, chegaram aos vários canais de comunicação. No 



 153 

entanto, estes óbitos correspondem a somente 14,7% do total de ocorrências fatais entre 

1998 e 2004, na Bacia de Campos. 

  O depoimento que se segue ressalta que, apesar dos resultados de todos os 

índices relativos à segurança terem apresentado importantes avanços em decorrência das 

medidas preventivas que a empresa vem adotando, entretanto, o indicador que se refere à 

taxa de óbitos por ano permanece com o mesmo referencial, o que consideramos 

extremamente sério. 

 “A Petrobras ta trabalhando o tempo todo pra tentar evitar os 

acidentes. Uma forma é conscientizar melhor os seus funcionários. 

(...) a Petrobras melhorou em todos os índices dela, todos. Só um que 

ela não melhorou, mortes. Ela tem 20 mortes por ano com o processo 

dela. Esse índice nem sempre tinha (...), tinha há uns 10 anos. Esse 

índice não melhora, 20 mortes/ano, tem que melhorar isso! Você tem 

20 mortos, você ta repetindo o mesmo erro. O processo depende de 20 

mortes por ano. É um negócio meio absurdo. É pesado demais (...)”.  

  Dados do Sindipetro NF (2005) demonstram que na Petrobras totalizando todas 

as áreas de negócios, de serviços, corporativas e, também, o segmento internacional, no 

período entre 1995 e 2004, o índice de óbitos decorrentes de acidentes de trabalho, 

incluindo trabalhadores próprios e terceirizados foi em média de 21 mortes por ano. Esse 

valor é semelhante aos dados citados pelo entrevistado. Cabe ressaltar que esse índice na 

Bacia de Campos, de 1998 a 2004, foi de 10,7 óbitos por ano, ou seja. 50% do total de 

óbitos por acidentes de trabalho na empresa estão no âmbito dessa região.  

  A expectativa presente é que todos esses dados se alterariam em decorrência da 

implantação de novas tecnologias e que os processos de reengenharia contribuiriam 

positivamente para criar novos padrões e formas de controle, estabelecidos durante as 

certificações ISOs, inicialmente 9000 e, posteriormente, as 14000.  

  No entanto, parece que isso não ocorreu. Não faz parte do objetivo desse estudo 

aprofundar essas questões, mas consideramos que se trata de uma abordagem que 

precisaria ser investigada com afinco. 

  O depoimento abaixo sinaliza a intensidade da angústia vivida pelo operador em 

torno de um acidente de trabalho.  



 154 

“Um acidente é impressionante. O resto do embarque você fica ..., 

todo mundo fica diferente, por menor que seja. Quando eu sei que 

aconteceu um acidente em outra plataforma, acabou pra mim a 

quinzena. Eu faço um trabalho comigo mesmo pra continuar, é uma 

desgraça, é terrível”. 

 A carta a seguir nos foi encaminhada por um dos trabalhadores entrevistados, no 

intuito de exemplificar que o acidente de trabalho ultrapassa as fronteiras da plataforma, 

atingindo, portanto, as condições do próprio transporte, o helicóptero. 

 

“Queda de Helicóptero na Bacia de Campos 

 
O vôo estava marcado para as 10 horas e saiu, com algum 

atraso, por volta das 11 horas, com destino à plataforma P-32 da 

Petrobras, localizada no Campo de Marlim. Desde o acionamento dos 

rotores da aeronave, ainda no pátio do aeroporto, até a queda no 

mar, passaram-se 28 minutos (dados fornecidos pelo co-piloto). 

Com aproximadamente 20 minutos de vôo, eu ouvi um ruído 

diferente.  Eu estava tentando dormir um pouco quando percebi que 

este ruído não se alterara. Ainda não era nada grave, mas os pilotos 

já estavam detectando, através do painel de controle, uma falha na 

lubrificação da transmissão. “O óleo da transmissão estava zerado”, 

disse o piloto depois do acidente. Neste momento eles decidiram 

retornar ao aeroporto, ou pelo menos alcançar o ponto mais próximo 

possível de areia da praia. 

  Não demorou cinco minutos até o instante em que um ruído 

mais forte fez com que todos percebessem que algo estava realmente 

muito ruim e a nossa viagem não seria tão tranqüila como das outras 

vezes. No instante deste primeiro ruído a aeronave sofreu um 

solavanco como aqueles sentidos nas turbulências e perdeu um pouco 

de altitude. Logo depois, houve um estouro muito forte de 



 155 

engrenagens se estilhaçando, ou algo parecido, e a aeronave começou 

a cair. 

Os pilotos fizeram uma manobra com o helicóptero, girando 

para a direita e descendo ao mesmo tempo, como um “cavalo de 

pau”, o que parece ter ajudado a diminuir a velocidade, mas a queda 

na água foi muito rápida. 

O choque com a água me fez sentir uma dor muito grande nas 

costas, o que quase me deixou sem ar por alguns segundos, e sem 

conseguir pronunciar qualquer palavra por, aproximadamente, 30 

segundos. Todos sentiram muita dificuldade em raciocinar neste 

intervalo de tempo. Quando consegui entender que estávamos com os 

flutuadores do helicóptero acionados, é que tudo começou a ficar 

mais claro e eu pude tomar as primeiras medidas de segurança como: 

retirar o cinto de segurança, os sapatos, e colocar o colete salva-

vidas sobre a cabeça para poder sair do helicóptero. 

Com a queda do helicóptero a água invadiu o interior da 

aeronave até a altura dos assentos, aproximadamente, e depois 

recuou um pouco por causa do acionamento dos flutuadores. O 

flutuador traseiro do lado direito não estava acionado ou se rasgou, 

fazendo com que o helicóptero ficasse inclinado para o lado direito. 

O passageiro que estava na porta do lado direito lançou o bote 

salva-vidas (apesar das fortes dores que sentia na coluna) e logo após 

pulou na água, antes que a água tomasse todo o lado direito da 

aeronave e pudesse impedir sua saída pela porta. Acredito que ele 

não tenha conseguido subir sozinho no bote, tendo que se jogar na 

água e ficar agarrado ao mesmo, devido a forte dor que sentia na 

coluna no momento. Mesmo assim ele conseguiu afastar o bote do 

helicóptero e contorná-lo pela frente. 

Os outros passageiros tiveram que sair pelo lado esquerdo, 

que estava com a porta totalmente aberta e ainda fora da água, 

devido às condições dos dois flutuadores ainda intactos. O passageiro 



 156 

que estava na porta esquerda, ajudado pelo passageiro que estava ao 

seu lado, lançou o outro bote na água e todos puderam, um a um, 

calmamente, subir diretamente no bote. 

O passageiro que estava na fileira de bancos da frente, 

sentado no assento do meio, não conseguia retirar o cinto de 

segurança preso na sua cintura, pois o seu braço esquerdo estava 

fraturado e seu corpo sofreu um deslocamento com a queda, 

dificultando a liberação do cinto de segurança com apenas uma das 

mãos. Neste instante, o piloto estava tentando pular os assentos para 

sair pela porta lateral esquerda, onde todos saíram para o bote, 

quando eu o avisei que havia um passageiro que estava preso pelo 

cinto, e pedindo que o ajudassem. Eu estava segurando uma parte do 

forro interno da aeronave que havia caído e estava atrapalhando a 

passagem pela porta. Fiquei ali esperando que todos passassem, até 

que chegou a minha vez de entrar no bote. 

Quando já estávamos sobre o bote (oito passageiros), uma 

parte da fuselagem perfurou o mesmo, e nós fomos obrigados a nadar 

até o segundo bote que estava com o passageiro que já havia 

contornado a frente da aeronave. Como havíamos perdido um dos 

botes, e não poderíamos arriscar perder o outro, decidimos que 

subiriam no bote apenas os que estivessem mais machucados. 

Colocamos o passageiro com fortes dores na coluna; o co-piloto com 

dores também na coluna; o que já estava ficando sem forças nos 

braços; o que estava com um dos braços fraturado; e o piloto subiu 

para tentar encontrar um rádio ou outro meio de comunicação dentro 

do saco que havia no bote salva-vidas. 

Ficamos na água Eu, três passageiros e o piloto que voltou 

para a água para abrir espaço no bote. Encontraram, e lançaram ao 

mar, repelente para tubarões, que estava dentro do saco de 

emergência amarrado ao bote. Isso me deixou um pouco apreensivo, 



 157 

pois eu ainda não havia pensado na possibilidade de aparecer algum 

tubarão por ali onde estávamos. 

Não demorou muito tempo até que uma outra aeronave nos 

localiza-se e nos indicasse a posição para um rebocador próximo. 

Nós podíamos ver o mastro deste rebocador quando o mar nos 

elevava nas ondas. Ele ainda levou quase meia hora para chegar até 

onde estávamos, mas o resgate foi feito com total eficiência, e fomos 

tratados muito bem por todos que estavam no rebocador. Após o 

resgate, fomos enrolados em cobertores, e retiramos as roupas 

molhadas para serem lavadas e secas. Antes de chegarmos ao píer da 

Petrobras, em Macaé, nossas roupas já haviam sido devolvidas. Nos 

deram água logo que subimos no rebocador e depois nos ofereceram 

frutas ou sanduíches. Ninguém sentia fome, mas aceitamos maçãs, 

água e chocolate. 

Durante o tempo que estivemos dentro do rebocador, a 

caminho de Macaé, pudemos conversar sobre a sorte de estarmos 

todos vivos e com ferimentos sem gravidade. O que sofreu 

esmagamento de uma das vértebras da coluna e terá que ser operado, 

mas passa bem e não corre o risco de ficar paraplégico, que era o 

maior temor de todos nós que fomos resgatados. O que terá que 

colocar pinos no braço fraturado, mas também está passando muito 

bem. Eu e os outros acidentados fomos examinados, através de 

radiografia e tomografia computadorizada, e mantidos em observação 

durante uma noite antes de sermos liberados. 

Acredito que a manobra feita pelos pilotos (“os dois estavam 

pilotando ao mesmo tempo na hora da queda”, disse o piloto) e o 

funcionamento dos flutuadores tenham salvado nossas vidas. A 

posição com que o helicóptero tocou na água foi crucial para que os 

flutuadores pudessem ser úteis, já que em outros acidentes, onde as 

aeronaves caíram com outro ângulo na água, os flutuadores não 

puderam nem ajudar os passageiros a sair da aeronave. 



 158 

Estou em casa com algumas dores pelo corpo, principalmente 

nas costas (coluna e músculos), devido ao impacto do helicóptero com 

a água do mar, como todos os outros que estavam comigo neste vôo e 

não tiveram ferimentos graves, mas está tudo bem, pois eu sei que isto 

irá passar. 

Eu ainda tenho que esperar alguns dias, para a ficha cair e 

voltar a acreditar que isto não irá acontecer comigo novamente, para 

esquecer de vez o que aconteceu e poder voltar a subir numa 

plataforma de petróleo novamente (...)”.  

 Esse depoimento vem explicitar, de forma contundente, que os riscos que 

envolvem a atividade offshore, se expandem além do espaço da plataforma, uma vez que 

o trabalhador se submete ao enfrentamento destes, tanto no trajeto de terra até a 

plataforma quanto no seu retorno. Nessa vida intermitente, permeada por sentimentos de 

medo, dúvidas e certezas, ou seja, de ambigüidades e tensões a sua identidade vai sendo 

forjada. Assim, esses homens, ao se depararem com as condições específicas do 

trabalho, criam estratégias de defesa que serão discutidas no capítulo V, no sentido de 

conviver, suportar e aprender a lidar com a complexidade existente nesse terreno 

marítimo.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 159 

4.4. Os Acidentes Industriais ampliados 

 

 A denominação acidente ampliado ou acidente químico ampliado ou mais 

especificamente acidente industrial ampliado (FREITAS; PORTO; GOMEZ, 1995 apud 

FREITAS; PORTO; MACHADO, 2000:27) se referem aos acidentes que provêm de 

“(...) uma ocorrência, tal como uma emissão, incêndio ou explosão 

envolvendo uma ou mais substâncias químicas perigosas, resultando 

de um desenvolvimento incontrolável no curso da atividade industrial, 

conduzindo a sérios perigos para o homem e o meio ambiente, 

imediatos ou a longo prazo, internamente e externamente ao 

estabelecimento”109.  

  Cabe mencionar que esse tipo de acidente não se caracteriza somente pelo grande 

número de óbitos, mas também pelo potencial de permitir que a sua gravidade e extensão 

ultrapassem seus limites “espaciais – de bairros, cidades e países – e temporais” – como 

danos em seres humanos, vegetações, meio ambiente futuro, além dos impactos 

psicológicos e sociais sobre as populações expostas. 

  A indústria offshore mundial, ao longo dos anos, vem sendo palco de uma série 

de acidentes industriais ampliados. Tomando como referência uma lista elaborada por 

Sevá Filho (1998), com base em dados da OIT (1993), listamos abaixo alguns graves 

acidentes ocorridos, dentre estes, dois na Bacia de Campos, com as plataformas PCE-1 e 

com a P-36.   

- em 1979: na China, adernamento e naufrágio da plataforma auto-elevatória de Bohai 

II, em decorrência de inundação da casa de bombas, com 72 vítimas e, no México, na 

plataforma Ixtoc-I, derramamento de 500 mil toneladas de petróleo, após erupção 

acompanhada de incêndio de um poço petrolífero, com o bloqueio do poço somente 9 

meses depois.  

- na década de 80, 8 acidentes foram registrados: em 1980, na Arábia Saudita, erupção 

de gás sulfídrico durante a perfuração na plataforma auto-elevatória Ron Tappmayer, 

                                                
109 Diretiva de Seveso, 1982 das Comunidades Européias apud FREITAS; PORTO; MACHADO, 
2000:27. 



 160 

com o falecimento de 19 trabalhadores e fechamento do poço oito dias depois; na 

Noruega, em 1982, na plataforma de Alexander Kielland, após tempestade e 

desamarração do floating hotel Edda, quando do rompimento dos cabos de âncora e 

de estruturas de sustentação, seguidos de adernamento e naufrágio com 123 mortos; 

em 1982, no Canadá, naufrágio da plataforma semi-submersível de perfuração Ocean 

Ranger, devido a um defeito mecânico no sistema de lastro, com 84 mortes; na 

Indonésia (Mar da China), em 1983, adernamento e naufrágio do navio sonda Glomar 

Java Sea, em decorrência do mau tempo, com 81 falecimentos; no Brasil (Bacia de 

Campos no estado do Rio de Janeiro), em 1984, acidente com a embarcação de 

abandono, baleeira, após erupção de blow-out, com 37 mortes; em 1986, na Escócia, 

queda de helicóptero Boeing Chinook devido a problemas mecânicos que 

ocasionaram o choque das hélices, com 45 óbitos; no Mar do Norte, em 1988, 

plataforma Piper Alpha, após falhas ocorridas no sistema de tratamento de gás, 

seguidas de explosão, incêndio e destruição total da plataforma, causando a morte de 

167 pessoas, sendo que foram necessários 22 dias para bloquear o vazamento e na 

Tailândia, em 1989, naufrágio do navio sonda Seacrest em meio a tufão, com ventos 

de 160km/h e ondas de mais de 10 metros, com 91 óbitos. 

- em 1991, na China, naufrágio do navio Mc Dermott Lay durante tufão, com ventos 

de 100 nós e ondas de 18 metros, com 22 trabalhadores desaparecidos. 

 Vale esclarecer que o trabalho feito por Sevá Filho foi anterior ao acidente com 

a plataforma P-36. Por entendermos que esse acidente se configura como um evento 

grave na indústria offshore brasileira, decidimos acrescentá-lo a essa lista.  

 A seguir, traçaremos algumas considerações acerca dos acidentes ocorridos com 

as plataformas de Enchova (PCE-1) e com a P-36.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 161 

4.5. O aprendizado e a lição de casa – os acidentes de PCE-1 e P-36 

 

 Dentre os vários acidentes relatados pelos trabalhadores durante as entrevistas, 

seja por terem vivido de perto, por vezes na própria pele, ou por terem presenciado o 

envolvimento de seus amigos offshore, três deles estão sempre presentes na memória 

destes homens: os da plataforma de Enchova (PCE-1) em 1984 e em 1988 e o da 

plataforma P-36 em 2001. 

 Todos eles, sob o ponto de vista desses trabalhadores, são considerados como 

marcos na indústria offshore, principalmente porque a partir desses acidentes algumas 

mudanças foram implantadas nos processos de trabalho. 

 A plataforma PCE-1 é citada como um símbolo de uma tragédia, na Bacia de 

Campos, não tanto pelas perdas materiais, mas pela morte de 37 trabalhadores, “amigos 

offshore”. O acidente se deu pela erupção de um blow-out110 em um dos poços 

conectados à plataforma, com explosão, incêndio prolongado e necessidade de 

evacuação de toda a Unidade. A mal sucedida operação de abandono foi o que gerou a 

morte dos trabalhadores, pois o cabo de sustentação da baleeira se rompeu no início da 

descida do convés para o mar, o que ocasionou a sua queda e mergulho com toda a sua 

lotação. Foi o primeiro acidente de grandes proporções na Bacia de Campos.  

 Cabe destacar que dois entrevistados se referiram ao acidente com a baleeira, 

como uma ocorrência que ainda não conseguiu desdobrar as mudanças necessárias neste 

tipo de embarcação na Bacia de Campos. Citam inclusive que é um projeto de 

embarcação inapropriada para os objetivos aos quais foi projetada e que não 

acompanhou os avanços tecnológicos e o crescimento da região petrolífera fluminense.  

“(...) depois do acidente de Enchova, as baleeiras ficaram interditadas 

2 anos. Mudaram 157 itens do projeto, detalhes do projeto. Mas o 

conceito permaneceu o mesmo. (...) nós temos aí 50 anos de história 

offshore talvez, se você for analisar estatisticamente quantas vezes as 

baleeiras foram empregadas, quantas vidas realmente salvou, é cruel a 
                                                
110 Blow-out é uma “reação conhecida e probabilística dos poços de petróleo que tem gás associado. 
Refere-se a um salto brusco de sobrepressão proveniente do interior dos reservatórios no subsolo, e que 
repercutem em todo poço. As variações de pressão chegam até a cabeça do poço situada na plataforma, 
podendo provocar explosões e incêndios”. (MARINHO et al., 1997) 



 162 

estatística, (...) tem um acidente a cada duas tentativas. Vamos parar e 

pensar. E, principalmente vamos analisar os acidentes que ocorreram. 

Quantas vezes a baleeira foi empregada com sucesso e realmente 

salvou pessoas? As pessoas têm conhecimento disso, mas poucos se 

arriscam a falar isso aí, a condenar isso aí e rever isso aí. O pessoal 

no Mar do Norte desenvolveu uma baleeira que pelo menos ao que se 

sabe até hoje não matou ninguém (...)”.  

Vários depoimentos mostram a pouca intensidade com que a empresa resgata a 

experiência acumulada de determinados profissionais que fizeram parte da construção 

do saber técnico na Bacia de Campos, sejam estes de nível técnico ou superior. O 

depoimento acima é apenas um exemplo de que na concepção destes trabalhadores 

existe necessidade de muito investimento técnico e socialização desse saber. 

Acrescenta, ainda, a explícita indicação sobre a dificuldade em se discutir, 

internamente, alguns temas técnicos, considerados como tabus, pois receiam pelas 

conseqüências que teriam que assumir, se assim o fizessem.  

“(...) Tem poucas vozes dizendo isso aí. A Petrobras tem muito isso. Se 

você começa ir muito contra o regime vigente (...) o pessoal começa a 

ficar de cara amarrada. Se, tem uma política, muitos seguem, muitos 

gerentes seguem cegamente. São pessoas muito bem preparadas, mas 

em compensação também são extremamente enquadrados”. 

 É importante mencionar que conforme foi abordado no capítulo II, a tradição da 

herança militar ainda se faz presente no dia-a-dia das relações de trabalho. O ditado 

popular “manda quem pode, obedece quem tem juízo”, assume novas formas mais 

sofisticadas, mas permanece circulando nos corredores da Bacia de Campos.  

 Nessa mesma direção, Sevá Filho (2003) indica que as relações de trabalho 

hierarquizadas, excluindo trabalhadores de operação e outros profissionais técnicos de 

uma participação efetiva na etapa de concepção dos projetos, criam um quadro em que, 

muitas das vezes, a probabilidade dos riscos se eleva, por terem que executar instruções 

equivocadas.  

 Llory (2001), ao analisar as relações entre os engenheiros e operadores, conclui 

que existe uma dificuldade de comunicação entre eles, pelas diferentes vivências, que os 



 163 

levam a terem perspectivas e olhares diferenciados diante da realidade técnica. Os 

operadores têm, a partir de suas experiências subjetivas, modos particulares de captar e 

analisar a realidade de trabalho, por esta ser “rapidamente mutável, complexa, incerta e 

incompleta”.  

Assim, se uma primeira interlocução entre esses dois profissionais já não era 

viável, estabelecer relações de cooperação, quando não existe confiança, torna-se 

praticamente impossível.  

 Vale enfatizar que não é nosso objetivo realizar nenhuma discussão sobre as 

questões técnicas que envolvem os projetos e procedimentos, mas destacar que o custo 

do silêncio (LLORY, 2001) tem um preço e, que a experiência e o saber acumulados 

durante anos e anos no trabalho offshore podem apontar pistas e sinalizações para a 

busca de respostas mais efetivas que minimizem os riscos presentes e latentes nessa 

realidade de trabalho. 

Retomando o acidente de Enchova, os trabalhadores acrescentam que essa 

ocorrência representou um marco para o trabalhador offshore, pois algumas mudanças 

importantes foram implantadas, a partir de então, na sistemática de realização dos 

treinamentos de segurança.   

“Os treinamentos até Enchova, você não simulava, era treinamento 

teórico ate Enchova. Você chegava, o cara falava e assim que faz... 

você meche aqui, tatatata... mais ninguém mexia, subia ou descia a 

baleeira. Em Enchova eu participei disso. Era só teórico. Não tinha 

curso de salvatagem111. Eu embarquei sem curso de salvatagem. As 

pessoas eram contratadas num dia, embarcavam no outro”.  

 Vinte e um anos se passaram e o que fica duplamente presente enquanto 

memória para os trabalhadores mais antigos é a perda dos amigos e a possibilidade de 

que poderia ser ele, se estivesse naquele momento, naquele lugar.  

“(...) a coisa que me marcou profundamente foram os 37 mortos de 

Enchova. Eu ver aqueles 37 corpos, recolhendo aqueles 37 corpos, eu 

                                                
111 Os trabalhadores offshore somente embarcam após a realização dos cursos de salvatagem e combate a 
incêndios. Estes treinamentos têm o objetivo de fornecer informações teóricas e práticas que orientem os 
trabalhadores em situações de emergência nas plataformas. 



 164 

chegar na plataforma, (...) ta a plataforma pegando fogo, ver aquele 

incêndio e o mesmo catamarã que tinha levado a gente lá, foi o 

catamarã que trouxe os corpos e como eu não pude desembarcar na 

plataforma que tava pegando fogo, deixaram a gente numa plataforma 

ao lado e ao chegar lá eu já vi os corpos recolhidos e depois o 

catamarã voltou de Enchova, aquele monte de corpos espalhados ali e 

aquela cestinha pegando de três em três corpos e botando lá no 

catamarã. Foi uma cena que me marcou profundamente aquilo ali. 

Uma semana depois eu fui chamado para colocar a plataforma em 

operação e chegar lá encontrar a plataforma em silêncio, encontrar 

botas, bolsas, os pertences, passagem de serviço, encontrar a 

plataforma do jeito que foi abandonada, aquilo ali mexeu muito comigo 

(...)”.   

 Não obstante, o que fica claro são os visíveis e obscuros riscos e ameaças 

recorrentes no cotidiano de trabalho que podem lhes reservar, por vezes, grandes 

surpresas. Na verdade, o que esses homens descrevem, é uma realidade de trabalho que 

lhes escapa ao âmbito do que está prescrito, detalhado nas suas atividades e nos próprios 

procedimentos.  

 Os procedimentos partem da constituição de um modelo idealizado de trabalho. 

Llory (2001) considera que não seja possível descrever, mesmo incorporando o retorno 

de experiências anteriores, todos os detalhes, todas as possíveis ocorrências e 

eventualidades. Afirma que a “avaliação probabilística de segurança de um sistema 

complexo é difícil e lenta de utilizar”. Nesse sentido, mesmo que tome como base os 

mais numerosos tipos de ocorrências e tente fazer uma análise dos mais diversos 

cenários possíveis de acidentes, essa descrição é também um modelo, portanto 

relativamente agregada, reduzida e simplificada e, baseada em hipóteses relativas ao 

funcionamento do sistema. 

 Nessa direção, mesmo que fosse possível cobrir todas as variações, todas as 

particularidades, todas as probabilidades, de possíveis acidentes, restariam ainda o 

gerenciamento e a interpretação das situações. “O trabalho real não é o trabalho 

prescrito, pois a aplicação estrita e rigorosa dos procedimentos, das regras formais de 



 165 

trabalho, conduz à paralisia do sistema”(MINTZBERG, 1982 apud LLORY, 

2001:240). Cabe, portanto, a intervenção dos trabalhadores112, no sentido de realizar os 

ajustes, adaptações, correções para que as operações possam gerar os melhores 

resultados. No discurso dos trabalhadores são explicitadas, de forma bastante intensa, 

preocupações com o constante aprimoramento técnico e o aprendizado adquirido no 

cotidiano de trabalho junto àqueles mais experientes. Um entrevistado afirma que se 

“você tem o conhecimento técnico, evita a ignorância e pode evitar um acidente”. 

 Quatro anos se passaram e um segundo acidente ocorre mais uma vez na 

plataforma de Enchova, e também pela erupção de um blow out, com explosão e 

incêndio, sem vítimas fatais. O abandono de 250 trabalhadores ocorreu pela passarela de 

ligação com o “floating hotel Safe Jasminia113”, que se encontrava atracado ao lado de 

PCE-1. Desta vez, houve quase que a destruição total desta Unidade.  

 O terceiro acidente se refere à ocorrência envolvendo a P-36, a maior plataforma 

semi-submersível do mundo. A P-36 se localizava aproximadamente a 150 km da costa 

do estado do Rio de Janeiro, no campo de petróleo denominado de Roncador. Em 15 de 

março de 2001 às 00h22m, a plataforma sofre uma explosão em sua coluna de popa 

boroeste. Dezessete minutos depois, uma outra explosão na parte superior da referida 

coluna e nas áreas próximas provoca a morte de 11 trabalhadores. Cinco dias depois, no 

dia 20 de março, às 11h41m, a plataforma submergiu completamente e afundou em 

seguida. 

”(...) tem um colega, (...) que resumiu o negócio da P-36 da seguinte 

maneira: todo dia, ta saindo a loto do horror, sai um número pra uma 

plataforma, dois para outra, pra outra, pra P-36 saíram os 6 números, 

naquela vez, e  não teve jeito de segurar. Teve várias coisas, ao mesmo 

tempo, pra aquilo acontecer. Agora, muitas daquelas coisas acontecem 

com várias plataformas, todos os dias, às vezes 1, 2, 3 números, mas 

agora o prêmio todo !  Diariamente, agente vê um quadro de acidentes. 

(...) eu conhecia um monte de gente ali. (...) o incrível não é a P-36 ter 

afundado, mas quando você começa a conversar com as pessoas, o 

                                                
112 O capítulo V tratará de discutir as regras não formais de trabalho que fazem parte do saber offshore. 
113 O Safe Jasminia é uma plataforma auxiliar que funciona como um hotel para os trabalhadores que se 
encontram envolvidos em obras de ampliação, complementação ou parada de manutenção.  



 166 

incrível é não acontecer com mais freqüência, porque os perigos são 

imensos. (...) aquelas pessoas ali eram de meu convívio há muitos anos 

e tal. Eu diria o episódio da 36, que marca o que é estar embarcado. É 

de momento pra outro você pode perder suas referências.”  

A análise dos trabalhadores é que muitos procedimentos foram criados após a P-

36, se por um lado consideram que isso demonstra a preocupação da empresa com as 

operações, com o controle e a segurança, de outro questionam a quantidade de 

procedimentos criados e a baixa qualidade técnica do efetivo próprio. Entendem que 

diante do inusitado, a competência do trabalhador offshore, incluindo capacitação 

teórica e prática, é o que faz a diferença entre o trabalho prescrito e o trabalho real. 

Acrescentam, ainda, que paralelamente, a empresa deveria dar a devida atenção para 

analisar acidentes considerados de expressiva gravidade que poderiam ser 

transformados em verdadeiras “lições de casa”.  

Consideram que os dois acidentes da PCE-1 e da P-36 são situações 

representativas das condições de vida e de trabalho offshore que além de retratarem a 

convivência do confinamento em alto-mar, também demarcam a experiência cotidiana 

com os vários tipos de riscos.  

Cabe lembrar que os vários veículos de comunicação, principalmente a 

televisão, registraram o choro de um trabalhador de macacão laranja, no momento em 

que a plataforma estava afundando. Ele se encontrava em uma plataforma situada 

próxima a P-36, que serviu de base de apoio às operações de tentativa de resgate. A 

veiculação dessa imagem para a maioria da população, pessoas “estrangeiras” a este 

mundo, poderia significar: a perda da plataforma, ícone da tecnologia brasileira, o 

esforço de muitos colegas em vão, o prejuízo por deixar de produzir 80 mil barris de 

petróleo por dia e um milhão e 300 mil metros cúbicos de gás diariamente etc. O 

depoimento a seguir sintetiza a vivência subjetiva que atravessa de forma intermitente a 

vida dessas pessoas.  

“(...) Porque ele tava vendo ali que pessoas morreram juntas, amigos 

seus afundaram juntos com a plataforma, e ele tava vendo (...) e 

pensou: podia ser eu”.  



 167 

Para alguns trabalhadores, o acidente da P-36 é caracterizado como um marco 

que ratificou para a empresa a exigência de realizar fortes investimentos em medidas 

preventivas e rever os procedimentos de segurança.  

Outros questionam a sistemática que a empresa vem adotando para efetuar o 

registro e a análise dos acidentes, por entenderem que a metodologia utilizada tem 

pouca efetividade. Consideram que seja impossível, fazer um tratamento sistematizado e 

profundo de todas as informações contidas no banco de dados, pelo quantitativo de 

elementos nessa base, uma vez que esta contempla todos os acidentes indistintamente, 

desde os mais elementares até aqueles de grande complexidade.   

“(...) abre aquilo ali e encontra 6000, 5000 registros!? É um banco de 

dados, que com respeito, vira lixo, porque é humanamente impossível, 

você absorver informação de mais de 1000 registros. Então tinha que 

ter seletividade. Os pequenos acidentes tinham que ser tratados só no 

âmbito da Unidade (...). Eu diria no popular que a Petrobras ‘errou na 

mão’(...)”.  

 Um outro aspecto apontado, como um desdobramento do acidente da P-36, se 

refere à mudança de rumos em relação ao processo de terceirização dos serviços de 

manutenção, conforme relata o trabalhador.  

“(...) muita política que veio depois, [refere-se a P-36] de uns dois, três 

anos pra cá, que eles estão reativando a manutenção que eles tinham 

pretensão de terceirizar, toda manutenção e aí voltaram atrás. (...) a 

mão de obra lá [refere-se na plataforma] que a gente está chegando 

agora, está muito escassa. Então já tem aquela pressão por você estar 

ali trabalhando e a gente não tem muita experiência”. 

 O que se vê é a necessidade urgente de formar um quadro de profissionais 

qualificados seja do ponto de vista de formação teórica, seja de saber operário. Ao longo 

dos anos, o processo de reestruturação produtiva foi de grande eficácia na empresa, pois 

implementou uma política de terceirização da área de manutenção, onde restaram alguns 

poucos profissionais próprios com a competência requerida para atuar nessa área.   

“(...) essa turma nova que entrou agora, também veio cheio de 

esperança, saiu da faculdade, cheio de gás e realmente demorou muito 



 168 

tempo pra Petrobras renovar, pra oxigenar a empresa, muitos valores 

foram embora, o patrimônio intelectual foi embora, não teve como 

segurar em função disso”.  

 Na medida em que os acidentes de maior ou menor gravidade continuam 

sucessivamente ocorrendo, como já vimos anteriormente, no item 4.3, após o acidente 

da P-36, cabe de forma indispensável que sejam reexaminados à luz dos novos 

conhecimentos adquiridos a partir de incidentes ocorridos nesse meio tempo, com base 

em novos referenciais teóricos e tecnológicos e sob novos pontos de vista, apreender os 

seus ensinamentos para prevenir novas situações. (LLORY, 2001:206) 

 Llory (2001) considera que mesmo que tenha passado muitos anos após um 

grande acidente industrial, o aprendizado a ser extraído desse evento, se não o foram 

extremamente depurados e analisados, podem ser resgatados para novas indagações. 

Cita como exemplo o acidente da Three Mile Island (TMI) em que 15 anos após o 

acontecimento, foram resgatados os ensinamentos de um operador que estava na sala de 

controle, no momento da ocorrência.  

 Ainda, em relação a P-36, outros trabalhadores compartilham da visão de que o 

acidente mostrou para todos o quanto que os trabalhadores offshore estão 

cotidianamente expostos a riscos e consideram que ao invés de ficarem com a sua 

imagem “arranhada” diante da opinião pública, ocorreu o oposto. O orgulho não saiu 

ferido, pois acreditam ter havido uma alavancagem nessa percepção, por considerarem 

que foi possível ser explicitada uma pequena parcela das suas inenarráveis experiências 

de vida e de trabalho.  

“(...) representou pra mim, todo esse drama que é viver diariamente 

com coisas, assim, catastróficas, quase acontecendo. Não digo 

diariamente, mas são muitas e muitas e muitas das vezes que 

acontecem coisas parecidas, que não dão naquilo, mas a gente vive 

isso cotidianamente e ninguém ta sabendo”.  

 Falar da P-36 fez com que um trabalhador resgatasse em sua memória situação 

semelhante vivida por ele em uma outra Unidade há alguns anos atrás. O tom de sua voz 

e sua linguagem expressa orgulho pelo êxito alcançado e pela oportunidade de ter feito 



 169 

parte de uma equipe que evitou que a Unidade onde trabalhava adernasse 

completamente.    

“Diariamente, a gente vê um quadro de acidentes... Aconteceu alguma 

coisa parecida com aquela e ninguém nunca ficou sabendo. Na época, 

eu trabalhava na manutenção, a gente ficou 72 horas procurando um 

óleo e a plataforma adernava pro um lado, adernava pro outro e a 

tempestade que não parava. Isso acontecendo e a Marinha dando aviso 

que ia ter tempo ruim por muito tempo, por alguns 4, 5 dias. Foi justo 

na hora, só que a gente acabou conseguindo controlar, achar o 

problema, detectar. A gente recebendo óleo hidráulico e gastando, não 

vendo pra onde tava vazando, todo mundo procurando, 72 horas sem 

dormir, foi uma coisa meio de maluco, e no final de tudo agente achou, 

(...) era uma coisa boba.  Aconteceu uma coisa que não acontece todo 

dia, mas que pode acontecer”. 

A imprevisibilidade que está na base do trabalho offshore, já discutido 

anteriormente, se refere a exigência cotidiana desses trabalhadores enfrentarem os riscos 

inerentes ao trabalho. O que fica claro é a percepção desses trabalhadores de que saíram 

dessa batalha como vencedores. O herói offshore não só aparece nos momentos de 

recordes de produção, mas ele existe cotidianamente na vida desses homens, pois no 

confronto da exploração capitalista entre o homem e a tecnologia, este precisa se auto-

superar para não morrer.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 170 

CAPÍTULO V 

 

 

 
AS ESTRATÉGIAS DEFENSIVAS OFFSHORE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1. Introdução 
 
 
 

O que se observa diariamente nos locais de trabalho é uma organização 

controladora, repressora e alienante que imprime ritmo excessivo, hierarquiza as 

relações interpessoais e cerceia a criatividade, consumindo a saúde e a força de trabalho. 

E o que se vê nas plataformas marítimas de petróleo da Bacia de Campos? 

Como já vimos, anteriormente, existe o confinamento em alto mar por um 

período de 14 dias, criando uma vida dicotômica, entre terra e mar, entre estar 

embarcado e desembarcado, o que leva a uma vivência entrecortada entre estes dois 

mundos opostos. Esse movimento de uma vida pendular, submetido à potencialidade do 

risco, propicia o surgimento de “síndromes” específicas, tais como a TPE e a TPD.  

Na relação do homem com o trabalho, a vivência subjetiva de cada trabalhador é 

diversa, na medida em que pode abrir espaços para experiências tanto de prazer quanto 

de sofrimento.  

 “o organismo do trabalhador não é um motor ‘motor humano’ (...);(...) o 

trabalhador não chega a seu local de trabalho como uma máquina nova. 

Ele possui uma história pessoal que se concretiza por uma certa 

qualidade de suas aspirações, de seus desejos, de suas motivações, de 

suas necessidades psicológicas, que integram sua história passada. Isso 

confere a cada indivíduo características únicas e pessoais; o trabalhador, 



 171 

enfim, em razão de sua história, dispõe de vias de descarga preferenciais 

que não são as mesmas para todos (...)”. (DEJOURS, 1994:24) 

Do choque entre a história individual de cada trabalhador com projetos, 

esperanças e desejos, e uma organização do trabalho que os ignora, resulta um 

sofrimento que se traduz em insatisfação, medo e ansiedade. (DEJOURS, 1988). Assim, 

essa vivência subjetiva tem muitas conseqüências concretas que se explicitam nos 

indicadores do absenteísmo ou no que Dejours (1994:23) denomina de “presenteísmo”, 

que se trata de um engajamento excessivo e ardoroso dos trabalhadores a determinadas 

atividades.   

A partir do discurso dos operários, da relação que estes estabelecem com o 

trabalho, Dejours (1994:22) apresenta a concepção de carga de trabalho, separando-a 

em duas noções: carga física e carga mental.  

Quando se fala de carga física, a questão fundamental é o emprego excessivo de 

aptidões físicas, diferentemente em relação à carga psíquica, pois a questão crucial é o 

subemprego de atividades psíquicas. Assim, o trabalho “torna-se perigoso para o 

aparelho psíquico quando ele se opõe à sua livre atividade”. Sentir bem, em matéria de 

carga psíquica, provém de um livre e articulado funcionamento com o conteúdo da 

tarefa, ou seja, o “prazer do trabalhador resulta da descarga de energia psíquica que a 

tarefa autoriza, o que corresponde a uma diminuição da carga psíquica do trabalho”. 

(DEJOURS, 1994:24) 

Quando o trabalho é livremente escolhido ou livremente organizado pelo 

trabalhador, pode tornar-se um caminho para obter relaxamento, pode ser um meio de 

uma carga psíquica negativa do trabalho ou de uma descarga psíquica.  

Dessa forma, sentimentos como indignidade e inutilidade estão sempre presentes 

na fala dos trabalhadores. E o que estes significam? Indignidade por sentir-se 

robotizado, por não ter mais imaginação e inteligência, pelo contato forçado com uma 

tarefa desinteressante. Inutilidade pela falta de qualificação e de finalidade do trabalho. 

Os trabalhadores não conhecem o conteúdo de sua tarefa em relação ao conjunto da 

atividade da empresa e as atividades que desenvolvem “não têm significação humana”. 



 172 

Tendo em vista que o bem estar psíquico provém de um livre funcionamento em 

relação ao conteúdo da tarefa, se o trabalho é favorável a essa liberdade, o equilíbrio é 

possível. Caso se a ela se opõe, será fator de sofrimento e doença. 

Nessa relação do homem com o trabalho, Dejours (1988:49) destaca duas outras 

concepções importantes: o conteúdo significativo do trabalho e conteúdo ergonômico do 

trabalho.  O primeiro se refere às competências reais do trabalhador, pois este pode 

encontrar-se em situação de subemprego de suas capacidades ou em situação complexa, 

correndo o risco de um fracasso. Inclui, portanto, a dificuldade da atividade prática da 

tarefa para o trabalhador, “a significação da tarefa acabada em relação a uma profissão e 

o estatuto social implicitamente ligado ao posto de trabalho determinado”. A tarefa pode 

também “veicular uma mensagem simbólica para alguém ou contra alguém” 

(DEJOURS, 1988:50). Assim, a atividade do trabalho, pelos gestos realizados, 

instrumentos utilizados, material tratado, “pela atmosfera na qual opera”, difunde certos 

símbolos que pressupõem a partir da vivência de cada um, sentidos e significações, pois 

remetem “à vida passada e presente do sujeito, sua vida íntima e sua história pessoal”. 

(DEJOURS, 1988:50) 

Um outro aspecto apontado por Dejours (1988) na vivência dos trabalhadores se 

refere ao conteúdo ergonômico do trabalho (exigências físicas, químicas e biológicas). 

Este diz respeito às insatisfações ou aos sofrimentos somáticos de determinismo físico e 

também de doenças do corpo “mediatizadas por algo que atinge o aparelho mental”.  

Explicitando a relação entre o aparelho psíquico e o trabalho, Dejours (1988) 

afirma que o primeiro seria responsável por representar e por fazer brilhar as aspirações 

do sujeito, pois o bem estar psíquico provém de um livre funcionamento em relação ao 

conteúdo da tarefa. Nesse âmbito é que se insere a psicopatologia do trabalho: o 

sofrimento está no centro da relação psíquica do homem com o trabalho. Não se trata de 

eliminar esse sofrimento da situação de trabalho nem tampouco extingui-lo, mas das 

conseqüências da organização do trabalho sobre a saúde mental do trabalhador.  

(DEJOURS, 1988). 

O autor aponta como principal fator determinante da psicopatologia do trabalho 

a própria organização do trabalho, geradora de conflito, na medida em que opõe o 

desejo do trabalhador à realidade limitada do trabalho.  



 173 

“(...) quanto mais a organização do trabalho é rígida, mais a divisão do 

trabalho é acentuada, menor é o conteúdo significativo do trabalho e 

menores são as possibilidades de mudá-lo. Correlativamente, o sofrimento 

aumenta”. (DEJOURS, 1988:52) 

A destruição do desejo se dá em função de dois pontos cruciais: o conteúdo das 

tarefas, como já apontamos acima, e as relações humanas. Às vezes, por exemplo, o 

próprio posto de trabalho tem uma significação em relação aos conflitos com colegas ou 

com o supervisor.  

Sob o domínio do modelo taylorista de produção, o trabalhador é submetido a 

um tipo de trabalho com tarefas fragmentadas, com modo operatório e ritmo 

preestabelecidos por outra pessoa. É um trabalho repetitivo e sob pressão, no qual não 

sobra lugar para a atividade criativa. Dejours (1994) vem avançando na busca de 

respostas para as questões que perpassam os conflitos existentes entre a organização do 

trabalho e a subjetividade dos trabalhadores. Assim, quanto menor a liberdade no 

trabalho, maior é a pressão, o bloqueio ao qual está submetido. “Uma organização do 

trabalho autoritária (...) conduz a um aumento de desprazer” (Dejours, 1994:30).  

Segundo Dejours (1994), a organização do trabalho determina o 

desencadeamento de um sofrimento criador ou patogênico. Considera que esta impacta 

diretamente o aparelho psíquico do trabalhador, lugar do desejo e do prazer, da 

imaginação e dos afetos (DEJOURS, 1988:43). Assim, o embate entre o trabalhador, 

portador de uma história individual, personalizada, com aspirações, motivações e 

desejos e a organização do trabalho padronizante, despersonalizante, surgem vivências e 

sofrimentos que vão se configurando próprios de cada realidade. Essa configuração, 

como já tratamos, assume contornos mais complexos na realidade offshore, por 

coexistirem em uma mesma condição de espaço e tempo, dois recortes distintos da vida 

dos homens, a dimensão pública e a privada.  

O sofrimento do trabalhador reflete-se em manifestações psicossomáticas, 

absenteísmo, perda de motivação, nenhuma identificação ou compromisso com seu 

trabalho, ingestão abusiva de álcool e acidentes de trabalho que mutilam e, por vezes, 

matam. 



 174 

Analisando o tema, Dejours (1994) acrescenta que a carga psíquica não é 

mensurável visto ser subjetiva, entretanto torna-se real como resposta às exigências e 

pressões do trabalho cotidiano. Assim, em termos de economia psíquica o que se 

observa é um movimento consciente de luta do trabalhador contra a insatisfação, 

indignidade, inutilidade e desqualificação impostas pela organização do trabalho. Um 

trabalho rigidamente organizado, mesmo que não seja muito parcelado, propicia o 

surgimento de sentimentos de frustração, resultantes de um conteúdo inadequado às 

potencialidades e a capacidade criativa dos homens. As más condições de trabalho 

ameaçam menos que o trabalho rígido e imutável.  

Dejours (1988) considera que o contato forçado com uma tarefa desinteressante 

determina o surgimento de sentimento de indignidade. A falta de significação 

decorrente do parcelamento das tarefas, a frustração narcísica, a inutilidade de gestos 

carentes da visão da totalidade do processo de produção determinam o surgimento de 

uma auto-imagem depreciativa. 

O indivíduo durante a realização de sua tarefa está submetido a excitações 

provenientes do exterior (informações visuais, auditivas, táteis etc) ou do interior 

(pulsionais114), que necessitam ser descarregadas. Essa excitação quando não dispõe de 

vias de descarga origina uma vivência de tensão psíquica, denominada pelo senso 

comum de “tensão nervosa”. Para descarregar essa energia, o trabalhador pode dispor da 

via psíquica, motora e “visceral”. (DEJOURS, 1988) 

Quando a via psíquica encontra-se bloqueada pelo exercício de tarefas 

desinteressantes e monótonas, e a via motora é inviável pela organização do trabalho, 

resta, como último recurso, a liberação da energia pela via visceral determinando 

desordenamento das funções somáticas. É a via "visceral" a que estará atuando no 

processo de somatização. Assim, quando o indivíduo somatiza, ele adquire uma saída 

para seus conflitos com a realidade. (DEJOURS, 1988) 

                                                
114 Pulsão é um “processo dinâmico que consiste numa pressão ou força (carga energética, fator de 
motricidade) que faz tender o organismo para um alvo. Segundo Freud, uma pulsão tem a sua fonte numa 
excitação corporal (estado de tensão); o seu alvo é suprimir o estado de tensão que reina na fonte 
pulsional; é no objeto ou graças a ele que a pulsão pode atingir o seu alvo”. (LAPLANCHE e 
PONTALIS, 1979) 



 175 

 O sofrimento resultante do confronto com a organização do trabalho cria, por 

parte dos trabalhadores, formas não passivas de se proteger das conseqüências nocivas 

impostas pelo trabalho, originando as estratégias defensivas.  

 Seligmann-Silva (1994:232) faz uma distinção entre os termos defesa e 

resistência ao se referir às estratégias adotadas pelos trabalhadores. Considera que as 

primeiras objetivam evitar ou tornar suportável o sofrimento e, em geral, não propiciam 

transformações. As segundas estão dirigidas à obtenção da transformação de situações 

que originam sofrimento. Considera, ainda, a existência de defesas que podem assumir, 

simultaneamente, características de resistência.  

 Esta autora afirma que os estudos iniciais de Dejours (1988) mostram que as 

estratégias coletivas de defesa não contemplam nenhuma perspectiva “política 

libertadora”, mas respondem à capacidade de suportar a penosidade do trabalho, o medo 

e a ansiedade “de conviver cotidianamente com os riscos de acidente e de vida” 

(SELIGMANN-SILVA, 1994:247).  

 Estas estratégias levam à transformação e, geralmente, à eufemização da 

percepção que os trabalhadores têm da realidade que os faz sofrer. Assim, deixam de se 

posicionar enquanto “não sujeitos” passivos, para se colocarem no lugar de sujeitos 

“ativos diante do desafio de uma atitude provocadora ou de uma minimização”, diante 

das pressões patogênicas.  

 Dejours (1994:128) afirma que as estratégias coletivas supõem um consenso ou 

um acordo partilhado coletivamente.  

“Há casos em que as estratégias defensivas coletivas, logo de saída 

consagram-se à luta contra o sofrimento engendrado pela organização do 

trabalho, conferindo ao sujeito uma estabilidade que ele será incapaz de 

garantir com a ajuda de apenas suas defesas próprias”. (DEJOURS, 

1994:129) 

 Portanto, a partir do compartilhamento do sentido comum pelos vários sujeitos 

de suas experiências acerca de um sofrimento único, a união de esforços para 

enfrentamento das questões que envolvem o trabalho, seus processos e suas relações 

dão origem à construção de estratégias coletivas defensivas.  



 176 

 Dejours (1994:129) afirma a existência de diferenciação entre mecanismo de 

defesa individual e estratégia coletiva de defesa, pelo fato que o primeiro está 

interiorizado no próprio sujeito, independentemente da presença física de outros, 

enquanto que a estratégia não tem sustentação sem as condições externas, o 

compartilhamento coletivo de outros sujeitos. 

 Considera que nas atividades perigosas, como nas usinas nucleares, fábrica de 

explosivos e refinarias de petróleo, dentre outros, onde a natureza do risco, em 

decorrência das próprias atividades e dos produtos existentes, é altíssima, as estratégias 

podem chegar a se configurar em uma verdadeira ideologia defensiva. (DEJOURS, 

1988) 

Trata-se, portanto, de uma negação da própria percepção da realidade, seja no 

sentido de transformá-la ou minimizá-la, operando coletivamente uma nova realidade 

construída a partir de um coletivo ou de uma comunidade inteira e sendo validada pelo 

mesmo. Assim, que “o resultado da estratégia defensiva coletiva é uma percepção 

irrealista da realidade, é um fato facilmente constatável” (DEJOURS, 1994:129).  

 Estas não são simples resultantes de uma ação mecanicista na relação entre 

estímulos e respostas, mas se configuram como estratégias complexas e rigorosas, 

porém não intencionais. Os estudos iniciais de Dejours mostravam que por vezes 

tratavam-se de “comportamentos insólitos e paradoxais” (ATHAYDE, 1996:78) de 

defesa contra o sofrimento mental. Por mais incomuns que pudessem ser, esses 

comportamentos têm a finalidade de manter estável o funcionamento mental do 

trabalhador contrapondo-se à organização do trabalho. 

 Soma-se a isso, o fato de que as estratégias coletivas de defesa desenvolvem um 

papel essencial na estruturação dos coletivos de trabalho, na sua coesão e sua 

estabilização, enfim, no sentido de fortalecer a própria cooperação. 

 A construção de estratégias coletivas de defesa, para fazer frente ao sofrimento 

no trabalho, é utilizada pela organização do mesmo para aumentar a exploração dos 

trabalhadores e elevar a produtividade, envolvendo-os num processo gradativo de 

alienação. Assim, os trabalhadores correm o risco de acabar transformando a estratégia 

em um objetivo em si mesma, donde todos os esforços vão convergir no sentido de 

“manter e vencer tudo que possa desestabilizá-la”.  



 177 

“A situação subjetiva enuncia-se como se o sofrimento fosse 

essencialmente o resultado de um enfraquecimento da estratégia defensiva 

e não conseqüência do trabalho. O sofrimento não pode mais ser 

reconhecido como decorrente do trabalho”. (DEJOURS, 1994:130) 

 Dessa forma, para subverter o efeito totalizante presente no território offshore 

que sujeita o trabalhador, psíquica e socialmente, tanto no período de trabalho quanto 

nos dias de folgas, estes homens criam estratégias defensivas que minimizam os efeitos 

nefastos dessa atividade.  

Cabe destacar que enquanto a psicopatologia do trabalho, em 1980, voltava-se 

para o sofrimento e as conseqüentes patologias dos trabalhadores, inserindo-se no 

campo das ciências da saúde, com o aprofundamento das pesquisas operou-se uma 

passagem do foco da patologia à concepção de normalidade, sem deixar de lado a 

questão do sofrimento, o que gerou uma nova denominação para essas pesquisas: 

psicodinâmica do trabalho.  

O fato de muitos trabalhadores não adoecerem, fez a “normalidade” se tornar 

um enigma. Essa normalidade, construída não sem sacrifícios, equilibra-se entre o 

sofrimento e as defesas. A normalidade aparece então como um equilíbrio precário 

(equilíbrio psíquico) entre constrangimentos do trabalho desestabilizantes ou 

patogênicos, e defesas psíquicas.  

Dessa forma, a psicodinâmica do trabalho abre novas perspectivas de análise que 

não abordam apenas o sofrimento, mas ainda o prazer no trabalho, reconhecendo que a 

relação entre a organização do trabalho e o homem não é um bloco monolítico mas que, 

dialeticamente, está em contínua transformação e deslocamento. Assim, por exemplo, a 

cada nova automatização nas sistemáticas operacionais surgem novas dificuldades, 

ainda não previstas, e que vão exigir a elaboração de novos “saber-fazer”, num 

processo por definição humano, de síntese entre execução e concepção. 

“(...) a organização do trabalho não é absolutamente absorvida pelos 

assalariados (...); todos os preceitos são reinterpretados e reconstruídos. 

(...) ora é tolerante, e oferece margens à liberdade criadora; ora é 

restrita, e os assalariados receiam ser surpreendidos cometendo erros 

(...)”. (DESSORS e SCHRAM apud DEJOURS, 2004:62) 



 178 

O trabalho, para ser fonte de prazer, deve conter espaço suficiente dentro de sua 

organização, de forma tal que respeite as condições psicobiológicas do indivíduo, dando 

margem ao exercício de sua criatividade, respeitando suas aspirações e seus desejos, o 

que, particularmente no território offshore, como já vimos até agora, é algo bastante 

complexo.  

Como construir uma experiência prazerosa no trabalho? Se há prazer no 

trabalho, responde Dejours (2004:213) este “só pode advir do ganho obtido no trabalho 

justamente no registro da construção da identidade e da realização de si mesmo”. 

Acrescenta que a “atividade não produz identidade. (...) A identidade só pode ser 

conferida pelo olhar do outro”. Assim, para que o trabalho transforme o sofrimento 

torna-se imprescindível o reconhecimento do “outro”, que pode se dar entre os pares ou 

pelos ocupantes da hierarquia.  

“(...) Sem reconhecimento, não pode haver sentido, nem prazer (...). Só há 

sofrimento patogênico e estratégias defensivas”. (DEJOURS, 2004:214)  

E, quando o recurso das estratégias defensivas não consegue exaurir toda a 

ansiedade, esse sentimento residual, não compensado, continua seu trabalho de solapar e 

de destruir psiquicamente o sujeito, empurrando-o para a descompensação (mental ou 

psicossomática) e para a doença. 

 

 

 

5.2. Medo 

  

 O medo pode estar presente no cotidiano das ocupações profissionais, tanto nas 

tarefas de escritório, quanto nas atividades repetitivas (DEJOURS, 1988). No entanto, 

existem áreas profissionais em que os riscos são mais evidentes, estão relacionados à 

integridade física do trabalhador. As indústrias de processo contínuo, onde se situa o 

trabalho offshore, são alguns desses exemplos. Em todas essas situações podem ocorrer 

ameaças de asfixia, queimadura, afogamento, acidentes em geral e até morte. O risco é 

sempre latente e pode se tornar iminente.  



 179 

“Toda atividade embarcado ta correndo risco. O transporte é arriscado, a 

evacuação é arriscada, o trabalho é arriscado. A gente ta lá, (...) não vê o 

risco, mas ta sabendo que ele ta ali. O risco está escondido (...) porque ta 

numa área industrial”.  

 Muitas vezes conviver com o risco é algo inerente à própria atividade, podendo 

ter um caráter mais coletivo ou personalizado, a depender das circunstâncias da 

ocorrência. As empresas, no sentido de sanar as repercussões nocivas do trabalho sobre 

a saúde dos trabalhadores, implantam medidas e regras de segurança que quase sempre 

contam com uma prevenção incompleta, seja pela imposição de ritmos de trabalho 

acima do que as normas de segurança prescrevem, por limitação de investimentos 

necessários ou porque os riscos e/ou as suas manifestações são desconhecidos.  

“O melhor momento pra você atuar, nem sempre é o melhor momento do 

ponto de vista da segurança. Você tenta se preservar de todo jeito, mas 

ainda assim é um ambiente muito grande, muito complexo, muitas pessoas, 

muitas variáveis, (...) gás, equipamentos, o perigo é latente”. 

 Dejours (1988) menciona o exemplo das indústrias que operam em fluxo 

contínuo onde muito freqüentemente é um acidente que revela a existência de um risco 

até então desconhecido. 

“Antes corria o risco de ver gente fazendo tarefa contrária a uma outra, 

sob o ponto de vista de segurança. (...) depois de um acidente com um 

pessoal trocando uma válvula, em 198..., foram disparadas algumas 

orientações que deram na PT115 e um monte de outras coisas, reuniões 

preparatórias (...)”. 

 Isso vem ratificar, muitas vezes, o desconhecimento dos trabalhadores dos reais 

riscos aos quais estão submetidos. Vários procedimentos prescritos adotados no 

processo de trabalho offshore, atualmente, são oriundos de ocorrências não previstas no 

trabalho prescrito.  

                                                
115 PT é uma sigla que significa permissão de trabalho. É um procedimento adotado na plataforma para 
análise de todos os trabalhos a serem realizados diariamente, de modo que sejam evitadas quaisquer 
ocorrências inesperadas. Qualquer trabalho só é realizado se tiver a PT autorizada.  



 180 

 No entanto, as medidas de segurança quase sempre se voltam para o aspecto 

preventivo individual como: os EPIs (capacetes, protetor auricular, salva-vidas etc) ou 

para atender ao aspecto psicológico, através do estabelecimento das normas de 

segurança, sendo que muitas vezes o risco permanece sem nenhuma medida no sentido 

de eliminá-lo. 

“o problema do medo no trabalho surge desta oposição entre a natureza 

coletiva e material do risco residual e a natureza individual e psicológica 

de preservação a cada instante de trabalho”. (DEJOURS, 1988:64) 

 É importante destacar que as preocupações com a saúde física sempre estão 

presentes no discurso dos trabalhadores, como por exemplo: as doenças profissionais 

cuja gênese está no trabalho, mas ainda não foram reconhecidas como tal e, portanto, 

não estão incluídas no quadro oficial das doenças profissionais. Entretanto, as condições 

geradoras e/ou fadigas são aquelas sob as quais esses trabalhadores são submetidos, 

devido às características da organização do trabalho, na maioria das vezes, não são 

mencionadas e, muito menos, se observa à busca de possibilidade de soluções. Os 

pressupostos da organização tayloriana, ainda são muito presentes na administração e 

gestão do trabalho e estudos mostram o quanto são lesivos à saúde e a vida dos 

trabalhadores por ela atingidos. 

Dessa forma, no sentido de combater o medo, os trabalhadores em nível 

individual ou coletivo precisam elaborar suas estratégias. Na verdade, o que gera 

aumento da produtividade não é diretamente a agressão sofrida pelo trabalhador, mas as 

estratégias que ele utiliza contra o sofrimento.  

 As estratégias contra o medo podem assumir diferentes contornos, pois ao 

mesmo tempo em que “apagam” o medo, ofuscam a visão objetiva dos riscos reais e, 

conseqüentemente, o estabelecimento de ações coletivas capazes de transformar 

positivamente o cotidiano desses trabalhadores.  

 A estratégia defensiva em alguns momentos mostra sua eficácia ao mascarar no 

discurso do trabalhador qualquer indício de medo, ou qualquer traço explícito desse 

sentimento. No entanto, alguns sinais podem servir ao pesquisador como indicadores da 

existência desse sentimento, como por exemplo: alterações no sono, irritação nervosa, 

distúrbios gastrointestinais e consumo de bebidas alcóolicas e tabaco. 



 181 

“Geralmente acordo umas duas vezes por noite lá. Sono lá é (...) é meio 

escaldado, gato escaldado, tem alarme, eu acordo (...) às vezes  acordo 4 

e meia e não durmo mais (...)”.  

“(...) pra onde as pessoas transferem esse medo? Na realidade, algumas 

pessoas, não é que elas transfiram, elas desgastam, infelizmente, em 

alguns casos, até de dependência: do álcool, noitadas, o cara vive na 

empresa com aquele medo, com aquela tensão, durante 14 dias, 21 dias 

de folgas dele, ele vive como se fosse aqueles dias fossem os últimos. Não 

são todas as pessoas não, mas muita gente faz isso. Praticamente farra 

todo dia, são bebedeiras, (...) alcoólicos. De às vezes, algumas pessoas 

chegarem ao aeroporto ainda em fase (...) ainda dentro de estágio de 

embriaguez. Então, na realidade transferem esse medo pra coisas que 

são prejudiciais”. 

 Cabe destacar que no capítulo II, o relato de um trabalhador offshore mostra o 

quanto o trabalho na indústria do petróleo, especificamente na Petrobras por toda sua 

história, cria laços de dependência, pois afirmava que o petróleo causava dependência 

química do mesmo modo que o uso do álcool. Estamos verificando que o efeito que o 

álcool traz para o trabalhador, enquanto estratégia de defesa, é um deslocamento do seu 

sofrimento cotidiano frente ao processo e a organização do trabalho. O sentimento de 

orgulho gerado no trabalhador pode, por sua vez, se configurar em uma estratégia com 

efeito alienante.  

 Seligmann-Silva (1994) enfatiza que dentre as estratégias de defesa mais 

distantes de um significado de resistência à dominação, tanto pela grande ocorrência 

quanto por assumirem contornos patológicos, encontra-se o uso excessivo de bebidas 

alcoólicas. Os depoimentos estão nos mostrando a correlação direta entre a utilização do 

álcool, como forma de defesa dos trabalhadores para enfrentarem o alto grau de risco no 

trabalho. O relato abaixo ilustra essa questão.  

“(...) você sabe que tem o risco, você sabe o que pode acontecer, então 

aí, quando vem pra folga, você tende a extravasar toda aquela coisa que 

fica reprimida durante os 14 dias. (...) uns vão pro bar, botequim, larga 

a mulher, enfim (...). Isso aí foi sempre, tanto há anos atrás, como agora, 



 182 

continua a mesma coisa, não muda. É o perfil do cara. O cara chega às 

vezes nem dá um beijo na mulher, vai direto pro botequim. O cara 

passou quinze dias sem beber uma gota de álcool e então ele chega ali, 

quer extravasar, (...) aí dá aquele alívio”. 

Uma outra defesa, citada por Seligmann-Silva (1994), contra o medo se refere à 

idealização. Se expressa não somente como um mecanismo adotado contra a 

consciência da exploração, mas também como manifestação dos desejos de 

autovalorização.  

Considera que quanto maior e mais importância tiver a empresa no cenário 

nacional e mundial, mais facilmente se estabelece essa relação de idealização116, pois ao 

mesmo tempo em que os trabalhadores sentem-se orgulhosos em fazerem parte desse 

desenvolvimento, essa estratégia é utilizada a serviço da dominação. Corroboramos essa 

análise, uma vez que essa temática já foi abordada no capítulo II, quando tratamos da 

ambigüidade do trabalhador offshore.  Nesse sentido, a figura do herói como um traço 

marcante na identidade do trabalhador offshore é transformado em uma estratégia de 

defesa ao assumir e internalizar para si o discurso do outro, ou seja, a voz da empresa, 

como se fosse a sua própria fala. A cultura do crachá abordada no capítulo II favorece, 

também, a lógica alienante reinterpretada pelos trabalhadores.  

 Cabe destacar que muitos comportamentos não se mostram explícitos para os 

trabalhadores, tendo em vista a eficácia das estratégias, pois ao mascararem o 

sofrimento, podem desenvolver progressivamente um processo de acomodação, 

colocando-se como “freio à emancipação e à mudança”.  

Seligmann-Silva (1994:232) concluiu em sua pesquisa junto aos trabalhadores 

industriais que em situações de perigo evidentes emergiam uma ansiedade persecutória, 

em decorrência das ameaças à integridade física e à própria vida, mas que são ocultadas 

da própria consciência através dos mecanismos de defesa. Afirma que a racionalização é 

uma estratégia bastante utilizada pelos trabalhadores, pois se por um lado encobrem 

experiências penosas relativas às condições de perigo, por outro lado aceitam as 

                                                
116 Laplanche e Pontalis (1979) conceituam idealização como um “processo psíquico pelo qual as 
qualidades e o valor do objeto são levados a perfeição. (...) diz respeito ao objeto, pelo qual este é 
engrandecido e exaltado psiquicamente sem alteração da sua natureza”.  



 183 

explicações, do ponto de vista tecnológico, que o seu modo de trabalhar é “o mais 

moderno e seguro”.  

“(...) nós temos uma cultura, cultura da tecnologia. É aquela cultura que 

ta tudo bem até você ser furtado ou roubado ou a sua tranca tiver (...), 

quando você chegar em casa e epa! - ‘Poxa!’ – Aí você coloca uma tranca 

melhor. ‘É nosso, não adianta!’ Então, precisou ter um acidente de graves 

proporções pra dar uma sacudida (...)”.  

Assim, as estratégias de defesa no sentido de evitar ou tornar suportável o 

sofrimento podem expulsar o sujeito de seu desejo e favorecer a lógica da alienação a 

partir da vontade e da ideologia do outro (DEJOURS, 1988). Considera que existem 

diferentes modos de lidar com o medo, mecanismos que podem servir à manutenção e 

ao fortalecimento da dominação.  

 Tanto nas refinarias de petróleo (SELIGMANN-SILVA, 1994; ARAÚJO, 2001) 

quanto no trabalho offshore, a negação do risco e a auto-repressão do medo são 

assumidas, implicitamente, como as únicas maneiras de convivência com as situações 

potencialmente ameaçadoras da realidade de trabalho onde se encontram. 

 “(...) pra embarcar o cara é corno, doido ou viado. Então é melhor a 

gente ser doido. É a melhor opção. De maluco a gente vai tocando a vida 

assim mesmo”.  

  O estereótipo da loucura se apresenta como uma estratégia para justificar a 

permanência nessa situação de trabalho bastante peculiar. Aceitar estar 

intermitentemente exposto a essas condições de riscos se sustenta em torno de 

associações que remetem a figura estereotipada de alguém “incapaz” de avaliar 

criteriosamente a sua inserção numa atividade complexa e de alto risco. 

 O depoimento abaixo demonstra que subdimensionar a intensidade e amplitude 

do risco na atividade offshore, pode se caracterizar como uma forma de negação dos 

trabalhadores para lidarem com o medo.  

“(...) foi no final do embarque. Depois que nós fizemos essa operação 

incorreta e aconteceu esse acidente, foi mais ou menos uma confirmação 

assim: ‘Ó, presta atenção, isso aí não é da forma que você tava levando 



 184 

não, toma mais cuidado’. Foi um marco na minha vida mesmo, (...) pois 

poderia talvez, ter quebrado ou até perdido o dedo. (...) eu ignorei a 

possibilidade de risco, (...) existe o tempo todo. (...) foi a experiência 

prática do ambiente e da periculosidade que existe, foi uma provação”.  

 O que se observa é que a experiência singular do acidente faz com que haja uma 

mudança na percepção do trabalhador e nas ações futuras diante dos riscos existentes no 

trabalho offshore. Começam a perceber com maior nitidez e veracidade, o perigo que 

enfrentam e suas conseqüências.  

“(...) você sabe que ali tem 100 kg, mas você não tem noção. Às vezes fica 

muito tranqüilo em ta fazendo aquilo, mas na verdade, você tem que ter 

sempre cuidado com aquilo. Você tem se conscientizar que tudo pode te 

machucar fácil”. 

 Ao mesmo tempo, a própria condição offshore e os seus riscos físicos, que são 

mais facilmente explícitos, multiplica esse medo a dimensões em que o sofrimento 

torna-se insuportável, gerando um alto custo de desgaste mental e psíquico. 

“(...) eu fiz um embarque de sete dias que foi o embarque mais longo da 

minha vida, quando eu embarquei em um navio (...). Quando chegou [ na 

Bacia de Campos] cheio de problemas, se adaptando, e eu fui pra área do 

navio e olhei aquele convés de fora a fora e pensei: aqueles tanques 

estavam cheios de petróleo, se acontecesse alguma coisa ali e fosse o dia, 

eu morria pelos ares, foi um dos dias que eu mais senti medo. Só que eu 

tive que respirar, porque não posso me desesperar”. 

 Acrescenta-se, ainda, como já mencionamos anteriormente, os próprios riscos da 

aviação, explicitados no discurso dos trabalhadores pelo medo do transporte conforme é 

ilustrado pela fala a seguir.  

“Eu arrisco a dizer que 50% desse negócio eu atribuo ao meio de 

transporte, ao helicóptero. Acho que metade das pessoas confessam que 

tem medo e a outra metade mentem. (...) alguém perguntou: ‘você não 

tem medo de roubar a tua casa?’ Aí eu respondi: se eu ficar com medo 

vai diminuir o risco? No meio do embarque você não fica ... mas quando 

começa a se aproximar a hora, dá uma coisinha sim, tanto na ida quanto 



 185 

na volta. Na maioria, eu não to dizendo todos. Tem cara que realmente 

ele anda de helicóptero como se tivesse num ônibus, não ta nem aí. Mas 

a maioria vai ali com um certo receio”. 

 Vale enfatizar que o medo do helicóptero, além de causar muita ansiedade e 

desconforto, se manifesta, implicitamente, também nas síndromes TPE e TPD, já 

discutidas no capítulo III.  

 Assim, o próprio medo já se constitui como um mecanismo de defesa no sentido 

do trabalhador sentir-se alerta durante todos os momentos, de modo que tome todas as 

precauções necessárias para a realização do trabalho, inclusive nas tarefas consideradas 

de menor complexidade, até mesmo “sem importância”.  

“(...) Se você tem receio ou medo de alguma coisa, você vai tomar todas 

as precauções pra que tudo esteja o mais seguro possível”. 

 O medo que protege e evita atitudes displicentes diante dos possíveis riscos 

latentes e silenciosos, ao mesmo tempo desencadeia mecanismos de proteção com 

intensidade proporcional ao estado de ansiedade do trabalhador que assumem um efeito 

paralisante.  

“Se eu tiver medo, eu não vou embarcar. Porque medo pra mim tem que 

ter um sentido de proteção. Eu não vou contra o meu medo. Saber que a 

coisa é perigosa é uma coisa. (...)  acho que medo me paralisaria”.  

 Dejours (1988) considera que os próprios ambientes de trabalho, como por 

exemplo, as indústrias químicas, lembram a possibilidade de ocorrência de acidentes ou 

incidentes, tais como: “cartazes, sinais luminosos, alarmes sonoros e visuais, presença 

de capacetes, máscaras, luvas, muito mais que cumprir sua função de estimular a 

atenção e o uso de alguns EPIs”, provocam medo.  

 Por outro lado, a questão é complexa, pois também desconsiderar que o 

trabalhador está em um ambiente em que todos fatores e variáveis de risco estão 

presentes, que apenas um deles pode acionar ações sistemáticas em cadeia que podem 

levar ao acometimento de acidentes graves, não é possível. 

 Dejours (1988:67) cita que o próprio aspecto exterior de uma fábrica não é 

indiferente para os trabalhadores, pois remete a representações que geram medo. 



 186 

“Imaginemos estas fábricas que se estendem por muitos quilômetros, cuspindo fogo e 

vapores, em noites, mergulhadas no barulho das máquinas e iluminadas sombriamente 

por luzes que dão às formas do prédio e das chaminés, uma silhueta estranha, banhada 

por uma atmosfera poluída de cheiros horríveis e sufocantes!” Este exemplo é 

totalmente aplicável à realidade da plataforma enquanto espaço industrial, 

acrescentando apenas o ingrediente da localização marítima que intensifica a 

complexidade desse significado para a população embarcada.   

“Em qualquer outro lugar você tem condições de correr, mas lá você 

não tem pra onde não. Então, acho que isso gera pânico. E o pânico 

embota sua mente, impede, trava, você não pode ter aquelas atitudes. As 

atitudes que você deveria ter, você não toma, porque você fica travado 

pelo pânico. (...) já vi operador altamente responsável, pessoa 

comprometida com o sistema, e tudo e um dia vazou, vazou... Era só 

fechar, passou pela mão, (...) o bicho estourou, passou na cabeça e ele 

ficou parado assim, olhando assim ... e o gás passando, passando.  Quer 

dizer, há esse desligamento. Acho, isso depende de cada um, cada um 

tem uma reação diante de uma situação de emergência”. 

 A vivência cotidiana do medo existe efetivamente e raramente emerge, pois se 

encontra represada pelas estratégias de defesa coletivas. As atitudes diante das situações 

inesperadas mostram a extensão que o medo assume, explicitando a sua face 

incontrolável, apesar de toda a experiência técnica e das ações preventivas implantadas. 

Figueiredo (2001) afirma que no caso dos mergulhadores, até mesmo os mais 

experientes, a estratégia usada é “nunca bater fofo no fundo”, que significa resistir e não 

se intimidar diante das situações adversas. 

“Quando a coisa acontece no real, o fator psicológico da pessoa, muda 

totalmente. Eu já vi incêndio no mar. ‘Já viu o mar pegar fogo? Eu já 

vi’. O mar pegou fogo, o cara ficou tão apavorado que não conseguiu 

engatar o esguicho. Travou o cara. Em 85, no acidente de Enchova, a 

gente tava operando na P-15, perto de Enchova. O queimador igual da 



 187 

P-12117 que é reto (...), então aquilo ali tinha uma mangueira de ar (...), 

que arrebentou, foi aquela labareda de fogo, deu aquele chamuscado 

grandão, do queimador, saiu todo mundo correndo”. 

 O depoimento acima nos mostra a necessidade de consolidação e 

compartilhamento das estratégias de defesa coletivas entre todos os trabalhadores. O 

medo se não fosse possível de ser controlado ou neutralizado, caso pudesse aparecer a 

qualquer momento durante o trabalho, esses trabalhadores não poderiam permanecer 

nesse tipo de trabalho. 

 O trabalhador novato sofre, sente-se desarmado diante da ignorância, da 

insegurança, dos mistérios e riscos já descobertos pelos mais antigos e ainda daqueles 

que vão surgir.  Por outro lado, a “eficácia simbólica da estratégia defensiva somente é 

assegurada pela participação de todos. Ninguém pode ter medo. Ninguém pode 

demonstrá-lo. Ninguém pode ficar à margem deste código profissional. Ninguém pode 

recusar sua contribuição individual para o sistema de defesa. Nunca se deve falar de 

perigo, risco, acidente nem do medo” (DEJOURS, 1988:71). Dejours acrescenta ainda, 

ao analisar os trabalhadores da construção civil, que muitas das vezes campanhas de 

segurança apresentam elevada resistência dos trabalhadores, pois acabam destacando a 

existência do perigo real, tornando com que o trabalho fique mais carregado de 

ansiedade.  

 “Tem que levar em consideração que você ta numa área perigosa. Não 

tire nunca da cabeça. Agora, medo, medo é algo controlado. Você tem 

medo? Claro que eu tenho medo”.  

“Medo, nada, que obviamente seja uma fobia. Não pode ter fobia de 

nada porque senão você fica neurótico. Tem que ter medo, no caso 

receio de tudo que possa acontecer, exatamente pra que? Pra preservar 

a pessoa, preservar você, seu trabalho. A segurança depende disso. (...) 

O medo defende você, de acontecer qualquer coisa com alguém”.  

 O medo tem que existir em dose e intensidade suficientes para que o trabalhador 

possa ter sua atenção voltada para os cuidados com os riscos e a segurança e, ao mesmo 

                                                
117 P-12 é uma plataforma semi-submersível que faz parte do sistema de Unidades flutuantes da Bacia de 
Campos.  



 188 

tempo, equilibrando essa quantidade de forma a não impedi-lo de realizar as atividades 

e procedimentos. Para tanto, os mecanismos de defesa coletivos são acionados.  

 Cabe destacar que a consciência aguda do risco de acidente (DEJOURS, 1988) 

forçaria o trabalhador a tomar tantas medidas individuais preventivas, que se tornaria 

ineficaz para o processo produtivo. O depoimento a seguir mostra que após um 

acidente, o trabalhador intensificou tanto os cuidados com a segurança e os 

procedimentos técnicos, de modo que já percebe o incomodo que está causando no seu 

grupo. 

“(...) eu tô enjoado, eu não faço mais o trabalho como antes (...) eles 

chamam de ‘exagero de vê’. Hoje, eu paro, fico olhando pelo menos uns 

dez minutos, o que pode acontecer ali, que possa me prejudicar, 

prejudicar o colega que vai estar comigo fazendo o serviço. Quase que 

confirmou: ‘Ó, o lugar é perigoso, isso aqui não é brincadeira’. (...) eu 

tenho que parar e analisar mesmo que seja o trabalho mais ridículo que 

possa ser, (...) eu aprendi isso. (...) vão implicar comigo: ‘Ah, você ta 

sendo demorado e tal’. (...) foi a experiência prática do ambiente e é da 

periculosidade que existe no ambiente”.   

 O medo relativo ao risco pode assumir, ampliadamente, grandes proporções pelo 

próprio desconhecimento em relação aos riscos, os seus limites e as ações de prevenção.  

 O aumento do risco e conseqüente medo podem gerar um quadro de ansiedade, 

irritabilidade e depressão que na maioria das vezes não é atribuído ao caráter específico 

do trabalho, mas a uma série de dificuldades financeiras, familiares e sociais. À 

ocorrência de um quadro de descompensação, não é vinculada pela empresa às 

mudanças na organização do trabalho, ficando mascarada em apreensões de ordem 

pessoal. 

 Esse quadro de medo e ansiedade não invade apenas o período de trabalho, 

permanece ainda durante o período de descanso na residência. Quando os períodos de 

recuperação são entrecortados pela ruptura de seus ritmos de descanso, como no 

trabalho em turno alternado, o quadro se agrava. O estado de ansiedade vivido pelo 

trabalhador pode perdurar durante as 24 horas durante anos e anos. 



 189 

“O medo você não perde. Você apenas transfere ele de lugar.(...) O 

medo de um risco de explosão, uma falha de um equipamento, que pode 

ocorrer, se isso acontecer não é falha humana, o camarada acabou de 

fazer uma manutenção preventiva, tava tudo ok, não tinha nada, mas de 

uma hora pra outra um rolamento pode dar um problema, travar um 

motor, travar um eixo, e a gente não tem como prever (...). O que 

acontece é que as pessoas, com o passar do tempo, elas passam a achar, 

que se não aconteceu, então, não vai acontecer”. 

 A negação como uma estratégia de defesa assume vários contornos, dependendo 

da situação que envolve os trabalhadores. Por outro lado, essas defesas não se 

constituem como duradouras. Podem ser rompidas por diferentes tipos de ocorrências. 

Uma delas se revela pelos acidentes de trabalho que, além de romper com essas 

estratégias, dá lugar ao medo explícito após vivenciarem a impotência e a desproteção 

ante as ameaças a sua integridade e sua vida, uma vez como vimos no capítulo IV, o 

risco nas plataformas se configura como “técnico, simultâneo, complexo e coletivo”.   

 Dejours (1988:113) menciona a articulação entre ignorância-risco-medo-

segurança, como “duas faces inseparáveis” de um processo que dá a empresa 

instrumentos para aumentar a produtividade e o controle social e, aos trabalhadores, 

formas de repensar a sua organização, a sua importância no processo e a criação de uma 

identidade. 

“O risco (...) a gente nem dá valor mais, passa do lado de uma linha 

pressurizada lá com 170 quilos, a gente segue em frente. O risco quando 

ele é conhecido, é um risco que a gente pode trabalhar. O risco que você 

não conhece (...) esse é que o problema. Em plataforma onde tem 

produção e perfuração é um risco desgraçado, o cara ta acostumado, na 

produção com uma linha de 150 quilos, não se preocupa, mas ele sobe 

na boca da mesa118, ele passa lá por trás (...)”. 

 O receio do risco é de algo que não se conhece, no caso em questão, os 

trabalhadores da produção desconhecem os riscos das operações do processo de 

perfuração e vice-versa. 
                                                
118 Boca da mesa é uma área na plataforma onde são realizados procedimentos operacionais com 
ferramentas pesadas durante o processo de perfuração de um poço.  



 190 

 Uma outra estratégia de defesa mencionada pelos trabalhadores se refere às 

mudanças em suas percepções. Consideram que diante de situações de emergência 

envolvendo companheiros de trabalho, situações em terra, relacionadas à doença com 

entes queridos, inclusive filhos, não mobiliza reais sentimentos de preocupação 

compatíveis com o que expressam por meio das palavras. Percebem que, na verdade, a 

preocupação que sentem é menor do que aquela manifestada verbalmente. Entendem 

que as suas reações não são normais e que são resultantes da longa permanência (há 

mais de 10 anos) nessa condição de trabalho, pois consideram que foram se moldando 

gradativamente para não sofrerem. Afirmam que o trabalho offshore vai, 

paulatinamente, embrutecendo o homem, criando armaduras em seu entorno, como se 

ficasse razoavelmente inatingível de sentimentos de afeição. 

“(...) o ambiente de plataforma é embrutecedor, porque você passa 

muito tempo confinado num ambiente desse, você se embrutece. Você 

passa a ter uma visão fragmentada, e você fica muito carente, carente de 

afetividade”.  

“Dejours falou disso (...) nesse embrutecimento, é uma defesa (...) te 

protege. A tua ansiedade diminui, tua angústia diminui, você ta sofrendo 

menos com isso tudo. (...) é uma defesa mesmo, uma defesa coletiva ou 

até individual, mas se o perigo existe e você vai ter que conviver com 

ele, se você viver o tempo todo com medo, décadas a fio, você ta tendo 

uma vida miserável. Então, você tem que criar algum mecanismo pra 

sair do sofrimento. Acho que isso é constitutivo. Eu acho que existe em 

qualquer função que tenha permanência no tempo. Offshore já tem mais 

de 20 anos”.  

 É uma forma de embrutecimento sutil, não perceptível, às vezes nem para o 

próprio trabalhador. É algo que vai sendo internalizado, assumindo a sua identidade e 

visão diante do mundo. O processo de embrutecimento sinaliza para um novo homem, 

um trabalhador com poucas emoções, que racionaliza as ações e reprime os desejos.  

 O depoimento abaixo ilustra o quanto o trabalhador se sente perplexo com a sua 

atitude diante de um acidente com os seus colegas. Se sente meio robotizado, meio 



 191 

máquina, pois o seu único pensamento era as conseqüências mais gerais daquela 

ocorrência e não necessariamente o estado de saúde dos acidentados. 

“Teve uma situação que marcou pra mim (...) foi o único acidente que 

eu presenciei. Tava na operação na hora e foi no dia que eu vi dois 

colegas queimados. Depois eu fiquei até raciocinando aquilo melhor. 

Dois colegas meus se queimaram no painel, e eu vendo os dois 

queimados, todo queimado, não cheguei nem a reconhecer, tinha falado 

com o cara 30 segundos antes, (...) quando eu voltei já vi os cara, todo 

queimado que eu nem reconheci. E a primeira coisa que eu fiz antes de 

socorrer foi fechar todos os poços, parar tudo, porque era um fumaceiro 

grande, e a primeira coisa que veio na minha mente antes de socorrer os 

caras foi ... Só tinha eu lá no turno, porque era hora do almoço, só tava 

eu lá embaixo, aí eu pensei na mesma hora se pegar fogo em tudo? Não 

sabia de onde tava vindo o fogo, e deixei os dois lá e  fechei todos os 

poços no painel, fechei tudo. Quando eu voltei já tinham subido não sei 

quantos degraus na escada e foram subindo e outras pessoas chegaram 

e levaram eles. Depois eu fiquei pensando: com que frieza que eu agi 

naquela hora, pois eu teria que ter socorrido os caras, mas na hora não 

veio outra coisa a não ser parar tudo, porque poderia morrer mais 

gente. E foi a única coisa que veio a minha mente e eu passei direto, 

nem parei pra olhar os caras”.  

 Assim, a alienação se manifesta por meio da negação. O embrutecimento assume 

uma nova denominação nos relatos a seguir, mas permanecem com a mesma finalidade 

de criar alternativas para a não percepção do perigo, desconsiderando-o até de uma 

forma ingênua ou em decorrência de um processo de acomodação e de sobrevivência 

para suportar o próprio sofrimento. O medo passa a ser algo completamente oculto e 

negado. 

“A gente pela vivência do nosso trabalho, já ta tão acostumado a 

conviver com o risco, que a gente começa a perder o medo das coisas, 

começa a agir mais friamente com as coisas. Vai se acostumando com 

aquilo”. 



 192 

“(...) a frieza é uma característica que você vai adquirir com o tempo, 

você vai perdendo um pouco o contato com a vida normal de terra, com 

família, vai se tornando, às vezes uma pessoa mais fria. (...), vai se 

isolando”. 

 Foi mencionado também que a vivência do trabalho offshore possibilita o 

exercício da convivência tão intensa com os riscos, e conseqüentemente com os medos, 

que cria práticas defensivas que são internalizadas na vida do trabalhador, mesmo anos 

após, ao deixarem esse regime de trabalho.  

“Acho que a minha maior aprendizagem embarcado, foi aprender a 

lidar com o medo”.  

Por outro lado, existem trabalhadores que consideram que ainda não passaram 

por esse processo, pois afirmam que quando ocorrem acidentes de trabalho, até mesmo 

em outras Unidades, ficam bastante mobilizados durante todo o período de embarque. 

Normalmente, associam a operação ou procedimento relacionado com o acidente ao que 

realizam cotidianamente.  

“(...) quando eu sei que aconteceu um acidente em outra plataforma, 

acabou pra mim a quinzena. Eu faço maior trabalho comigo mesmo pra 

continuar o mesmo, é uma desgraça, é terrível. (...) há pouco tempo, 

morreu um eletricista (...). Teve gente que fica pensando que o serviço 

que você faz todo dia acontece, acontece em outra plataforma”. 

 Os acidentes de trabalho são citados pelos trabalhadores offshore como a melhor 

representação do cotidiano de trabalho, pois se constituem na forma mais marcante de 

reproduzir a intensidade com a qual estão expostos a todos os riscos já mencionados, até 

mesmo da própria morte. Portanto, a memória dos acidentes é preservada, é sempre 

atual e presente, pois é vivenciada fortemente durante o período de trabalho e de vida 

embarcado.  

 Dejours (1988:68) menciona que as representações no discurso operário sobre a 

fábrica onde trabalhavam enfatizavam aspectos relativos à ignorância sobre o resultado 

das reações químicas produzidas durante os processos, o sentimento “penoso” de que os 

trabalhadores podem perder o controle sobre a fábrica e a certeza de que a fábrica 

esconde uma “violência própria, explosiva e mortal”.  



 193 

 Uma outra manifestação do medo que cerca esse segmento profissional se 

explicita através do relato de sonhos, que ocorrem tanto durante o embarque quanto no 

período de desembarque, e que estão associados aos riscos da atividade.  

 “(...) Todas as pessoas que trabalham no mar, elas sempre sonham que 

um dia vai vir uma onda gigantesca e vai engolir a plataforma. Lembra 

da tsunami? (...). Então, isso vai bater com a questão dos riscos, com o 

grau de exposição ao risco (...)”. 

“(...) Eu tava de férias, aí faltando assim, poucos dias pra voltar a 

trabalhar eu sonhei que tava trabalhando na perna da plataforma. Aí eu 

fico assim sonhando, vendo aquela área, aquele monte de ferro, aí 

quando eu acordo é um alívio (...)”. 

  Como já vimos, a qualidade do sono desses trabalhadores é, significativamente, 

afetada em função das características do regime e da organização do trabalho offshore. 

Mesmo assim adotam uma conduta de um mergulho profundo nas atividades cotidianas 

durante o período de embarque, num processo de alta concentração na própria tarefa e 

auto-aceleração do desempenho. A alienação é explicitada quando afirmam “que vai 

trabalhando tão envolvido que nem percebe mais o perigo”, num processo de 

embrutecimento, o que equivale sintetizar que o trabalho offshore, enquanto um território 

que encarcera e limita o trabalhador, o interdita psiquicamente, favorecendo o aumento 

da exploração e da produtividade.  

  Cabe ressaltar que apesar do trabalho offshore invadir e interferir negativamente 

na atividade onírica dos trabalhadores, os relatos não nos permite um aprofundamento do 

tema, aliado ainda a não ser esse o objetivo dessa pesquisa, mas vale dizer que essa 

temática poderia ser resgatada em outras investigações.  

 

 

 

 



 194 

5.3. Cooperação, companheirismo e reconhecimento 

 
 

Toda experiência relatada até aqui nos mostra uma diversidade de pressões aos 

quais se submetem esses trabalhadores enquanto sujeitos de uma história particular. A 

vivência offshore impõe que trabalho e descanso se misturem. Em vista disso, a 

convivência entre os trabalhadores propicia a construção de vínculos de 

companheirismo e de amizade que, muitas vezes, extrapolam o âmbito do trabalho.  

 Cabe destacar que em praticamente todas as entrevistas, o relacionamento entre 

os trabalhadores, mais especificamente, as relações de companheirismo foram 

destacadas como o principal mecanismo para garantir a permanência no regime 

offshore.  

“A questão não é o espaço que você tem que considerar, o espaço da 

floresta, da câmara de mergulho ou da plataforma. São as convivências 

que se dão ali, em cada um desses espaços e que recebe uma inflexão 

diferente. Existe um modo particular que estabelece o vivido, o vivido é 

diferente. O que diferencia são as relações que são construídas ali”. 

Que convivências são estas? Os laços de companheirismo existentes no mundo 

offshore se baseiam nas experiências vividas ao longo dos anos que vão amadurecendo 

e reforçando os laços de confiança e, que também contribuem para assegurar a coesão e 

a construção desse coletivo. Sennett (2003:24) considera que geralmente as experiências 

mais profundas de confiança são as informais.  

“(...) como quando as pessoas aprendem em quem confiar ou com quem 

podem contar ao receberem uma tarefa difícil ou impossível. Esses laços 

sociais levam tempo para surgir, enraizando-se devagar nas fendas e 

brechas das instituições”. (SENNETT, 2003:24) 

 O fortalecimento dos laços de companheirismo depende da associação de longo 

prazo e da disponibilidade de estabelecimento de compromissos com outras pessoas. 

Esses são dois componentes fundamentais na construção das relações entre os homens 

(SENNETT, 2003) e, ao mesmo tempo, em que são ingredientes existentes na realidade 

offshore. 



 195 

“(...) O espírito de equipe em plataforma também é muito bom. (...) O 

que existe de positivo hoje é o coleguismo embarcado (...)”.  

 Confiança, lealdade e compromisso mútuo são valores que não são mais 

destacados como importantes nas instituições modernas que se baseiam em estrutura de 

rede flexível e conseqüentemente em laços tipicamente curtos. Por outro lado, no 

mundo offshore, em que as relações se dão na não dissociação entre espaço público e 

privado, como vimos no capítulo II, o relacionamento entre os homens, após muitos 

anos de embarque com o mesmo grupo de trabalhadores, é que gera a construção desses 

valores, enfatizados como de extrema importância naquela realidade de trabalho. Dessa 

forma, os trabalhadores têm a expectativa de que o espaço offshore se configure como 

uma segunda casa e as relações entre os colegas como uma segunda família.  

“(...) o que o cara quer lá? Você está a 14 dias, é praticamente uma 

segunda casa, todo mundo acha isso. (...) Chega lá você encontra todo 

mundo que você não vê durante a folga, passa a ser uma família. São 14 

dias, você tem que encarar como uma família. (...) Embarcar achando 

que vai ser profissional durante 14 dias é pedir muito. Você tem que ser 

amigo do cara, o cara tem que ser seu amigo. Porque se ficar 14 dias lá 

sendo só profissional, vai ter um troço, que não dá. Não adianta, tem que 

entrar na parte pessoal, senão fica maluco (...)”. 

Mais uma vez a figura estereotipada do maluco é associada ao trabalhador 

offshore, agora como uma exigência de que os valores citados anteriormente 

ultrapassem a formação de vínculos exclusivamente profissionais como uma estratégia 

de combater o sofrimento pela condição de confinamento e de riscos. Sennett 

(2003:138) considera que esses valores, por exigirem mais tempo de convivência, 

quando partilhados de forma mais profunda tornam-se mais difíceis de serem 

manipulados pela própria organização.  

O confinamento offshore e todas as questões que o envolvem, como foi 

abordado anteriormente, apesar de remeter a representações de solidão e angústia 

apontadas pelos trabalhadores, contraditoriamente, também é destacado positivamente, 

uma vez que obriga, circunstancialmente, que os homens aprendam a conviverem em 

grupo.  



 196 

“(...) o confinamento é pesado mesmo, mas em compensação isso te ajuda 

a ser mais tolerante, porque você seria menos tolerante se não tivesse 

vivenciado essa situação toda. É uma escola aquilo lá. O grande centro 

do trabalho offshore é que nos obrigamos a aprendermos, realmente (...) 

as diferenças e conviver, trabalhar as diferenças (...)”. 

O aprendizado apontado pelos trabalhadores se refere ao respeito às diferenças 

entre os homens, às suas visões de mundo, aos valores diversificados e as formas de agir 

também diversas.  

“É um big brother, coloca ele de Juiz de Fora, ele de Natal, o outro de 

Vitória, o outro não sei da onde, e cada um com suas culturas e com suas 

raízes e, você joga ali um pra conviver (...) de repente com outros”.  

O partilhamento e enfrentamento diário do convívio offshore levam à criação de 

fortes elos de identidade com colegas da plataforma e que, por vezes, ultrapassam à 

fronteira do mundo marítimo, uma vez que penetram na intimidade da vida onshore e 

privada, no período de folgas. Sennett (2003:171) considera que “fortes laços entre as 

pessoas significam enfrentar com o tempo suas diferenças”.  

“(...) experiências no mar, existe uma coisa em comum, que é o 

isolamento social, sócio-familiar e isso exige, leva a um coleguismo, um 

espírito de equipe, há um aumento no relacionamento afetivo, o fato de 

você estar confinado, independente que seja a plataforma, que seja uma 

floresta, que seja uma câmara de mergulho, você está confinado. Isso te 

leva a uma necessidade de ter uma aproximação afetiva, emocional com 

quem está nas mesmas condições que você. Acho que é o que une”. 

Assim, o trabalho offshore, enquanto um espaço de confinamento, gera relações 

de confiança como facilitadoras para resolução dos conflitos internos quanto às 

arbitragens, escolhas e decisões. Estas passam, então, a ser administradas coletivamente.  

 As divergências que ocorrem no espaço offshore assumem dimensões 

específicas, com um maior grau de intensidade, pois qualquer conflito na esfera do 

trabalho invade também as horas de descanso. Isso traz um desgaste para as relações 

entre os trabalhadores e gera uma necessidade de se criar mecanismos coletivos que 

minimizem os conflitos e não tornem a convivência na plataforma algo insuportável.  



 197 

“(...) o mecanismo que a gente vem trabalhando o tempo todo, é não 

deixar as arestas se acumularem. Deu um probleminha, um achou que 

não foi legal naquele momento ali, chega e pára logo (...). Se deixar 

acumula, vai chegar a hora que vai explodir. Fez uma coisa que a gente 

não gostou, um ou outro, dentro da civilidade(...), foi um dispositivo 

criado para você não deixar... Você sabe se vier pela acumulatividade, 

uma hora vai surtar (...)”.  

Assim, as dificuldades de relacionamento e o espírito de não cooperação podem 

se constituir em elementos relevantes para a não permanência nessa condição de 

trabalho.  

 “O que seria primordial pra se manter a bordo (...) é você criar 

condições (...) conviver bem com seus colegas, você se mantém, se existe 

clima (...) você ta conseguindo de alguma maneira se auto-motivar (...). 

Na medida em que você começa a ter dificuldades de relacionamento, 

isso começa a funcionar como uma espécie de obstáculo pra que você 

permaneça a bordo”.  

O isolamento social, a discriminação pelos colegas de trabalho na condição de 

confinamento offshore são determinantes para que o trabalhador se obrigue a se 

transferir de plataforma, pelos mecanismos coletivos de expulsão criados pelo grupo. É 

citado como exemplo desse processo, no depoimento a seguir, a não adesão a 

movimentos de paralisação (greve), conduzidos pelas entidades sindicais em períodos 

de negociação dos acordos coletivos de trabalho. 

“(...) uma vantagem do trabalho offshore é que você se obriga, na 

acepção da palavra mesmo, a conviver em grupo. Nada pior na 

plataforma do que você viver isolado. O cara isolado morre. Nas greves, 

os pelegos que a gente isolava, o cara ficava desesperado (...)”. 

 As relações de confiança, de solidariedade e de compromisso se destacaram em 

todas as entrevistas, como valores fundamentais para se permanecer nessa condição de 

trabalho. Enfatizam que as amizades construídas na plataforma são um ponto forte do 

regime offshore, pois além de terem criado um espírito de equipe que fortalece a coesão, 



 198 

as pessoas que ali estão “se gostam e se respeitam e estão prontas pra que na hora que 

o negócio pegar um ajudar o outro”.  

 Dessa forma, a confiança e a solidariedade são suportes para a estruturação de 

relações de transparência entre os trabalhadores, que só vêem reforçar os laços de 

amizade, de lealdade e manter a união do grupo, ratificando o sentido de pertencimento 

àquela comunidade.  

 Relações de confiança no ambiente offshore são imprescindíveis para se 

estabelecer vínculos de cooperação e um processo de comunicação entre os 

trabalhadores facilitando o fluxo do conhecimento e da experiência adquirida no 

processo produtivo. Vale destacar que, enquanto as relações de cooperação podem se 

caracterizar como meramente formais, os relacionamentos de companheirismo e de 

amizade envolvem relações de afetividade.  

 A confiança, como já mencionamos anteriormente, está fundamentada em fortes 

alicerces e tal como Lancman e Sznelwar (2004:68) afirmam que não se pode zombar 

da confiança, pois assim sendo terá que se enfrentar a desconfiança e a suspeita, que em 

nada contribuem para a formação de relações de confiança no trabalho.  

“Elucidar os princípios da confiança nas relações de trabalho permite 

que se entenda a substância, a construção e a forma de estabilização 

das ‘regras de trabalho’ ou das ‘regras de ofício119’”.  (DEJOURS, 

2004:68) 

Lancman (2004:67) considera que a cooperação é um elemento com um “grau 

suplementar na complexidade e na integração da organização do trabalho”. Entende que 

a articulação existente nas atividades singulares não é atribuída somente à coordenação 

lógica e cognitiva, mas “a vontade das pessoas de trabalharem juntas e de se 

superarem coletivamente as contradições que surgem da própria natureza ou da 

essência da organização do trabalho”. 

A cooperação não é determinada pelo trabalho prescrito, uma vez que o 

“conteúdo da cooperação concreta, em uma situação de trabalho dada, escapa a uma 

descrição prévia” (LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:67). É necessário que se forme a 

                                                
119 Discutiremos as regras de ofício no próximo item. 



 199 

partir de uma vontade coletiva, de um movimento de liberdade de cada trabalhador. 

Assim, não pode ser definida aprioristicamente. No universo offshore, a cooperação 

assume contornos específicos, pois paralelamente ao ser utilizada como um mecanismo 

defensivo coletivo para minimizar o sofrimento e elevar o prazer no trabalho, 

paralelamente aumenta a eficiência e a produtividade organizacional.  

“Se ela é um fator de liberdade, não pode ser prescrita, sob pena de 

levar a injunções paradoxais. Sem cooperação, a situação seria 

equivalente ao que se observa em uma operação padrão: em outros 

termos, corresponde a um ato de bloqueio da produção”. (LANCMAN 

e SZNELWAR, 2004:67) 

A cooperação só se torna efetiva se os trabalhadores demonstrarem interesse em 

cooperar. Passa pela mobilização e contribuição “específica e insubstituível” dos 

trabalhadores, de forma espontânea e não de modo prescritivo. Nesse sentido, a 

característica central da liderança demarcará a qualidade das relações sociais de trabalho 

no mundo offshore. As características adotadas no gerenciamento cotidiano vão 

demarcar traços de uma gestão mais autoritária ou mais democrática, o que 

conseqüentemente repercute nos processos de trabalho.  

 Não somente o medo proveniente dos riscos inerentes ao trabalho afeta 

negativamente o trabalhador, mas também a ansiedade gerada pelas relações de 

trabalho. Muitas vezes, o gerente ou o supervisor utiliza estratégias de repreensões e 

favoritismos a fim de dividir o grupo, temendo que a união grupal se constitua em uma 

ameaça a sua autoridade. Em outras situações estimula a geração de conflitos 

interpessoais que deslocam as questões de âmbito exclusivo do trabalho para o nível 

pessoal, fragilizando as reivindicações da equipe. Um outro aspecto se refere ao uso da 

desigualdade na divisão do trabalho, que pode se caracterizar como “uma arma” a 

serviço do da “própria agressividade, hostilidade ou perversidade” do chefe, incluída 

como parte integrante das táticas de comando no papel da hierarquia. (DEJOURS, 

1988:75) 

 A ansiedade gerada pelas relações de trabalho é um ponto significativo para 

análise da realidade offshore, uma vez que este sofrimento se superpõe ao já existente 

em virtude das condições de risco do trabalho. É uma ansiedade superposta, tendo em 



 200 

vista que a supervisão tem por incumbência manter esta ansiedade com relação ao 

rendimento de cada trabalhador. (DEJOURS, 1988:75) 

Uma outra estratégia adotada pelo grupo offshore se refere ao processo de 

inclusão dos novos trabalhadores nessa realidade de trabalho. Como já apresentamos 

anteriormente, o confinamento condicionará um relacionamento de convivência 

minimamente amistosa, onde gradativamente o “borracho” passará por um processo de 

inclusão, que não se dá de forma imediata, logo nos primeiros embarques, mas 

geralmente ao longo de cinco anos.  É um processo de migração gradativo, onde 

inicialmente ocorre um primeiro choque cultural, entre o ambiente familiar, em terra, 

para a realidade da plataforma. Paulatinamente, diante das adversidades desse regime 

de trabalho, o trabalhador vai criando mecanismos para lidar com o cotidiano das 

diferentes situações estressantes. O depoimento a seguir destaca a exigência imposta ao 

trabalhador de possuir maleabilidade para conviver com a imensa diversidade de 

valores individuais e ao mesmo tempo, ir construindo a sua identidade offshore. 

 “(...) Ele não ta preparado pra viver num ambiente onde haja uma 

pluralidade de valores, o seu valor é diferente do meu, do meu colega, 

da empresa. Ele tem que ver isso como um grande mosaico (...). É mexer 

nos valores, o cara tem que perder a virgindade emocional. Eu nasci 

assim, eu cresci assim, vou ser sempre assim. Isso é um processo grupal. 

(...) quando você começa numa equipe, você sente a necessidade de ser 

incluído, uma vez você sentiu aceito na equipe, você quer ter controle, 

quer participar do núcleo do poder das decisões, (...) aí você já passa a 

conviver respeitando mais o outro, conhecendo que o outro é diferente 

de você, então é amadurecimento grupal.”. 

 Cabe destacar que o processo de admissão nas instituições totais é marcado por 

ritos iniciais que permitem o enquadramento do homem neste novo local e a ruptura 

com a sua história pessoal. Não se trata aqui de fazer analogia direta com esse processo 

e, sim de caracterizar que a entrada no universo offshore também tem as suas 

particularidades. Trata-se de ações que submetem o trabalhador recém-chegado a testes 

que mostrem possibilidades ou não de suportar conviver naquela situação. 



 201 

 “(...) antigamente, a gente dava banho de petróleo no cara que chegava 

na primeira vez embarcado, era o batismo, mesmo sabendo que poluía 

um pouquinho o ambiente. (...) era uma coisa simbólica (...), chegou 

num local que produz petróleo, nada mais justo que molhar aquela 

pessoa, (...) era uma forma de carinho que você recebia aquelas pessoas 

e, a partir daí, você integrava no grupo. (...) era aquela cumplicidade do 

mal. (...) a pessoa ficava admirando o mar, encostada no guarda corpo 

(...).  E quando alguém passava o rádio, falava assim: ‘Ó, fulano ta na 

posição!’. Aí, a gente imediatamente acionava um grupo e quando ia 

ver, aquela pessoa tomava um banho, que nem sabia da onde e nem 

quem dava o banho. Então, era uma coisa sadia, uma coisa super 

legal”. 

Esse “batismo”, além de objetivar a socialização do novo trabalhador a realidade 

offshore, também se apresenta como um momento inicial de avaliação do seu nível de 

tolerância e de estabelecimento de um primeiro elo de confiança a ser estabelecido com 

essa coletividade, componentes estes fundamentais para a coesão interna. 

 Esse processo de cumplicidade vai se configurando, seja de defesa contra os 

riscos e o medo, de proteção das regras de trabalho fundamentais para a auto-

preservação e sobrevivência, de compartilhamento de sonhos, de desejos e da singular 

experiência de vida e de trabalho. Quando que seria concluída essa etapa de inclusão? 

Um trabalhador experiente relata que o “borracho” galga um outro patamar na estrutura 

informal quando 

 “(...) você ta chegando e você é um estranho naquele grupo, existe 

alguma coisa que vai acontecer pra num determinado momento você se 

sinta assim (...) já estou me sentindo mais ou menos que já faço parte 

daquele grupo. O que seria isso na plataforma? Acho que é a 

democratização do poder, das decisões. Quando eu sô envolvido nas 

decisões do grupo, eu só incluído. A partir do momento em que as 

decisões só me são comunicadas, eu só opero essas coisas, eu to fora do 

processo. (...) eu fico na geladeira. E ninguém quer e gosta de 

geladeira”.  



 202 

 A inclusão pelo espaço de participação nas discussões e decisões sobre o 

trabalho é apontada por Lancman e Sznelwar (2004), de forma esquemática, como as 

condições nas quais os homens engajam-se na dinâmica de construção e evolução da 

organização do trabalho denominada de mobilização subjetiva.  

“Esforços de inteligência; esforços de elaboração para a construção de 

opiniões (a partir da experiência pessoal do trabalho, das interpretações 

que implicam a referência às prescrições da organização do trabalho, 

dos valores aos quais cada indivíduo está ligado, das obrigações morais 

em relação aos outros, das preferências e dos gostos próprios a cada 

personalidade) sobre a melhor maneira de arbitrar as contradições e de 

acertar as dificuldades da organização do trabalho; e esforços para se 

inteirar do debate de opiniões necessárias à deliberação que deve 

preceder ou acompanhar as escolhas ou as decisões em matéria de 

organização do trabalho”. (LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:69) 

 O exercício dessa discussão, tanto como aponta Lancman (2004) quanto como 

ocorre nas plataformas, se dá nos horários considerados de descanso, ou seja, no 

refeitório, nos espaços de lazer, na conversa informal.  

 Essa mobilização subjetiva, por ser espontânea, depende da “dinâmica entre 

contribuição e retribuição”. No entanto, a expectativa que o trabalhador offshore tem 

desse retorno é apenas de um reconhecimento simbólico que reforce as suas iniciativas e 

que seja um exemplo para os demais trabalhadores. “Que não seja considerado apenas 

um ‘simples executante’ condenado à obediência e à passividade”.  (LANCMAN e 

SZNELWAR, 2004:71) 

“A Petrobras reconhece de uma forma mais global, mas como 

funcionário, como equipe (...) são poucos gerentes que começaram a 

reconhecer, valorizar, elogiar. As pessoas se dedicam muito ao 

trabalho, pra produzir óleo e tem pouco retorno, quase nenhum. Um se 

sacrifica muito pra fazer alguma coisa e tem outro grupo que ta se 

lixando com economia, dedicação com a produção. Isso acaba 

revoltando, principalmente, o pessoal da produção, que ta na linha de 

frente”.  



 203 

“O cara quer reconhecimento (...). Hoje, há um tempinho atrás, 1 ou 2 

anos a Petrobras começou a fazer umas plaquinhas de elogio, aquilo 

não é nada, mas a gratificação que o empregado tem (...). Todo mundo 

fez um trabalho legal, mas não chegou reconhecimento.  Esse estímulo, 

não é tanto financeiro, mas, a gratificação que você contribuiu foi 

elogiada. Viram você fazendo, te reconheceram e isso te dá estímulo. 

(...) Ele já viu tanto aquilo ali acontecer que já não esquenta mais. Ele 

vai se fechando, vai se tornando bruto, vai endurecendo em função de 

tantas coisas que ele fez, ninguém deu ouvido, ninguém deu um tapinha 

nas costas dele”.  

 Os relatos ilustram a escassez ou a falta de reconhecimento simbólico pela 

organização pelo trabalho realizado. Inclusive o embrutecimento enquanto estratégia 

defensiva, já discutida anteriormente, é ratificado como um mecanismo utilizado por 

esses trabalhadores para enfrentarem a condição de desprestígio e não reconhecimento 

organizacional na qual são colocados.  O reconhecimento, no sentido de gratidão, pela 

contribuição dos trabalhadores à organização do trabalho é apontado por Lancman e 

Sznelwar (2004) como uma das dimensões da retribuição de natureza simbólica. A outra 

dimensão é no sentido de constatação, ou seja, do “reconhecimento da imperfeição da 

ciência e da técnica, das falhas organizacionais do trabalho prescrito e do recurso 

indispensável à contribuição dos trabalhadores para fazer funcionar o processo de 

trabalho” (LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:71). O reconhecimento simbólico é 

aguardado por esses homens e se constitui em um componente fundamental para a 

obtenção da cooperação.  

 O reconhecimento (LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004) pode se distinguir de 

duas formas: pelo “julgamento de utilidade”, pronunciado pelos superiores hierárquicos, 

no caso da plataforma, pelos gerentes de plataforma ou de staff em terra; e pelo 

“julgamento de estética”, dito pelos colegas. A maioria, no entanto, não tem 

expectativas em relação aos supervisores, pois estes são considerados como 

componentes do próprio grupo. Os supervisores sentem-se como se estivessem 

desempenhando uma função denominada popularmente de efeito “sanduíche”, 

pressionados pelos conflitos intrínsecos entre capital e trabalho. De um lado, premidos 

pelos interesses do coletivo e, de outro, ditados pelos interesses do capital, que ao 



 204 

definirem diretrizes e metas a serem cumpridas, limitam significativamente o seu poder 

de interferência e decisão nos processos. 

 Lancman e Sznelwar (2004:74) consideram que o reconhecimento simbólico é 

oriundo da produção do sentido que ele confere à vivência do trabalho. A construção do 

sentido pelo atendimento às expectativas do trabalhador em relação à sua realização 

pessoal pode transformar o sofrimento em prazer. Nessa relação entre prazer e 

sofrimento, Athayde (1996:88) assinala que no contexto social do trabalho, que “o 

reconhecimento do ser é reconduzido permanentemente pelo reconhecimento do fazer” 

e que a ausência deste processo, altera a dinâmica psíquica, fazendo com que o prazer 

desapareça e o sofrimento patógeno assuma esse lugar. O depoimento que se segue 

mostra o atendimento às expectativas desse trabalhador, por ter alcançado uma função 

gerencial, que em muito minimiza o impacto da realidade offshore em sua vida, uma vez 

que o trabalho lhe traz muita satisfação. 

“A Petrobras, a cada dia que passa, está conseguindo se firmar, firmar 

a sua marca, internacionalmente e isso é uma coisa, que de uma certa 

forma, nos orgulha porque se isso tudo ta ocorrendo é porque, de 

alguma forma, o seu esforço, o meu esforço pessoal, na qualidade de 

empregado ta contribuindo pra isso. Quando a gente percebe, consegue 

compreender que a gente faz parte de todo esse sucesso, evidentemente, 

é uma situação que a gente cria a expectativa de ta existindo daqui pra 

frente, uma postura mais cordial da empresa no sentindo de ta 

reconhecendo as suas competências. Eu acho que isso é uma coisa que é 

importante demais e eu hoje, talvez seja uma prova viva disso”.  

Cada vez que o trabalhador consegue superar um desafio proposto pela 

organização do trabalho e recebe o reconhecimento social, gratifica-se e transforma o 

sofrimento em prazer. Entretanto, esse prazer é efêmero e logo o sujeito sai à procura de 

novos desafios e possíveis gratificações. É nesse processo contínuo de sofrimento e 

gratificação que consolida a sua identidade. 

 

 

 



 205 

5.4. Saber Offshore  

 

Os trabalhadores na execução do processo produtivo, a fim de dominar as 

possíveis intercorrências e de se proteger dos riscos e lutar contra o medo, criam 

procedimentos e elaboram um conhecimento a partir das tarefas cotidianas. Trata-se de 

saberes que extrapolam as regulamentações ditadas pelos documentos e procedimentos 

oficiais que lhes dão acesso a atuarem preventivamente, no decorrer dos processos, ou 

intervirem nas situações de emergências.  

“E quanto mais medo, mais imaginação; não pelo medo em si, mas as 

defesas contra o medo acabam por levar ao engendramento de técnicas 

e saberes práticos”. (ATHAYDE, 1996:84) 

 Estas maneiras de proceder coletivamente no cotidiano ao mesmo tempo em que 

explicitam a separação existente entre concepção e execução do trabalho e que se 

configuram como fontes de infortúnios e sofrimento, também podem se caracterizar 

como possibilidades de prazer.  

Na relação entre trabalho prescrito e trabalho real, os trabalhadores descrevem 

uma realidade profissional que foge ao âmbito prescrito, que vai lhes exigir criatividade 

e iniciativa, pois o processo contínuo operacional não pode parar. Teoricamente, o 

conjunto de procedimentos prescritos seria suficiente para realização do trabalho, 

bastando que os mesmos fossem seguidos rigorosamente ao pé da letra, solicitando dos 

trabalhadores, apenas, a execução.    

Devido à impossibilidade de existência de um domínio técnico perfeito do 

processo, os trabalhadores são levados a elaborar “modos operatórios originais” que vão 

constituir a organização real do trabalho. Dessa forma, “o que está em jogo para a 

segurança e a eficiência do processo é sobretudo a capacidade de mobilização das 

iniciativas individuais ante o inesperado, o que implica a efetividade da dimensão 

coletiva e a cooperação entre os operadores” (DUARTE; FREITAS, 2000:91). Assim, 

em razão do que é produzido coletivamente, seja pelas variações nos processos e as 

intervenções necessárias, é que projetos criados a partir de uma mesma concepção 

técnica, após alguns anos apresentam divergências significativas entre as mesmas.  



 206 

“(...) mesmo as plataformas que entraram em operação na mesma época, 

cada uma tem um jeito de operar, seja pelos problemas operacionais que 

já teve, pelo tipo de manutenção dos equipamentos, pelas preventivas 

(...) nenhuma Unidade é igual. Quando o cara sai de uma plataforma e 

vai pra outra, tem sempre que aprender alguma coisa (...)”. 

Nos sistemas complexos de riscos, como é o caso das plataformas, mesmo com 

um volume muito grande de procedimentos, o sistema técnico sempre evolutivo vai 

exigir, além de mudanças de componentes e diferentes regulações, também que os 

modos operatórios sofram modificações, até por conta da incorporação da própria 

experiência dos trabalhadores. 

O saber operário se reverte em favor da própria organização do trabalho, 

contribuindo para a elaboração de regras de ofício que constituem verdadeiros 

princípios reguladores, elaborados pelos próprios trabalhadores, para fazer frente às 

dificuldades ordinárias e extraordinárias na execução do trabalho. Essas regras, oriundas 

da vivência de trabalhar juntos, se estabilizam nas relações de confiança e por vezes são 

apropriadas pela própria organização. O depoimento a seguir foi obtido em uma reunião 

com operadores na qual estes estavam, formalmente, discutindo e elaborando padrões 

operacionais por solicitação da gerência da área.   

“(...) nós hoje estamos aqui pra acertar essa defasagem. Estamos aqui 

fazendo padrões. Esses padrões saíram de nossas contribuições, das 

contribuições de cada um de nós (...)”. 

 Segundo Llory (2001), os operadores, ao descreverem sobre o trabalho prescrito 

e o trabalho real, o fazem falando de uma realidade de trabalho que escapa em parte ao 

âmbito prescrito, ou que é insuficientemente específico e detalhado.  

“Existe um conjunto de prescrições, de procedimentos, de diretrizes, de 

regulamentos, a maior parte escritos, que descrevem o trabalho a fazer, 

definem o conjunto das tarefas que devem ser executadas. Na teoria seria 

suficiente aplicar esse conjunto de procedimentos e documentos escritos 

para realizar o trabalho. Os operadores seriam, nesse caso, reduzidos ao 

papel de executantes, sem intervenção particular de sua parte (...). 



 207 

Teriam apenas de obedecer aos procedimentos, empregando-os de 

maneira estrita, rigorosa”. (LLORY, 2001:237) 

 Diante da insuficiência dos procedimentos120, os operadores se posicionam como 

atores ativos e criativos no processo de trabalho, o que vai exigir-lhes espírito de 

iniciativa, de inventividade e capacidade de interpretação a fim de preencher as lacunas 

entre o trabalho prescrito e o trabalho real. 

 Os procedimentos comportam ‘brancos’, algumas etapas não são explicitadas 

suficientemente, que “às vezes contêm incertezas, até mesmo, erros, ‘bugs’, erros de 

impressão” (LLORY, 2001:237).  Portanto, os procedimentos são insatisfatórios, 

partem de uma realidade idealizada, estática e sem possibilidades de eventuais 

surpresas. É como se fosse possível prever todas as intercorrências, toda a 

multiplicidade de fenômenos que se desencadeiam, por vezes, a partir de um único 

incidente, pela complexidade da organização dos processos offshore.  

“Os procedimentos constituem um modelo ‘ideal’ de trabalho, um 

modelo depurado. Não é possível descrever de antemão, em detalhes, 

todas as eventualidades, a multiplicidade das ocorrências, a proliferação 

dos microdetalhes. Tal tentativa estaria fadada ao fracasso e, no mínimo, 

conduziria a uma massa considerável, até mesmo inextricável de 

documentos, envolvendo múltiplos direcionamentos, casos particulares, 

logo muito difícil de utilizar e de manipular”. (LLORY, 2001:238) 

 O distanciamento entre trabalho prescrito e trabalho real, na medida que envolve 

desconhecimento sobre o processo de trabalho, riscos, incidentes e sobre as questões de 

segurança geram, por conseguinte, medo e ansiedade. Assim, a exploração da própria 

ignorância dos trabalhadores estabelece uma relação diretamente proporcional entre 

quanto maior a ignorância maior o estado de medo. Muitas vezes o medo toma 

dimensões imensuráveis pela própria ignorância sobre a eficácia das medidas de 

segurança. 

                                                
120 Llory (2001:237) estabelece como definição para o termo procedimentos, “o conjunto dos textos, 
documentos, relatórios e notas de serviço, manuais, que recapitulam as prescrições, os regulamentos, as 
diretrizes, os modos operatórios, a descrição do trabalho prescrito”.  



 208 

“O nervosismo ou o medo, por exemplo, vai contra a segurança e é, 

portanto, necessário empregar defesas, ‘truques’ para reprimi-los”. 

(LLORY, 2001:242) 

Nesse sentido, as estratégias defensivas são acionadas de forma a minimizar o 

sofrimento e os seus efeitos sobre os trabalhadores. A ignorância e a desinformação 

estão sempre permeando o desenvolvimento das tarefas pelos trabalhadores. No entanto, 

existe uma diferenciação básica entre o desconhecimento teórico e o prático. O 

conhecimento prático transmitido pela empresa para os trabalhadores executores se 

restringe as instruções oficiais, bastante insatisfatórias que visam interferir nas etapas 

intermediárias do processo de produção. Enquanto que o saber teórico fica a cargo do 

grupo técnico (de nível superior) geralmente formado por engenheiros, permanecendo 

essas informações nos escritórios de projetos e na sede da empresa. (DEJOURS, 

1988:113) 

 Assim, não existe por parte dos trabalhadores que executam as tarefas diárias, 

um conhecimento coerente sobre o processo de produção e nem sobre o funcionamento 

das instalações: o saber não é contínuo. O conhecimento é adquirido ao longo da 

experiência e do tempo de permanência na atividade, onde a obtenção deste se refere a 

um conjunto de “dicas, macetes e regras informais” que são acumuladas e partilhadas 

coletivamente pelo grupo. 

 Se os procedimentos são insatisfatórios exigindo dos trabalhadores adaptações às 

condições reais do trabalho, somente a partir de sua experiência e dos conhecimentos 

práticos acumulados é que os trabalhadores contribuem de forma coletiva. 

“Os operadores desenvolvem um conjunto de heurísticas, atalhos de 

raciocínios, analogias, macetes, truques, golpes de vista, astúcias, 

particularmente eficazes e econômicas. Economia refere-se aqui à 

economia de tempo, até mesmo de energia, necessária para examinar 

uma situação de trabalho, discuti-la, tomar a decisão mais adequada e 

agir”. (LLORY, 2001:240) 

Llory (2001) considera que uma parte do savoir-faire é consciente, mas uma 

outra é mencionada pelos próprios trabalhadores como “impalpáveis: não tenho 

palavras para explicá-los” e que são obtidos “na arte do ofício, nas tradições, nos 



 209 

costumes e hábitos” (DEJOURS; CRU, 1983 apud LLORY, 2001:241). O depoimento 

que se segue explicita a importância da sutileza do aprendizado que não é tateável e 

evidente, mas especificamente fundamental para a prevenção e que pode fazer a 

diferença entre permanecer vivo ou não. Trata-se de um acidente fatal ocorrido com um 

trabalhador experiente, mas que já a alguns anos não mais executava determinadas 

atividades operacionais, por estar na função de supervisão e que resolveu “botar a mão 

na massa”.   

“(...) existe uma aprendizagem corporal e quando você sai da execução 

e fica só supervisionando, você perde essa percepção, não tem 

possibilidade de captar essa sensação”.  

 Para Lancman e Sznelwar (2004:281) uma característica da inteligência prática é 

ser fundamentalmente um aprendizado corpóreo. Afirmam que muitos ajustes na 

organização do trabalho e na prevenção de incidentes se referem à vigilância dos 

próprios sentidos a acontecimentos que interrompem com o que é “habitual, ou causam 

desconforto, ou desprazer”. Assim, uma vibração, barulho, odor ou sinal visual pode ao 

alertar o trabalhador, previamente despertar a atenção do corpo, desde que este, 

anteriormente, tenha vivido uma situação de trabalho dentro dos padrões de 

normalidade.   

“(...) São assim as mudanças – ou então a repetição, quando ela se 

torna intolerável – que alertam o corpo e solicitam o desdobramento da 

curiosidade na busca de uma explicação, ou mesmo de uma solução, 

para a superação do problema. (...) É a desestabilização do corpo em 

seu conjunto, sua situação a partir da reação a determinado estímulo 

que dá início e passa a acompanhar o jogo dessa inteligência prática”. 

(LANCMAN e SZNELWAR, 2004:282)  

 Por vezes, determinadas condutas adotadas mesmo que possam parecer 

absurdas, para os estrangeiros a realidade de trabalho, tem sempre um sentido e uma 

razão de ser para os trabalhadores que vivenciam esse cotidiano.  

 Assim, essas regras de trabalho criadas são multifuncionais, que além do 

objetivo principal de realização do trabalho, também visam a segurança e a prudência na 



 210 

realização do trabalho. São regras informais de trabalho que estruturam coletivamente 

as formas de proceder no dia-a-dia.  

“Trata-se de regras práticas, relativas ao trabalho concreto, 

centralizadas na realização do trabalho cotidiano e na prevenção, 

criando, administrando, especificando alguns ‘detalhes’, aspectos do 

trabalho que um procedimento provavelmente não poderia alcançar”. 

(LLORY, 2001:243) 

 Cabe ressaltar que as regras de prudência, além de sinalizar e reforçar e prevenir 

para despertar a atenção para determinados cuidados e perigos, também objetivam que 

os trabalhadores tenham condições psicológicas que garantam segurança, como por 

exemplo: “serenidade, confiança e vigilância”. (LLORY, 2001:242)  

 Figueiredo (2001) considera que os macetes desenvolvidos pelos mergulhadores, 

além de se constituírem em proteção dos riscos e luta contra o medo, são extremamente 

úteis ao processo e que também funcionam como saberes de prudência no campo da 

segurança.  

 Para Dejours (1988), o saber prático não tem o objetivo de diminuir a carga de 

trabalho e nem representa o know how de uma profissão e nem uma formação completa 

sobre o trabalho, mas é o resultado de anos de experiência, de observações cotidianas e 

de conhecimento sobre um processo de trabalho. 

 Assim, o desenvolvimento e aprimoramento das regras informais se fazem 

necessários, uma vez que a convivência com a situação de risco é real e, encontrar 

métodos que evitem ou minimizem tragédias, é parte do próprio conhecimento prático 

do coletivo de trabalho e, que não existem oficialmente em qualquer manual de 

instruções. 

“(...) no curso do trabalho, um conjunto de técnicas, táticas, estratégias 

referem-se à segurança e têm por objetivo assegurá-la em termos 

práticos, concretos. Elas levam em conta não apenas as coerções 

técnicas do trabalho, mas especificidades do meio ambiente e a 

personalidade dos membros da equipe, o conhecimento que o agente 

tem de seus companheiros”. (LLORY, 2001:241) 



 211 

Ao mesmo tempo, a pressão exercida pela convivência com o medo alcança 

níveis altíssimos de ansiedade favorece, por outro lado, o aumento da produtividade, ou 

seja, a exploração do medo objetivando a lucratividade pois, além de favorecer a criação 

das regras informais, exige dos trabalhadores um permanente estado de alerta. “Quanto 

melhor estiver o processo de produção, mais tranqüilos estarão” (LLORY, 2001). No 

entanto, o conhecimento pragmático é descontínuo, existindo uma série de espaços 

vazios que não se articulam no processo de produção. Para que haja validação do saber 

operário, das habilidades individuais e legitimação dos valores dos participantes é 

necessário que todos conheçam o trabalho de cada um. No entanto, um grupo de 

trabalhadores pode deter conhecimento pragmático eficiente e eficaz sobre a experiência 

acumulada na sua área de trabalho, não tendo a mesma segurança sobre outras áreas. 

Llory (2001:243) afirma que: 

“É igualmente possível comprovar um determinado número de regras 

informais (não formalizadas, não escritas) de trabalho que foram 

elaboradas nos coletivos de trabalho e que regem seu funcionamento, 

definem algumas maneiras de proceder coletivamente no cotidiano. 

Trata-se de regras práticas, relativas ao trabalho concreto, 

centralizadas na realização do trabalho cotidiano e na prevenção, 

criando, administrando, especificando alguns ‘detalhes’, aspectos do 

trabalho que um procedimento provavelmente não poderia alcançar”.  

 Quando falamos em multifuncionalidade, remetemos assim, ao paradoxo 

mencionado por Dejours (1988) sobre a questão da polivalência. Afirma que em 

pesquisas realizadas constatou que a polivalência aumenta a tensão nervosa, pois o 

trabalhador descobre com certeza que as suas grandes dúvidas também ocorrem com 

colegas de outras áreas. Ao ser dotado da função de polivalente poderia mostrar-lhe um 

horizonte de acesso maior aos “macetes” sobre o processo, conseguindo um maior 

domínio sobre o próprio instrumento de trabalho; no entanto, ao mesmo tempo em que 

conhece um grande número de “dicas”, acumula também zonas de ignorância que o 

confrontam a um número de riscos ainda maior do que conhecia (DEJOURS, 

1988:107).  



 212 

“Lá nos somos operadores da Cedae, da Cerj e da Ceg. E como se ele 

fosse multifuncional, polivalente. Ele é o cara que cuida do gás, da luz e 

da água, ao mesmo tempo”.  

 Pessanha (1994:189) afirma que para os operadores offshore, a polivalência é 

interessante, pois pode significar: 

“um aumento da sua qualificação, da sua criatividade, da sua 

versatilidade, da sua intervenção no processo de trabalho que 

represente maior segurança, da sua participação na definição e 

implantação do processo de modernização, da sua autonomia (...)”. 

 Por outro lado, não interessa a esses mesmos trabalhadores, por representar 

“uma ampliação das suas tarefas intensificando o trabalho e 

aumentando as responsabilidades (...). Os trabalhadores querem a 

‘poli’, mas rejeitam a necessidade do ‘valente’”. (PESSANHA, 1996) 

Nas plataformas, as equipes trabalham, geralmente, de forma coesa e dentro do 

grupo estabelece-se uma hierarquia informal em que os mais antigos são reconhecidos 

como mais experientes e detentores do saber operário. Essa valorização passa pelo 

reconhecimento pelos pares e pela hierarquia que confia em seu trabalho e reconhece 

sua competência. 

Os trabalhadores mais experientes consideram que existe um período mínimo de 

tempo de, aproximadamente, cinco anos de embarque, para que o “borracho” (novato) 

se transforme efetivamente em um profissional offshore. Vai ser exigido que possua 

condições técnicas para executar as atividades diárias dentro do que constam como 

atribuições do cargo, compatibilizando o conhecimento teórico com o saber prático.    

“Eu acho que um operador pra ele estar bem, em condições de operar, 

depois de uns cinco anos, se ele for esforçado (...). Cinco anos se ele 

pegar o processo, de uma plataforma partindo, em cinco anos ele já vai 

ter oportunidade de passar pelos vários sistemas que acontecem. Um 

operador, ele vai se formar, na verdade, de 8 a 10 anos (...)”.  

 Cabe destacar que esse período de cinco anos também é mencionado como o 

tempo necessário para que o novato tenha possibilidades de decidir se permanece nesse 



 213 

regime de trabalho ou decida sair dessa condição (cair fora), ou também é citado como 

um período de tempo necessário para se sentir incluído na equipe de trabalho e 

permanecer como trabalhador offshore por um prazo indeterminado. Nessa segunda 

alternativa, o trabalhador vai gradativamente passando por um processo de 

embrutecimento, como já foi discutido anteriormente, assumindo e internalizando 

paulatinamente a “forma do ambiente”.   

“(...) o novato ainda não se embruteceu, mas ele vai se embrutecer ... Ou 

ele vai tomar a decisão de cair fora antes de se embrutecer ou embrutece 

e vai ficar lá. O homem vai sendo amaciado gradativamente, quando ele 

perceber ... ele já introjetou aquilo. (...) vai tomar a forma do ambiente 

hostil”.  

Ferreira e Iguti (1996) ao pesquisarem os trabalhadores das refinarias de petróleo 

concluíram que são necessários também vários anos de experiência para se formar um 

bom profissional de operação, em média de quatro a cinco anos, não somente que saiba 

de forma efetiva operar cotidianamente, mas principalmente nas situações de 

emergência.   

O processo de aprendizado do novato implica, necessariamente, o repasse pelos 

colegas mais antigos das experiências acumuladas, dos “macetes” e das regras 

informais, de tudo que foi apropriado e reinterpretado por esses trabalhadores.  

“(...) sempre se busca em constante conversa a experiência. O grande 

foco pra mim é a experiência de cada um. Experiência, experiência ..., eu 

acho de dentro de qualquer meio a experiência da pessoa conta muito. 

Aquilo que a pessoa pode passar conta muito. Em termos de 

aprendizagem técnica, isso você aprende em qualquer livro, apostila, 

mas a experiência, a convivência que o cara teve, muitas das vezes não 

encontra em qualquer lugar. (...) O aprendizado vivido lá é 

extremamente importante. Acho que em qualquer lugar, o aprendizado 

vivido não existe MBA que vai te esclarecer, que vai te ajudar”. 

Até que cada novato perca o medo e possa ser “certificado” pelos mais 

experientes, para ser considerado um verdadeiro profissional offshore, permanecerá 

sendo considerado como “borracho”. Só a partir de então poderá atuar sozinho e com 



 214 

seus pares em posição de igualdade, se comportar e ser visto como alguém que sabe agir 

em situações de risco, de perigo e de pressão e ser respeitado pelo grupo.   

Os trabalhadores com mais de 15 anos de experiência offshore são destacados 

tanto pelos colegas também experientes quanto pelos “borrachos” (novatos) como 

motivo de orgulho por terem sobrevivido às inúmeras intercorrências na vida 

profissional e por acumularem um saber operário extremamente específico, complexo e 

que hoje pode compartilhar com outros colegas. Essa é também uma forma de manter 

viva a memória do conhecimento operário offshore.  

“Os colegas de trabalho mais antigos sempre perguntam: ‘Você está 

com dificuldade em alguma coisa, onde eu posso te ajudar? É melhor 

você ficar mais atento porque daqui a pouco a gente está indo embora, 

faltam dois anos pra eu me aposentar, então cola em mim por que você 

vai aprender coisas que vão ser úteis pra você continuar aqui dentro’”.  

 Por outro lado, para que ocorra essa articulação de saberes, existe a necessidade 

da disponibilidade de ambos, antigos e novatos, bem como o estabelecimento de uma 

relação de confiança. O relato a seguir é ilustrativo para mostrar o quanto é 

imprescindível à construção de laços de lealdade e de confiança, pois caso contrário o 

que poderá ser predominante no relacionamento entre os mais experientes e os 

“borrachos” é o espírito de competição e não compartilhamento das experiências de 

trabalho.      

“(...) pra haver um bom ambiente de trabalho tem que haver confiança e 

a confiança é um componente da ética. Se a troca é o equilíbrio das 

relações e se eu to numa relação de prostituição profissional em que não 

rola um beijinho, neguinho só quer ..., ou seja, só eu que passo 

conhecimento pra ele, só ta ali pra aprender comigo e eu depois ser 

descartado. Então, eu não vou dividir conhecimento não. O borracho 

vai ter que ficar 15 anos pra aprender o que eu aprendi. Quando ele 

aprender o que eu aprendi, eu quero ta lá na frente. Se a relação fosse 

mais transparente e honesta naturalmente, eu prepararia essa pessoa. 

(...) agora se é pra competir comigo, não vou passar conhecimento de 

forma nenhuma. Minha experiência eu vou levar junto comigo”. 



 215 

Vale destacar que as regras de trabalho repousam também sobre as formas de se 

trabalhar em conjunto, fixando as bases fundamentais e necessárias para o 

estabelecimento das relações de confiança. Dessa forma, as regras de trabalho, além de 

considerarem os aspectos técnicos, podem compreender questões éticas. Os conflitos 

decorrentes da organização do trabalho se referem às dimensões técnicas, sociais e 

psicoafetivas. Uma regra é sempre, ao mesmo tempo, técnica, que fixa as formas de 

fazer; social, que delineia as condutas; lingüística, estabilizadas em práticas de 

linguagem; ética, que são referenciais às arbitragens e aos julgamentos das relações. 

(DEJOURS, 1994:136) 

“Essas regras têm também um poder organizador sobre a coesão e a 

construção do coletivo: coletivo de regra, que se oporá ao coletivo 

essencialmente estruturado pelas estratégias defensivas: coletivo de 

defesa. Ainda que, certamente, na realidade as duas dimensões 

coexistam, em geral uma pode sobrepujar-se à outra”.  (DEJOURS, 

1994:136) 

Essa dificuldade entre os mais antigos e os “borrachos”, provém da inserção no 

espaço organizacional em momentos históricos bastante diferentes, seja do ponto de 

vista político-econômico, organizacional ou tecnológico e, que conseqüentemente, 

criaram expectativas também particulares a respeito da realidade técnica, da expressão 

de seus sentimentos e sofrimentos, da vivência subjetiva e dos modos de apreensão da 

vida e do trabalho offshore.   

 “Quando o novato chega com esse cabedal de formação, é de uma 

forma tão acadêmica lá fora, mas esses cascos velhos que tão aqui tem 

uma coisa importantíssima que se chama experiência. (...) às vezes você 

vê alguns borracho se achando o todo poderoso, porque o cara saiu de 

uma escola técnica, só tem uma diferença, que nunca ele teve lá. Ta 

entrando num ambiente que é hostil, ta entrando num ambiente que com 

toda segurança e tecnologia é sujeito à falhas (...) e isso me preocupa, 

porque alguns não têm a humildade pra perguntar o que não souber. 

(...) mas hoje você vê muita gente de nariz em pé e isso é preocupante”.  



 216 

  O domínio dos macetes confere a quem os detém vantagens em relação à 

autonomia e poder em relação à hierarquia e aos pares, seja por saber se proteger, de 

forma mais eficaz dos riscos e da fadiga, como também ganhos de produtividade, 

reconhecimento dos pares, da hierarquia e contrapartidas salariais.  

O não compartilhamento dos macetes com os borrachos encontra condições 

favoráveis para que não ocorra o “retorno da experiência”, o que particularmente acirra 

as relações de competição entre trabalhadores antigos e novatos e que, muitas vezes, são 

estimuladas por certas formas de gerenciamento.  

Às vezes até nas brincadeiras ficam explicitadas as dificuldades existentes no 

relacionamento entre esses dois grupos. Ambos precisam cooperar e contribuir para 

evolução do saber operário, pois enquanto a tecnologia vai introduzindo novos processos 

e procedimentos operacionais, faz necessário também construir e transformar as regras 

de trabalho e reinterpretar todo conhecimento já adquirido.   

“(...) O que tem de bom é que a gente ta ficando velho mesmo, e ta 

chegando essa turma nova e agente coloca pra trabalhar. O pessoal que 

ta chegando hoje, mas ta chegando com o peito mais inflado do que 

tigela. (...) quando chama a gente de tio na pelada, tudo bem, pior 

quando me chama de vovô. (...) Mas mesmo assim, acho que sangue 

novo é bom em qualquer lugar e lá não é diferente”. 

As brincadeiras têm funções expressivas nas relações de trabalho offshore. 

Existem distinções entre os trabalhadores com relação àquelas consideradas saudáveis 

que desenvolvem um papel de descontração e que aliviam a situação de penosidade 

enfrentada no cotidiano e as que são percebidas como ofensivas.  

Através das brincadeiras os trabalhadores selecionam aqueles com os quais 

possuem maior afinidade ou aqueles com os que desejam manter um maior 

distanciamento.  É um espaço que demarca e mobiliza vivências que podem reforçar as 

relações de confiança e cooperação ou de desconfiança entre os antigos e novatos.  

Esse conflito coloca em pauta a discussão sobre as práticas de reconhecimento 

simbólico que são priorizadas pela empresa. Se o trabalhador novato com seu arcabouço 

de conhecimento teórico, representante do trabalho prescrito ou àqueles que somaram à 

formação dos bancos escolares, o perseverante trabalho acumulado durante anos e anos 



 217 

e que produziram um saber específico sobre essa realidade? O relato abaixo mostra a 

exigência de acúmulo dessas duas fontes de produção, que formam a práxis offshore. 

“(...) numa greve em que praticamente paramos a produção, a empresa 

resolveu colocar os engenheiros para operar. As Unidades não eram tão 

automatizadas (...), foi um desastre, porque eles não sabiam de nada. 

Tinham que perguntar o tempo todo. O que sabiam da faculdade não 

servia para operar a plataforma (...)”. 

 Certamente que reconhecer a formação teórica do novato não exclui o auto-

reconhecimento de um saber apropriado ao longo dos anos pelos profissionais 

experientes. O saber offshore é um produto das relações sociais de trabalho que exigem 

dos trabalhadores capacidade de criação, inventividade, disponibilidade, iniciativa e 

companheirismo.  

 Esse saber não está escrito. Sua transmissão se dá pela palavra não formal, nas 

conversas, nas trocas e na circulação oral entre os trabalhadores. O essencial desse saber 

é veiculado boca a boca entre aqueles que estão na execução, mas podem também ser 

discutidos com os superiores hierárquicos. No entanto, o que se vê, na maioria das 

vezes, é uma comunicação hierarquizada, informativa que não dá espaço para nenhum 

tipo de discussão.    

 A linguagem utilizada nas comunicações no universo offshore é operatória, 

bastante diferenciada da que é normalmente usada no cotidiano da vida comum, “mais 

seca e curta, cheia de termos operacionais e só pode ser entendida por quem é da 

área” (FERREIRA; IGUTI, 1996). “Seus códigos e suas gírias incluem nomear e 

tratar as situações de atenção, anormalidade, alertas e riscos (...) com expressões 

típicas” (SEVÁ, 2000). Caracteriza-se, muitas das vezes, como se os trabalhadores 

compartilhassem de um dialeto, pois o linguajar não se refere apenas às situações de 

anormalidades, mas também às siglas dos cargos, aos níveis salariais, às áreas de 

trabalho, aos documentos internos expedidos, sejam técnicos ou da área de pessoal.  

  A contribuição dos trabalhadores para a produção do conhecimento offshore não 

é reconhecida formalmente, muito pelo contrário, é encoberta pelos procedimentos, 

como se estes fossem suficientes para a garantia do pleno funcionamento do sistema 

produtivo. O saber operário, enquanto um mecanismo de transformação do sofrimento 



 218 

em prazer, implica na vontade dos trabalhadores em atuarem juntos, de suplantarem 

coletivamente as contradições e de dar continuidade à produção de um know how 

offshore.  

 Desse modo, torna-se fundamental que um trabalhador não se coloque como 

mero executante, que use o seu conhecimento prático, suas habilidades tácitas, suas 

interpretações e técnicas em termos práticos e concretos. 

 “(...) o pessoal de dezoito, vinte anos de casa, pessoal nasceu com a 

plataforma. Pessoal que nasceu lá praticamente. Saiu de um tubo lá de 

óleo, de gás. Primeiro poço que furou saiu os caras”.  

Esta fala só vem ratificar a representação do grau e da intensidade da experiência 

dos trabalhadores mais antigos, pois muitos deles fizeram parte dos pioneiros das 

plataformas da Bacia de Campos. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 219 

CONCLUSÃO 

 
 
 A construção da identidade do trabalhador offshore próprio da Petrobras foi 

moldada ao longo do processo histórico da empresa. A sua face bifacial, pública e 

privada, está presente em sua estrutura e nos processos organizacionais, nas narrativas 

dos trabalhadores e na identidade destes homens. Essa ambigüidade intrínseca conferiu-

lhe características que ora remetiam exclusivamente à racionalidade empresarial, ora a 

uma atuação típica das organizações de Estado. 

Aos traços de uma gestão autoritária, hierarquizada, militarizada, que perpassou 

toda trajetória da empresa, desde sua criação, se associam a uma identidade moldada a 

partir da campanha “O Petróleo É Nosso”, de cunho nacionalista e que permaneceu 

presente, principalmente, na voz das lideranças do movimento sindical. Hoje, sentem-se 

frustrados pela interrupção dessa história de conquistas, demonstrando um total 

descrédito pelas lideranças atuais, identificando-as somente com os interesses da 

empresa, desconsiderando os anseios da categoria.    

O trabalhador offshore, como pioneiro da indústria petrolífera offshore brasileira, 

vai gradativamente assumindo a face de uma identidade de herói nacionalista, do 

guerreiro que trava lutas cotidianas no enfrentamento das intempéries climáticas e na 

complexidade dos riscos técnicos e coletivos inerentes a atividade produtiva offshore. 

Ele se auto-representa como um verdadeiro “bandeirante do mar” que em suas aventuras 

durante 14 dias, descobre e produz o tão almejado “ouro negro”, cobiçado por tantos. 

A década de 90 deixou marcas profundas nessa identidade. Os ideais políticos 

governamentais assolaram a gestão e as práticas organizacionais. Os planos de 

incentivos às demissões voluntárias e de estímulo às aposentadorias foram medidas 

largamente utilizadas. Tentativas de redução do período de folgas dos trabalhadores 

offshore, de 21 dias para 14, retornando ao regime anterior à Constituição de 1988, 

foram seguidamente colocadas na mesa de negociação em troca de indenizações e 

tinham como propósito “comprar o descanso, o lazer, os dias de convivência com a 

família, os filhos, os amigos etc”. Esse ciclo histórico, de desnacionalização, de 

desestatização e de desemprego em massa foi afastado, pelo menos por enquanto, 

enquanto um fantasma que circundava as expectativas dos trabalhadores.  



 220 

No novo milênio, o sonho longínquo dos pioneiros, da década de 70, de alcançar 

a auto-suficiência brasileira em petróleo, torna-se realidade. O início da produção da 

plataforma P-50, no campo de Albacora Leste, na Bacia de Campos, em 21 de abril 

deste ano, ratifica os traços de pioneirismo e vanguardismo que permanecem marcando 

a história da empresa e dos trabalhadores offshore.  

 Os traços dessa identidade são apropriados pela empresa como estratégia para 

criar novos desafios a serem superados, elevando conseqüentemente sua produtividade, 

suas riquezas e o seu lucro. A auto-suficiência como lema que aglutina e integra é forte 

o suficiente para envolver não somente aqueles que estão, há tanto tempo, nesse 

processo, como também os “borrachos” que facilmente assimilam e internalizam o 

conteúdo ideológico da linguagem empresarial.  

 O trabalhador, sujeito histórico que participa e assume a liderança do movimento 

sindical, da mesma forma que trava lutas políticas e ideológicas diante do poderio do 

capital, também se sente prisioneiro de um regime de efeito totalizante, que o aliena, 

que o controla e que não o valoriza, nem o reconhece. Sofre com as conseqüências da 

jornada de trabalho, o turno de revezamento, o confinamento, a distância de terra, de 

contatos com sua rede social de relações e, que não somente trabalha no arquipélago de 

aço da Bacia de Campos, mas que também neste vive por 14 dias.   

Pessanha (2001) afirma que como professor na Escola Técnica Federal de 

Campos, muito contribuiu para a formação dos jovens estudantes, na época, que 

ansiavam pelo sonho em trabalhar e pertencer à classe de trabalhadores até então mais 

bem remunerada e valorizada na sociedade local (Campos). A sua experiência mostra o 

quanto esses “desbravadores do nosso tempo”, ainda permanecem não-visíveis aos 

olhares dos estrangeiros a essa realidade. Esse reconhecimento pode vir de pequenos 

atos simbólicos, de uma gestão menos autoritária, de estímulos a permanecer se 

aperfeiçoando, se capacitando, estimulando a formação de uma competência técnica e 

de um know how que fazem a diferença diante da imprevisibilidade dos processos e 

sistemas.  

Diante dos inúmeros procedimentos operacionais, estes não são suficientes para 

minimizar os riscos e evitar os acidentes, algumas vezes com conseqüências 

irreversíveis. Estes procedimentos estão na esfera do trabalho prescrito, o trabalho real 



 221 

depende do saber offshore, do conhecido “feeling” da execução, da experiência 

profissional na área que também não é valorizada. 

Hoje, esses “heróis-pioneiros” com mais de 40 anos de idade, se sentem, ainda, 

meros desconhecidos heróis ou vítimas de toda complexidade imposta pela condição de 

trabalho offshore. Nessa ambigüidade de suas vidas, o guerreiro, em sua luta diária, 

busca estratégias para se proteger dos riscos dos processos e da organização do trabalho 

que invadem seu corpo e sua mente.   

Nesse sentido, o trabalhador, até na mais simples tarefa que executa, pode ser 

desafiado a realizar escolhas diante das determinações prescritas. Nesse sentido, a 

atividade não pode ser entendida apenas pelo que o trabalhador faz, mas também o que 

não se faz, “o que se busca fazer sem conseguir, o que poderia ser feito, o que há para 

refazer e até o que se faz sem querer”. “O homem é, a cada minuto, pleno de 

possibilidades não realizadas”. (ATHAYDE; BRITO, 2003:242)  

O processo de terceirização que invadiu a empresa e o trabalho offshore deixou 

traços marcantes, uma vez que a área de manutenção, por exemplo, nas plataformas foi 

praticamente terceirizada. Esse saber acumulado que se perdeu ao longo do tempo, hoje 

se existir, está na memória dos trabalhadores terceirizados. Assim, essa experiência terá 

que ser acumulada, interpretada e reinterpretada pelos “borrachos” que estão chegando, 

caso novas ondas e correntes marítimas não levem a empresa para outras rotas.  

O trabalhador vive conflitos e tensões, de forma fragmentada e intermitente, 

entre o mundo marítimo e a vida terrestre. A identidade que se constrói no espírito de 

aventura é comprimida pelas exigências da disciplina dos procedimentos operacionais. 

O homem parcializado no mundo offshore, pois não lhe é possível desempenhar outros 

papéis, deseja e sonha com o dia de retorno ao convívio com a família e amigos. Sonhos 

realizados, outros frustrados, desejos saciados, outros ainda por fazê-lo, comemorações, 

eventos, tempo marcado pelos acontecimentos: esse não é o tempo offshore. O tempo é 

limitado e determinado pela “escala”, pela dúvida permanente entre ficar mais um 

pouco ou pra toda vida.  

Nessa vida segmentada e intermitente, esses trabalhadores “como fumaça 

costumam sumir e reaparecer” (PESSANHA, 2001). Diante dos riscos e do 

enfrentamento do medo desenvolvem estratégias coletivas que minimizam o sofrimento 



 222 

e os alienam sob o efeito totalizante do território offshore. Solidariedade e 

companheirismo alimentam corpos e mentes daqueles que, por vezes, vivem no limite 

de suas forças físicas e psíquicas. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 223 

BIBLIOGRAFIA 
 
 
ALVEAL CONTRERAS, E. (1994). Os desbravadores: a Petrobras e a construção 

do Brasil industrial. Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumará: ANPOCS.  

ANTUNES, R. (1998). Adeus ao trabalho? Ensaio sobre as metamorfoses e a 

centralidade do mundo do trabalho. São Paulo: Cortez; Campinas: Editora da 

UNICAMP. 

____________. (2001). Os sentidos do trabalho: ensaio sobre a afirmação e a 

negação do trabalho. São Paulo: Boitempo Editorial.  

____________.(1996). “Dimensões da crise e metamorfoses do mundo do trabalho”. 

Revista Serviço Social & Sociedade, Rio de Janeiro, n.50, ano XVII. 

ARAÚJO, A. (2001). Paradoxos da modernização: terceirização e segurança em 

uma refinaria de petróleo. Tese de Doutorado, FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro. 

ARAÚJO, E. (2004). A educação para a saúde dos trabalhadores no contexto da 

acumulação flexível: novos desafios. Trabalho, Educação e Saúde, Rio de 

Janeiro, v.2, n.2, p. 252-270.  

ASSAYAG, M. et al. (1991). A atividade offshore no Brasil: histórico. Rio de 

Janeiro: Petrobras/CENPES.  

ATHAYDE, M. (1996). Gestão de coletivos de trabalho e modernidade: questões 

para a engenharia de produção. Tese de Doutorado, COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de 

Janeiro, RJ. 

BAKHTIN, M. (Volochinov). (1992). Marxismo e filosofia da linguagem. São Paulo: 

Hucitec.  

BRAIT, B. (2004). Linguagem e identidade: um constante trabalho de estilo. Trabalho, 

Educação e Saúde, Rio de Janeiro, v.2 (1), p. 15-32.  

BRITO, J.; ATHAYDE, M. (2003). Trabalho, educação e saúde: o ponto de vista 

enigmático da atividade. Trabalho, Educação e Saúde, Rio de Janeiro, v.2, p. 

239-265.  



 224 

BARRETO, F. (1998). Oficina de heróis – estudo sobre a identidade social dos 

mergulhadores profissionais. Tese de Doutorado, IFCS/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, 

RJ. 

BARROS, C. (1998). Especificidades da relação trabalho & saúde dos operadores 

de petróleo da Bacia de Campos. Projeto de pesquisa para exame de 

qualificação na área de Saúde coletiva, USP, São Paulo. 

BARTOLOTTI, L. (2002). Ilhas de aço – homens de ferro: cotidiano de trabalho e 

vida do petroleiro offshore da Bacia de Campos dos Goytacazes. Dissertação 

de Mestrado, PUC-SP, São Paulo. 

______________. (1999). Saudade. Imagem: revista do sindicato dos petroleiros do 

norte fluminense, Macaé, n.3, ag./set., p. 20-21.  

CARDOSO, R. (1986). “Aventuras de antropólogos em campo ou como escapar das 

armadilhas do método”. In: Durham, E. R. et al. Aventura antropológica: 

Teoria e pesquisa. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra. 

CARVALHO, R. A. (1995). “Saúde mental e trabalho um novo (velho) campo para a 

questão da subjetividade”. In: Codo, W.; Sampaio, J. J. Sofrimento Psíquico 

nas Organizações: saúde mental e trabalho. Rio de Janeiro: Vozes. 

CASTELLO, M.; ALVARENGA, G. (1993). Reflexões e desdobramentos acerca da 

implantação do projeto Família x Trabalho offshore. In: V ENCONTRO 

REGIONAL DE RECURSOS HUMANOS DA PETROBRAS, RJ, (mimeo). 

CHAUÍ, M. (1983). O Nacional e o popular na cultura brasileira. São Paulo: Editora 

Brasiliense. 

CHOUERI Jr., N. (1991). Equipes de perfuração marítima: uma análise das 

relações sociais, das condições de trabalho e de produtividade. Dissertação 

de Mestrado, UNICAMP, Campinas.  

CODO, W.; SAMPAIO, J. J. C (orgs). (1995). Sofrimento Psíquico nas Organizações.  

DA MATTA, R. (1991). A casa & a rua. Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara Koogan.  



 225 

DEJOURS, C. (1994). Psicodinâmica do trabalho: contribuição da Escola 

Dejouriana à análise da relação prazer, sofrimento e trabalho/ Dejours, C., 

Abdoucheli, E., Jayet, C.; Betiol, M. (coord.), São Paulo: Atlas.  

___________. (1988). A loucura do trabalho: estudo de psicopatologia do trabalho. 

São Paulo: Cortez – Oboré.  

___________. (2004). “Avant-propos para a edição brasileira”. In: Lancman, S.; 

Sznelwar, L. (orgs.). Christophe Dejours: Da psicopatologia à psicodinâmica 

do trabalho. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz, Brasília: Paralelo. 

DUARTE, L. F. (1986). “Classificação e valor na reflexão sobre identidade social”. In: 

Durham, E. R. et al. Aventura antropológica: Teoria e pesquisa. Rio de 

Janeiro: Paz e Terra.  

DUARTE, F.; VIDAL, M. (2000).“Abordagem ergonômica da confiabilidade e a noção 

de modo degradado de funcionamento”. In: Freitas, C., Porto, M, Machado, J. 

(orgs.). Acidentes Industriais ampliados: desafios e perspectivas para o 

controle e a prevenção. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz.   

DUARTE, L. F. (1987). “De bairros operários sobre cemitérios de escravos”. In: Leite 

Lopes, J. S. (coord.). Cultura e identidade operária: aspectos da cultura da 

classe trabalhadora. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ/Museu Nacional, Ed. Marco Zero. 

____________. (1987). “Identidade social e padrões de agressividade verbal em um 

grupo de trabalhadores urbanos”. In: Leite Lopes, J. S. (coord.). Cultura e 

identidade operária: aspectos da cultura da classe trabalhadora. Rio de 

Janeiro: UFRJ/Museu Nacional, Ed. Marco Zero. 

DURHAM, E. R. et al. (1986). A aventura antropológica: Teoria e pesquisa. Rio de 

Janeiro: Paz e Terra. 

DURHAM, E. R. (1986). “A pesquisa antropológica com populações urbanas: 

problemas e perspectivas”. In: DURHAM, E. R. et al. A aventura 

antropológica: Teoria e pesquisa. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra. 

DWYER, T. (2000). “A produção do erro – o caso dos acidentes ampliados”. In: 

Freitas, C., Porto, M, Machado, J. (orgs.). Acidentes Industriais ampliados: 



 226 

desafios e perspectivas para o controle e a prevenção. Rio de Janeiro: Editora 

Fiocruz, 2000.  

FAUSTO, B. (2002). História do Brasil. São Paulo: EDUSP.  

FERREIRA, L. (1987) Trabalho em turnos – Temas para discussão. Revista de Saúde 

Ocupacional. São Paulo, v.58, n.15. 

FERREIRA, L.; IGUTI, A. (1996). O trabalho dos petroleiros: perigoso, complexo, 

contínuo e coletivo. São Paulo: Scritta.  

FIGUEIREDO, M; ATHAYDE, M. (2004). “Coletivos de trabalho e componentes 

subjetivos da confiabilidade em sistemas sociotécnicos complexos: 

considerações a partir da situação de trabalho em mergulho profundo na Bacia 

de Campos/RJ”. In: Figueiredo, M.; Athayde, M.; Brito, J.; Alvarez, D. 

Labirintos do trabalho: interrogações e olhares sobre o trabalho vivo. Rio 

de Janeiro: DP&A. 

FIGUEIREDO, M. (2001). O trabalho de mergulho profundo em instalações 

petrolíferas offshore na Bacia de Campos: confiabilidade e segurança em 

meio à guerra de ‘highlander’ contra leviatã. Tese de Doutorado, 

COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 

_______________. (1995). Nos subterrâneos da linha vermelha: o trabalho dos 

operários em tubulões de ar comprimido. Dissertação de Mestrado, 

COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ.  

_______________. (2004). “A ‘pressão’, os conflitos e a organização do trabalho na 

atividade de mergulho profundo da indústria petrolífera offshore na Bacia de 

Campos (RJ)”. In: Araújo, A.; Alberto, M.; Neves, M.; Athayde, M. Cenários 

do Trabalho: subjetividade, movimento e enigma. Rio de Janeiro: DP&A. 

FISCHER, F.; MORENO, C.; ROTENBERG, L. (2003). Trabalho em turnos e 

noturno na sociedade 24 horas. São Paulo: Editora Atheneu.  

FISCHER, F. (2003). “As demandas da sociedade atual: aspectos históricos do 

desenvolvimento do trabalho em turnos no mundo – conceitos, escalas de 

trabalho, legislação brasileira”. In: Fischer, F.; Moreno, C.; Rotenberg, L. 



 227 

Trabalho em turnos e noturno na sociedade 24 horas. São Paulo: Editora 

Atheneu.  

___________. (2003). “Fatores individuais e condições de trabalho e de vida na 

tolerância ao trabalho em turnos”. In: Fischer, F.; Moreno, C.; Rotenberg, L. 

Trabalho em turnos e noturno na sociedade 24 horas. São Paulo: Editora 

Atheneu.  

FREITAS, C., PORTO, M., MACHADO, J. (2000). Acidentes industriais ampliados: 

desafios e perspectivas para o controle e a prevenção. Rio de Janeiro: Editora 

Fiocruz.  

FREITAS, C.; SOUZA, C; MACHADO, J.; PORTO, M. (2001). Acidentes de trabalho 

em plataformas de petróleo da Bacia de Campos, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil. 

Cadernos de Saúde Pública, Rio de Janeiro, v.17, jan-fev.  

GOFFMAN, E. (1985). A Representação do Eu na vida cotidiana. Petrópolis: Editora 

Vozes. 

____________. (1987). Manicômios, prisões e conventos. São Paulo: Editora 

Perspectiva.  

____________. (2002). Estigma. São Paulo: Editora LTC.  

JOBIM e SOUZA, S. (1994). Infância e linguagem: Bakhtin, Vygotsky e Benjamin. 

São Paulo: Papirus.  

KUENZER, A. Z. (2002). “Educação, linguagens e tecnologias: as mudanças no mundo 

do trabalho e as relações entre conhecimento e método”. In: Candau, V. M. 

Cultura, linguagem e subjetividade no ensinar e aprender. Rio de Janeiro: 

DP&A. 

LANCMAN, S.; SZNELWAR, L. I. (orgs.). (2004). Christophe Dejours: da 

psicopatologia à psicodinâmica do trabalho. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz, 

Brasília: Paralelo 15.  

LANE, S. T. M. (2004). “Consciência/ alienação: a ideologia no nível do individual”. 

In: Lane, S. T. M.; Codo, W. Psicologia Social: o homem em movimento. São 

Paulo: Brasiliense. 



 228 

LAPLANCHE J.; PONTALIS, J.B. (1979). Vocabulário da Psicanálise. Rio de 

Janeiro: Martins Fontes Editora.  

LAURELL, A.; NORIEGA, M. (1989). Processo de produção e saúde: trabalho e 

desgaste operário. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  

LEITE, M. P. (1994). O futuro do trabalho: novas tecnologias e subjetividade 

operária. São Paulo: Página Aberta/Scritta.  

LEITE LOPES, J. S. (1978). O vapor do diabo: o trabalho dos operários do açúcar. 

Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.  

_______________. (1987). Cultura e identidade operária: aspectos da cultura da 

classe trabalhadora. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ/Museu Nacional, Ed. Marco Zero. 

_______________. (1987). “Formas de proletarização, história incorporada e cultura 

operária”. In: Cultura e identidade operária: aspectos da cultura da classe 

trabalhadora. Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ/Museu Nacional, Ed. Marco Zero. 

LESSA, C. (1999). “O processo de produção/ reprodução social: trabalho e 

sociabilidade”. In: Capacitação em serviço social e política social: Módulo 2: 

crise contemporânea, questão social e serviço social, Brasília: Cead. 

LLORY, M. (2001). Acidentes industriais: o custo do silêncio. Rio de Janeiro: 

Multimais Ediorial.   

LOSICER, E. (2003). Confinados! In: ESTADOS GERAIS DA PSICANÁLISE: 

SEGUNDO ENCONTRO MUNDIAL, Rio de Janeiro, (mimeo). 

__________. (2001). Caso clínico em alto mar: abrindo a “caixa preta” da P-36. In: VIII 

COLÓQUIO INTERNACIONAL DE SOCIOLOGIA CLÍNICA E 

PSICOSSOCIOLOGIA, Belo Horizonte, MG, (mimeo). 

__________; SIQUEIRA SILVA, V. (1991). Relatório do projeto de Intervenção 

Clínico-institucional. Macaé, RJ, (mimeo). 

MACHADO, J. (1997). Processo de vigilância em saúde do trabalhador. Cadernos de 

Saúde Pública, Rio de Janeiro, v. 13, supl. 2.  

MARINHO, P.; SEVÁ FILHO, A.; VASCONCELOS, E. et al. (1997). “Os 

subterrâneos da Bacia: as mortes, os riscos e a ilegalidade na exploração e 



 229 

produção de petróleo da Bacia de Campos”. Dossiê do Sindipetro NF 

apresentado à CPI da ALERJ que apura “Falta de segurança e condições 

de trabalho nas plataformas petrolíferas do estado do Rio de Janeiro”. 

Macaé, RJ.  

MARX, K. (1985). O Capital. São Paulo: Nova Cultural, v.1. 

________. (1983). “Manuscritos econômicos filosóficos”. In: Fernandes, F. (org.). 

Marx/Engels, história, São Paulo: Ática. 

_______; ENGELS, F. (1987). A ideologia alemã. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  

MOREL, R. (2001). “A construção da ‘família siderúrgica’: gestão paternalista e 

empresa estatal”. In: Ramalho, J. R. (org.); Santana, M. A. Trabalho e tradição 

sindical no Rio de Janeiro: a trajetória dos metalúrgicos. Rio de Janeiro: 

DP&A. 

NICÁCIO, E. M. (1997). Da exclusão à manipulação da subjetividade no mundo do 

trabalho. Praia Vermelha: estudos de política e teoria social, Rio de Janeiro, 

v. 1, n. 1, p. 216 – 237.  

PESSANHA, R. (1994). O trabalho ‘offshore’: inovação tecnológica, organização do 

trabalho e qualificação do operador de produção na Bacia de Campos. Tese 

de Mestrado, COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 

____________. (2001). Heróis do petróleo. ONG 21, mimeo. 

PETROBRAS.  (1991). Perfil do homem offshore: resumo executivo. Macaé, RJ.  

___________. (2000). Os funcionários embarcados da Bacia de Campos e a 

proposta de alteração do regime de trabalho. Rio de Janeiro.  

___________. Revista da Petrobras, Os 20 anos da Bacia de Campos. Rio de 

Janeiro, n. 39, ano IV.  

___________. (2001). O cardume brasileiro de petróleo. In: Revista da Petrobras, Rio 

de Janeiro, n. 76, ano VII, dez. 2000/jan.   

___________. (2004). Relatório Anual do Sistema Petrobras. Rio de Janeiro, 2004. 

___________. (2002). Uma nova fronteira no mar. In: Revista da Petrobras, Rio de 

Janeiro, n. 80, ano 8, jun.  



 230 

___________. (1999). O petróleo e a Petrobras em perguntas e respostas. Rio de 

Janeiro.  

___________. (2003). Máquina do tempo: o primeiro poço a gente nunca esquece. In: 

Revista da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro, n.90, ano 9, abr/mai/jun.  

___________. Bacia de Campos: perguntas & respostas. Rio de Janeiro. 

___________. (2002). Cadernos Petrobras: Bacia de Campos. Rio de Janeiro, n.2, 

ago.  

___________. (2003). Almanaque: memória dos trabalhadores da Petrobras. Rio de 

Janeiro.  

___________. O valor do homem offshore. In: Revista da Petrobras, Rio de Janeiro. 

___________. (1999). Exploração e Produção – Bacia de Campos. Macaé.  

___________. (2004) Petrobras: Bacia de Campos – 30 anos descobrindo o futuro. 

Macaé, RJ. 

___________. (2005). Tipos de plataformas. Rio de Janeiro. Disponível em 

www.petrobras.com.br  

PORTO, M.; FREITAS, C. (1997). Análise de riscos tecnológicos ambientais: 

perspectivas para o campo da saúde do trabalhador. Cadernos de Saúde 

Pública, Rio de Janeiro, v. 13, s. 2.  

RHEIN, M. S. (1999) Revista Veja. Rio de Janeiro, n. 15, ano 32. 

RODRIGUES, V. (2001). Relações de trabalho em unidades de perfuração 

marítima – estudo de caso com ênfase em trabalho em turnos. Dissertação de 

Mestrado, Universidade de Alfenas, MG. 

ROTENBERG, L. (2003). “Aspectos sociais da tolerância ao trabalho em turnos e 

noturno, com ênfase nas questões relacionadas ao gênero”. In: Fischer, F.; 

Moreno, C.; Rotenberg, L. Trabalho em turnos e noturno na sociedade 24 

horas. São Paulo: Editora Atheneu.  

RUTENFRANZ, J.; KNAUTH, P.; FISCHER, F. (1989). Trabalho em turnos e 

noturno. São Paulo: Editora Hucitec.  



 231 

SAHLINS, M. (1979). Cultura e razão prática. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Ed. 

SAMPAIO, J.; BORSOI, I; RUIZ, E. (1998). Saúde mental e trabalho em petroleiros 

de plataforma: penosidade, rebeldia e conformismo em petroleiros de 

produção (onshore/offshore) no Ceará. Fortaleza: FLACSCO/EDUECE.  

__________ (2001). “Saúde Mental e Trabalho Petroleiro: gente em desconforto, mal 

estar e sofrimento”. In: Venâncio, A. T. A. & Cavalcanti, M. T. (orgs.). (2001). 

Saúde mental: campo, saberes e discursos. Rio de Janeiro: Edições IPUB.  

__________; HITOMI, A. H.; RUIZ, E. M. (1995). “Saúde e trabalho: uma abordagem 

do processo e jornada de trabalho”. In: CODO, W.; SAMPAIO, J. J. Sofrimento 

Psíquico nas Organizações: saúde mental e trabalho. São Paulo: Brasiliense. 

________________________; CODO, W. (1995). “Saúde Mental e trabalho: um 

modelo de investigação”. In: CODO, W.; SAMPAIO, J. J. Sofrimento Psíquico 

nas Organizações: saúde mental e trabalho. São Paulo: Brasiliense. 

___________; BORSOI, I. C. F.; RUIZ, E. M. (1995). “Trabalho e identidade em 

telefonistas”. In: CODO, W.; SAMPAIO, J. J. Sofrimento Psíquico nas 

Organizações: saúde mental e trabalho. São Paulo: Brasiliense. 

SANTOS, J. (1999). Trabalho e sofrimento psíquico na Marinha Mercante: um 

estudo sobre a tripulação embarcada. Dissertação de Mestrado, FIOCRUZ, 

Rio de Janeiro. 

SCALETSKY, E. C. (2003). O patrão e o petroleiro: um passeio pela história do 

trabalho na Petrobras. Rio de Janeiro: Relume Dumará.  

SELIGMANN-SILVA, E. (1994). Desgaste mental no trabalho dominado. Rio de 

Janeiro: UFRJ; Cortez Editora.  

SENNETT, R. (2003). A corrosão do caráter: as conseqüências pessoais do trabalho 

no novo capitalismo. Rio de Janeiro: Record.  

SEVÁ FILHO, A. (2000). “Seguuura, Peão! Alertas sobre o risco técnico coletivo 

crescente na indústria petrolífera”. In: Freitas, C., Porto, M, Machado, J. (orgs.). 

Acidentes Industriais ampliados: desafios e perspectivas para o controle e a 

prevenção. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fiocruz.   



 232 

_______________. (1997). Combustíveis, Trabalho Social e Riscos Técnicos: o 

petróleo e o gás no Norte Fluminense e no Brasil dos anos 1990. Relatório de 

Pesquisa de Pós-Doutorado: Rio de Janeiro, Coordenação dos Programas de Pós-

Graduação em Engenharia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. 

SIQUEIRA SILVA, V. (1997). Os transtornos mentais que acometem embarcados. 

Macaé, RJ, (mimeo). 

SOUZA-e-SILVA, M. (2004). “Quais as contribuições da lingüística aplicada para a 

análise do trabalho?”. In: Figueiredo, M.; Atayde, M.; Brito, J.; Alvarez, D. 

Labirintos do trabalho: interrogações e olhares sobre o trabalho vivo. Rio 

de Janeiro: DP&A. 

TITTONI, J. (1994). Subjetividade e trabalho. Porto Alegre: Ortiz.  

VENTURA, A. (1997). Transformações capitalistas e reflexos no serviço social: 

uma aproximação às mudanças no mundo do trabalho e ao serviço social 

neste espaço. Dissertação de Mestrado, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro. 

WISNER, A. (1987). Por dentro do Trabalho. Ergonomia: método e técnica. São 

Paulo: FTD/Oboré.  

__________. (1994). A inteligência no trabalho: textos selecionados de ergonomia. 

São Paulo: Fundacentro. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 233 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A  N  E  X  O  S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 234 

 
 
 

ANEXO I 
 
 
 

- Principais tipos de plataforma 
 
 
- Exemplos de equipamentos (manifold, árvore de 
natal) 
 
 
- Recordes de lâmina d´água 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 235 

 
    Plataforma Semi-submersível 
 
 

 
     FPSO 
 
 



 236 

 
    Plataforma fixa 
 
 

 
Navio-tanque Muriaé 



 237 

 
Árvore de Natal molhada do poço de Marlim IV na Bacia de Campos - Campos – RJ 
 
 
 

 
Manifold submarino instalado no campo de Marlim à profundidade de 800 metros 
 



 238 

 
 

 

Série histórica dos recordes de lâmina d´água de 
produção.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 239 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DADOS SOBRE A PETROBRAS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 240 

 

 
 
 
 



 241 

 
 
 

 
 
 



Livros Grátis
( http://www.livrosgratis.com.br )

 
Milhares de Livros para Download:
 
Baixar livros de Administração
Baixar livros de Agronomia
Baixar livros de Arquitetura
Baixar livros de Artes
Baixar livros de Astronomia
Baixar livros de Biologia Geral
Baixar livros de Ciência da Computação
Baixar livros de Ciência da Informação
Baixar livros de Ciência Política
Baixar livros de Ciências da Saúde
Baixar livros de Comunicação
Baixar livros do Conselho Nacional de Educação - CNE
Baixar livros de Defesa civil
Baixar livros de Direito
Baixar livros de Direitos humanos
Baixar livros de Economia
Baixar livros de Economia Doméstica
Baixar livros de Educação
Baixar livros de Educação - Trânsito
Baixar livros de Educação Física
Baixar livros de Engenharia Aeroespacial
Baixar livros de Farmácia
Baixar livros de Filosofia
Baixar livros de Física
Baixar livros de Geociências
Baixar livros de Geografia
Baixar livros de História
Baixar livros de Línguas



Baixar livros de Literatura
Baixar livros de Literatura de Cordel
Baixar livros de Literatura Infantil
Baixar livros de Matemática
Baixar livros de Medicina
Baixar livros de Medicina Veterinária
Baixar livros de Meio Ambiente
Baixar livros de Meteorologia
Baixar Monografias e TCC
Baixar livros Multidisciplinar
Baixar livros de Música
Baixar livros de Psicologia
Baixar livros de Química
Baixar livros de Saúde Coletiva
Baixar livros de Serviço Social
Baixar livros de Sociologia
Baixar livros de Teologia
Baixar livros de Trabalho
Baixar livros de Turismo
 
 



 

 

 

 

Sim pósio de Gerenciamento da Segurança Operacional 

A Segurança Operacional e a Prevenção de Acidentes 
Aeronáuticos no Âmbito das Atividades Offshore 

 
Eng. Marco Aurélio Ramos Balboa 28 de Abril de 2013 
SCA – Gerência de Segurança e competência em Aviação 

Exploração e Produção – Serviços (E&P-SERV) 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



 ORGANOGRAMA DA PETROBRAS: 

 Conselho de Administração 

 
Presidente 

  
 

 

Finan ceira Gás e Energia Exploração e Produção Abastecimento 

Internacional Engenharia, Tecnologia e Materiais Corporativa e de Serviços 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 2 



Organograma 

Diretor E&P 

 

 

E&P-
E&P -EXP E&P-ENGP E&P-PDP E&P-PGSU 

PRESAL 

 

 E&P-CORP E&P-SSE E&P-NNE E&P-SERV E&P-CPM 

Segurança e 
Competência 
em Aviação 

(SCA) 

Serviços de 
Planejamento Serviços Serviços de Serviços de 

Logística de 
e Gestão Submarinos Apoio Contratação 

E&P 

Diretoria 

Gerência Executiva 

Gerência Geral 

Slide 3 
Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Gestão do Modal Aéreo 

E&P-SERV 

CSV 

SCA 

CTA 

US-AP 

TAO 

SCA: Segurança e Competência em Aviação 
CSV: Coordenação de Segurança de Voo 
CTA: Coordenação Técnica de Aviação 
TAO: Transporte Aéreo Offshore  

4 



14 Bases Operacionais 

  Porto Urucu, AM 
RNCE   Manaus, AM 
2 MP 

  Paracuru, CE 
UO-AM  2 PP 

4 GP  Guamaré, RN 
3 MP 

 Aracaju, SE 
 2 Aviões 

 Salvador, BA 
 Vitória, ES 

SEAL  
 14 

2 MP  Farol de São Tomé, RJ 
2 PP  Campos, RJ 

 BA   Macaé, RJ 
1 MP 

 Cabo Frio, RJ 
 Jacarepaguá, RJ 
 Itanhaém, SP 
 Navegantes, SC 

ES, BC, RIO, BS  
63 MP 
32 GP 

Operação E&P Serviços 
SUL 
3 MP Operação offshore NNE 

Operação onshore NNE 

Frota em 14/02/14 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Principais helicópteros offshore - médio porte 

 
SIKORSKY S-76C++ 

 1º voo: 2005 
MGW: 5.307 kg 

 Comprimento máximo: 16,00 m 
Capacidade: 12 PAX 

Motores: Turbomeca Arriel 2S2 
 Máx. Cont.: 833 SHP 

Combustível: 860 Kg 

 Vel. Cruzeiro: 139 Kt 

AGUSTAWESTLAND AW139 

EUROCOPTER EC155B1 1º voo: 2001 

1º voo: 1997 MGW: 6.800 kg 

MGW: 4.850 kg Comprimento máximo: 16,66 m 

Comprimento máximo: 14,30 m Capacidade: 12 (15) PAX 

Capacidade: 12 (13) PAX Motores: PW PT6C-67C 

Motores: Turbomeca Arriel 2C2 Máx. Cont.: 1.531 SHP 

Máx. Cont.: 865 SHP Combustível: 1.263 Kg 

Combustível: 987 Kg Vel. Cruzeiro: 152 Kt 

Vel. Cruzeiro: 143 Kt 

Slide 6 
Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Principais helicópteros offshore - grande porte 

 SIKORSKY S-92A 
MGW: 12.020 kg 

 Comprimento máximo: 20,88 m 

 Capacidade: 19 PAX 
Motores: GE CT7-8A 

 Máx. Cont.: 2.043 SHP 
Combustível: 2.327 Kg 

 Vel. Cruzeiro: 141 Kt 

EUROCOPTER EC225LP 
MGW: 11.000 Kg 

Comprimento máximo: 19,50 m 
Capacidade: 19 PAX 

Motores: Turbomeca Makila 2A 
Máx. Cont.: 1.892 SHP 
Combustível: 2.270 Kg 
Vel. Cruzeiro: 137 Kt 

Slide 7 
Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Crescimento operacional bases Sul e Sudeste 

120  PEOTRAM 2 1200

 
100 1000

 
80 800

 
PEOTRAM 

60  600
Desmobilização da 

Lancha 
1º. Plano de 

Renovação da 
40 Frota 400

20 200

0 0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Idade da Frota Médio Porte Grande Porte Passageiros Idade da Frota 
18 anos 6 anos 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



 

 

 

 

 

Petrobras 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Acidentes e HV de Helicóptero 

 4
120.000

 
100.000

 3

 80.000

2
 60.000

40.000

1

20.000

0 0

Ano 

Petrobras Noruega Petrobras Noruega

Acidentes com fatalidade 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 

Acidentes 

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Horas Voadas 



Programa de Excelência nas Operações de 
Transporte Aéreo e Marítimo (PEOTRAM) 

SEGPRO fase 1 
 Início do operacional e 

desenvolvimento acesso via 
do SEGPRO 

 internet 

 Limite do 
“Desenvolver o desenvolvimento PG-1ED-00020-0 

PEOTRAM HUET 
me rcado para possível com uma 

Criado o  
aprimorar os índices abordagem apenas 

de  segurança” CCTA colaborativa 

Plena integração 
Requisitos mais Diagnóstico Nova estrutura dos requisitos 
exigentes que a das quatro de gestão do PEOTRAM aos 
regulamentação expectativas modal aéreo contratos do 

modal aéreo 

Auditorias Vantagem Contratos: a Reformulação 
PEOTRAM nas competitiva e principal interface dos BAD do 

operadoras linhas de corte de segurança modal aéreo 

2005 2007 2012 2013 2014 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



Programa de Excelência nas Operações de 
Transporte Aéreo e Marítimo (PEOTRAM) 

 

 

 

 
Estações meteorológicas automáticas 

 

Helideck Monitoring Systems (HMS) 

Vídeo remoto 

Helicóptero 
SAR 

2014 
Exploração e Produção Serviços 



REQUISITOS DE CERTIFICAÇÃO (“latest design” FAR29) 
 

Dual  

 4-axis  
Flight data recorder/ Performance Class 1 

autopilot 
cockpit voice or  

30-minute run dry  
 recorder enhanced PC2 

MGB 

 

HUMS/HFDM 
 Aircraft-wide bird strike 

certification 

Reduced workload 
EFIS cockpit 

Deployable 
High  Emergency 

visibility crew 
Large  Beacon 

station 
emergency Pushout window Crashworthy fuel 

exits  exits positioned system separated 

for each row from cabin Sea State 5 
flotation 

Emergency system 
Energy absorbing 

lighting 
passenger and crew TCAS / EGPWS 

systems 
seats 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 13 



PEOTRAM - Aeronave 

GPS 

Flight  Following HUMS 
 

 

 

 TCAS 

 

HFDM 

EGPWS 
Piloto Automático 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



PEOTRAM - Aeronave 

Coletes 
ADELT 

 

 

 

 

 
Botes Externos 

Flutuadores 
Automáticos 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



PEOTRAM - Aeronave 

 Assentos com amortecimento de impacto 

 
HEELS (Helicopter Emergency Egress Lighting System) 

 

 Portas e/ou janelas amplas e alijáveis para cada fileira 
 
de assentos 

PA (Public Adress System) para comunicação com os 

passageiros 

Ar condicionado 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



PEOTRAM - Tripulação 

 Experiência e horas de voo: padrões da OGP 

 Treinamento anual em simuladores de voo classes "D" 

 e "C“,  

 CRM (Crew Resource Management) e LOFT (Line 

 Oriented Flight Training) em simulador 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 



NAVEGAÇÃO 
 AÉREA: 

• EPTA “A”  
 

• Rotas ATS 
 

• SMA (repetidoras) 
 

• Vigilância ADS-B 
 • AWS: 

•ALB: P-52/P-25/PRA-1 
•MRL: P-20/PNA-1 

•ECH: P-12/PCE-1/P-15  

• IFR (ampliação) 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 18 



NAVEGAÇÃO 
 AÉREA: 

• EPTA “A”  
 

• Rotas ATS 
 Pin

S 
Pin
S • SMA (repetidoras) 

 
• Vigilância ADS-B 

 Pin Pin
S S • AWS: 

•ALB: P-52/P-25/PRA-1 
Pin •MRL: P-20/PNA-1 
S 

Pin
S •ECH: P-12/PCE-1/P-15  

Pin
S • IFR (ampliação) 

Pin
S 

Pin
S Proced. Aprox IFR (PinS) 

AWS 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 19 



Interfaces de Segurança Operacional 

Reunião SIPAER (trimestral ou por demanda) 
 

• GSCA e ASV dos operadores 
 

 Indicadores de segurança de processo (trimestral) 

• Apresentação presencial pela Alta Direção de cada operador à 
 Petrobras, abordando análises e tendências 

 
Comitê de Operações (trimestral ou por demanda) 

• Petrobras, Diretores de Operações e Chefes dos Pilotos 

Comitê de Manutenção (trimestral ou por demanda) 

• Petrobras, Diretores de Manutenção e RPQS 

Programa de Melhoria do Desempenho de Fornecedor  

• Gerente do contrato e preposto da contratada 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 20 
20 



Gestão do Risco no Modal Aéreo 

Nível Foco  
Petrobras Operadoras 

•Estratégia de aviação •Estratégia de aviação 
•Safety Case •Vantagem competitiva – nota PEOTRAM 
•PG-1ED-00020-0 – PEOTRAM • Instrumentos contratuais 

Predizer e •Gestão por processos •Documentos de orientação 
prevenir •Padrões SINPEP - atividades do modal aéreo •Especificação técnica dos contratos de 

•Especificação técnica - equipamentos/serviços aeronaves 
•Garantia de competências com base nos •Garantia de competências com base nos 
padrões SINPEP requisitos PEOTRAM 

•Comitês de Operação e Manutenção •Comitês de Operação e Manutenção 
•Auditoria interna – controles no Safety Case •Auditorias PEOTRAM 
•Auditoria interna – conformidade com padrões •Auditorias de conformidade contratual 
SINPEP (aeronaves, bases, empresa, safety case) 

Detectar •Monitoramento de indicadores de processo •Especificação técnica dos contratos de 
•RELPREV aeronaves 
• Inspeções em helipontos  e infraestruturas •Monitoramento de indicadores de processo 
aeronáuticas •RELPREV e comunicação de eventos 

• Inspeções em bases operacionais reportáveis 

•Controle das ações corretivas via CPA, •Controle das ações corretivas via SEGPRO, 
conforme DIP E&P-SERV com base em cláusulas contratuais 

Recuperar •Resposta a variações intoleráveis nos •Especificação técnica dos contratos - aeronaves 
indicadores de processo monitorados •Resposta a variações intoleráveis nos 

indicadores de processo monitorados 

•PG-2ED-00358-A – Manual de Resposta à •Requisitos PEOTRAM para de resposta à 
Emergência Aeronáutica emergência aeronáutica 

Mitigar •Cenários de emergência aeronáutica nos PRE •Especificação técnica dos contratos de 
conseq. de cada base aeronaves 

•Manual de Comunicação de Crise •Comunicação de crise 21 

•Recursos SAR aéreos e marítimos •Recursos SAR aéreos e marítimos 



 

 

 

 

 

Obrigado! 
MARCO AURÉLIO RAMOS BALBOA 

Gerência de Segurança e Competência em Aviação 

Av República do Chile, 330 – Torre Oeste, 20º andar 

E-mail: balboa@petrobras.com.br  

Tel. (21) 2144-6533 

Exploração e Produção Serviços 22 



 
 
 
 
 

SAFETY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS – 2013 DATA 

Report No. 2013s 
(July 2014) 
 
OGP DATA SERIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  Producers



  
  
  
  
  
  

 

ublications 

P 

 

 

Global experience 
 
The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers has access to a wealth of technical 
knowledge and experience with its members operating around the world in many different 
terrains. We collate and distil this valuable knowledge for the industry to use as guidelines 
for good practice by individual members. 

 

Consistent high quality database and guidelines 
 
Our  overall  aim  is  to  ensure  a  consistent  approach  to  training,  management  and  best 
practice throughout the world. 

The  oil  and  gas  exploration  and  production  industry  recognises  the  need  to  develop 
consistent databases and records in certain fields. OGP’s members are encouraged to use 
the guidelines as a starting point for their operations or to supplement their own policies 
and regulations which may apply locally. 

 

Internationally recognised source of industry information 
 
Many of our guidelines have been recognised and used by international authorities and 
safety and environmental bodies. Requests come from governments and non-government 
organisations around the world as well as from non-member companies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Disclaimer 

Whilst every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this publication, 
neither OGP nor any of its members past present or future warrants its accuracy or will, regardless of its 
or their negligence, assume liability for any foreseeable or unforeseeable use made thereof, which liability 
is hereby excluded. Consequently, such use is at the recipient’s own risk on the basis that any use by the 
recipient constitutes agreement to the terms of this disclaimer. The recipient is obliged to inform any 
subsequent recipient of such terms. 

 

Copyright notice 

The contents of these pages are © The International Association of Oil and Gas Producers. 
Permission is given to reproduce this report in whole or in part provided (i) that the copyright of OGP 
and (ii) the source are acknowledged. All other rights are reserved. Any other use requires the prior 
written permission of the OGP. 
These Terms and Conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England 
and Wales. Disputes arising here from shall be exclusively subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of 
England and Wales. 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OGP safety performance indicators 

2013 data 
 
 
 
 

Report No: 2013s 

July 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Revision history 

Version Date Amendments 

1.1 August 2014 Minor correction to TRIR and LTIF definitions (pp 3-2 and 3-3) 
1.0 July 2014 First issued



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 

Preface 

  
  

The  International  Association  of  Oil  &  Gas  Producers, which will typically report its own data as well as that of its 
OGP,  has  been  collecting  safety  incident  data  from  its associated contractors (see Appendix C). 
member companies globally since 1985. The data collected In  2010,  data  collection  was  initiated  to  capture  “causal 
are  entered  into  the  OGP  safety  database,  which  is  the 

factors” associated with fatal incidents and high potential 
largest database of safety performance in the E&P industry. 

events. These data are presented in section 2.11 of this report. 
The principal purpose of the data collection and analysis is Wherever practicable, results are presented graphically.  The 
to record the global safety performance of the contributing data underlying the charts are presented in Appendix B. The 
OGP member companies on an annual basis. The causal factors and chart data are available to OGP members 
submission  of  data  is  voluntary  and  is  not  mandated  by in editable format from the members’ area of the OGP web- 
OGP   membership.   The   annual   reports   provide   trend site.  The tables are organised according to the section in the 
analysis, benchmarking and the identification of areas and report where the chart appears. 
activities on which efforts should be focused to bring about Fatal   incident   and   high   potential   event   descriptions 
the greatest improvements in performance. 

previously included in this report as appendices C and D 
The   OGP   incident   reporting   system   covers   worldwide are now available for download on the OGP Safety Zone 
exploration and production (E&P) operations, both website:  http://info.ogp.org.uk/safety. 
onshore and offshore, and includes incidents involving both 

The main changes to the 2013 report are: 
member companies and their contractor employees. 

·  The   addition   of   TRIR   presented   by   country   (see 
The key indicators presented are: number of fatalities, fatal Section 3.7) 
accident rate, fatal incident rate, number of lost work day ·  FAR and LTIF by function are now presented as 5-year 
cases and number of lost work days, total recordable injury 

rolling average instead of the 3-year rolling average 
rate, lost time injury frequency, number of restricted duty 

·  The  region  previously  named  South  America  is  now 
case  and  restricted  duty  days,  and  number  of  medical 
treatment  cases.  The  report  presents  contributing  OGP referred to as South & Central America. The change 

members’  global  results  for  these  indicators,  which  are does not affect the historical results in this report. 

then analysed by region, function and company.  A code is These changes reflect the Safety Data Subcommittee’s aim 
used to preserve the anonymity of the reporting company, to improve the consistency of presentation of the data. 

  
 

Scope of reporting and data validation  
 
This  report  is  published  with  two  separate  addendums companies  is  conducted  by  the  OGP  secretariat  and  any 
which can be downloaded from the OGP public website. data  validated  by  an  OGP  workgroup  is  blind  coded  to 
These   provide   the   narrative   descriptions   for   the   fatal preserve  the  anonymity  of  the  reporting  companies.  A 
incidents   and   high   potential   events   which   have   been self-assessment  questionnaire  is  included  within  the  data 
reported by the participating member companies. The data submission  process  to  determine  the  alignment  between 
requested from participating OGP member companies are the  requested  data  and  the  company  submissions.  The 
published in an annual User Guide in two parts: information provided in this questionnaire is also used in 

·  Part A contains definitions and the scope of the safety the validation process. Data that appear to be incorrect and 
data  submission.  This  document  is  published  on  the that  cannot  be  confirmed  by  the  submitting  company  as 
OGP public website. correct may be excluded from the data set at the discretion 

·  Part B contains practical information for the Company of the secretariat. 

nominees   submitting   the   data,   copies   of   the   data The scope of data included within this report is detailed in 
submission forms and a data submission checklist. Appendix A. 

The safety data submission process is used for the collection 
of   data   relating   to   safety   performance,   process   safety 
performance  and  motor  vehicle  crashes.  The  OGP  safety 
database  has  built-in  data  validation  requirements  and 
each  company  data  submission  is  validated  by  the  OGP 
secretariat  and  the  workgroup  (Safety  Committee  Sub- 
Committee,  Task  Force  or  Network)  responsible  for  the 
data set in accordance with the OGP data collection and 
reporting  procedure.  Any  communication  with  reporting 

  
  

ii ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Data series 
 
Other OGP data reports include: 

·  Environmental Performance Indicators 
·  Health Performance Indicatorst 
·  Process Safety Event Data. 

These are available from the OGP website: 

http://www.ogp.org.uk/publications/ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP iii 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The   safety   statistics   for   2013   were   derived   from   data 
provided by the following companies: 
 

Contributing OGP Members 
  

Addax Petroleum Limited MOL 
  
 Adnoc  Nexen Inc 
 Anadarko  Oil Search 
 Bashneft  OMV 
 BG Group  Pan American Energy 
 BHP  Pemex 
 BP  Perenco 
  

Cairn Energy Petrobras 
  
 Cairn India  PETRONAS Carigali Sdn Bhd 

 Chevron  Premier Oil 
 CNOOC  PTT EP 
 ConocoPhillips  Qatar Petroleum 
 Dolphin Energy  RasGas 
 Dong E&P  Repsol 
  

E.ON RWE Dea AG 
  
 eni  Sasol 

 ExxonMobil  Shell Companies 
 GALP  Statoil 
 GDF Suez E&P International  Suncor 
 Hess Corporation  Talisman Energy 
 INPEX  Total 
 Kosmos  Tullow Oil 
  

Kuwait Oil Company Wintershall 
  
 Maersk Oil  Woodside 

 Marathon Oil Company  Yemen LNG 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

iv ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Contents 

 
 

Executive Summary vii 

1.   Summary 1-1 
1.1 General..................................................................................................................................................................................................  1-1 
1.2 Fatalities.......................................... ............................................................................................................................. .........................  1-2 
1.3 Total recordable injuries...................................................................................................................................................................  1-4 
1.4 Lost time injuries ................................................................................................................................................................................  1-5 

2. Overall results 2-1 
2.1 Fatalities...............................................................................................................................................................................................  2-1 
2.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR).................................................................................................................................................................  2-2 
2.3 Fatalities by incident category and activity..................................................................................................................................   2-3 
2.4 Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours............................................................................................................  2-5 
2.5 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) .............................................................................................................................................  2-6 
2.6 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)............................................................................................................................. ...................  2-7 
2.7 Lost work day cases by categories and activities .........................................................................................................................  2-8 
2.8 Severity of lost work day cases.......................................................................................................................................................  2-14 
2.9 Severity of restricted work day cases............................................................................................................................................  2-16 
2.10 Incident triangles.............................................................................................................................................................................  2-18 
2.11 Causal factors analysis ....................................................................................................................................................................  2-20 
2.12 OGP Life-Saving Rules ..................................................................................................................................................................  2-24 

3. Results by region 3-1 
3.1 Fatalities by region.............................................................................................................................................................................  3-1 
3.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR) by region...............................................................................................................................................  3-2 
3.3 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by region ...........................................................................................................................  3-2 
3.4 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) by region................................................................................ ..............................................  3-3 
3.5 FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages by region ......................................................................................................  3-4 
3.6 Severity of lost work day cases by region ......................................................................................................................................  3-5 
3.7 Individual country performance....................................................................................................................................................  3-5 
3.8 Incident triangles by region...................................................................... .......................................................................................   3-8 

4. Results by function 4-1 
4.1 Fatalities by function ........................................................................................................................................................................  4-1 
4.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR) – 5-year rolling average.....................................................................................................................  4-2 
4.3 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by function.................................................................................. .....................................  4-3 
4.4 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) – 5-year rolling average by function .............................................................................  4-3 
4.5 Severity of lost work day cases by function..................................................................................................................................  4-4 
4.6 Exploration performance.................................................................................................................................................................  4-5 
4.7 Drilling performance................................................................. .......................................................................................................  4-7 
4.8 Production performance.................................................................................................................. ................................................  4-9 
4.9 Construction performance.................................................................................................................. ..........................................  4-11 
4.10 Unspecifed performance.................................................................................................................. ..............................................  4-13 

5. Results by company 5-1 
5.1 Overall company results...................................................................................................................................................................  5-1 
5.2 Company results by function..........................................................................................................................................................  5-9 

Appendix A: Database dimensions A-1 

Appendix B: Data tables B-1 

Appendix C: Contributing companies C-1 

Appendix D: Countries represented D-1 

Appendix E: Glossary of terms E-1 
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP v 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
vi ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Executive Summary 

   
   

 
The 2013 OGP Safety Performance Indicators show that the Fig 0.1: Number of fatalities and fatal accident rate 

 
Fatal Accident Rate for reporting companies has decreased 2004–2013 [Data page B-2] 

 
by 11% compared with 2012. The number of fatalities has 120 6 

Fatalities 
decreased from 88 in 2012 to 80 in 2013. 33 of the fatalities FAR  
reported in 2013 occurred in 3 incidents. 100 5 

  
Analysis of the fatal incident descriptions has shown that 

80 4 
at  least  67%  of  the  fatal  incidents  reported  in  2013  can   
be linked to failure to follow the OGP Life Saving Rules 

60 3 
published in March 2012, see OGP report 459. 

 
There are a number of common causal factors related to the 40 2 
atal incidents and high potential events from 2010 to 2013.   

f  
 

The top 5 causal factors for 2013 are also the 5 causal factors 20 1 
 

that consistently appear in the 2012, 2011 and 2010 top 10   
 

for both fatal incidents and high potential events. These are: 0 0 
2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013 

·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate 
training/competence 

·  People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness: © International AssoFciiagtio 0n o.f2 O:OGil &P G Lasi fPero-dSucaervs ing Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents 
From ‘OGP Safety Performpanecer In dciceatonrs t– 2 0o13f d attao’ tal 2013 incidents [Data page B-6] 

Improper decision making or lack of judgment 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate Insufficient  information 

Core  rules  16% 
to  assign  a  rule  14% 

work standards/procedures  
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate  

supervision  
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate  

hazard identification or risk assessment No  appropriate 
rule  19% 

The 6th most common causal factor for fatal incidents, which 
did not show in the top 10 for High Potential Events, was: 

·  People (acts):  Following procedures:  Improper 
position (line of fire) 

Supplementary 
Personal  injury  performance  shows  the  lost  time  injury rules  51% 
frequency decreasing by 6% and the total recordable injury 
rate decreasing by 8% compared with 2012 results. However 
it can be seen that the severity of lost work day cases has 
increased. 

Fig 0.3: Lost time injury [Data and & B-3] 
frequency total recordable injury rate

Four fatal incidents were as a result of process safety events. per million hours worked page B-2     
5 

TRIR 

LTIF 

4 
Fatal accident rate (FAR) 

    
The number   of   company/contractor   fatalities   per 

 
100,000,000 (100 million) hours worked. 3

 
Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)  
The  number  of  recordable  injuries  (fatalities  +  lost 2 
work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical  
treatment cases) per 1,000,000 hours worked.  

 
Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 1

  
The number of  

lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
  

day cases) per 1,000,000 hours worked. 0 
2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  

  
  

© OGP vii 

Numberoffatalities 

FAR-Fatalaccidentsper100millionhoursworked 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
viii ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

1. Summary 

 
 
 

The OGP safety performance indicators report 
summarises  the  safety  performance  of  contributing 
OGP member companies for 2013. 

The key performance indicators (KPI) used to benchmark 
safety   performance   are:   number   of   fatalities,   fatal 
accident and incident rates, total recordable injury rate 
and lost time injury frequency. 

Third party fatalities are not included in this report. 
 
 
 

1.1 General 
 
 

·  The safety performance of contributing OGP 
member companies in 2013 is based on the analysis of 
3 771 million work hours of data. 

·  Submissions  were  made  by  50  of  the  62  operating 
company OGP members. 

·  The data reported cover operations in 110 countries. 
 
 
 

Hours worked 
millions [Data page B-19] 
4000 
 
3500 
 
3000 
 
2500 
 
2000 
  
1500 

work hours contractor 
 

 
1000  
 

500  

work hours company 
       

0 
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2013 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 1-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1.2 Fatalities 
   
   
Fig 1.2.1: Fatalities by reporting category, 2013  

inst  the  background  of  a  2%  increase  in  work  hours 
% fatalities associated with each reporting category A ga
[Data page B-3] r eported,  the  number  of  fatalities  has  decreased  from  88 

Exposure noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.3% in   2012  to  80  in  2013.  The  80  fatalities  occurred  in  43 

 Exposure electrical 1.3
% separate incidents. The resulting Fatal Accident Rate (2.12) 

Other 26.3% 
Falls from height 3.8% Overexertion, strain 1.3% is 11% lower than last year’s figure (2.38). The company and 

 contractor FAR are 1.83 and 2.20 respectively. Onshore and 
Explosions or burns 5.0% offshore FAR are 1.70 and 3.27 respectively. 
Pressure release 7.5%  
 The   reported   fatalities   are   divided   into   ‘activity’   and 

 
  ‘category’. The activity with the highest number of fatalities 
Caught in, under reported by the OGP member companies is ‘Transport–air’ 
or between 8.8%  
  (22%) with 17 fatalities as a result of 2 separate helicopter 

crash  incidents.  13  fatalities  (17%)  were  reported  in  13 
Assault or violent  
act 11.3%  separate incidents in the ‘Drilling, Workover, Well Services’ 
 

 activity and 12 fatalities (15%) were reported in 2 separate 
 

 events in the ‘Transport–water, including marine activity’ 
 

Water related, activity.  These  include  a  tug  that  capsized  during  static 
drowning 21.3% 

Struck by 12.5% tow  operations  to  an  export  tanker  in  Nigeria  in  which 
11 contractor employees lost their lives. One incident was 
reported in the ‘production operations’ activity (11% of the 
total  fatalities)  in  which  9  company  employees  lost  their 
lives in a terror attack in Algeria. 

Fig 1.2.2: Fatalities by activity, 2013 
With  regard  to  the  incident  category,  21  of  the  fatalities 

% fatalities associated with each activity [Data page B-3] 
 reported in 2013 (26%) were categorised as ‘Other‘ and were 

Seismic/survey operations related to 5 fatal incidents including the 2 helicopter crashes 
2.6% in which 17 people died and 3 incidents in which 4 people 

Unspeci   ed – other 3.8% Transport – air 21.8% 
 died for which the details were not available (2% of fatal 

incidents reported in 2012 were in the category ‘Other‘). 
Transport – land 7.7% 
 Fatalities categorised as ‘Water related, drowning’ were the 
Construction, commissioning, 
decommissioning 7.7% second greatest contributors to the fatality statistics with 17 
 fatalities in 6 separate incidents, accounting for 21% of the 
Production operations fatalities (1% in 2012). This includes the incident in Nigeria 
11.5% where a tug capsized resulting in 11 contractor deaths. 
 

Drilling, 
workover, 

well services 
16.7% 
 

Maintenance, inspection, 
testing 12.8% 

Transport – water, inc. marine activity 15.4% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

1-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Fig 1.2.3: Fatal accident rate - company and contractors 
The fatal accident rate for 2013 is 2.12, 11% lower than the 

per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2] 
2012 rate. The offshore FAR (3.27) for 2013 is more than 

8 
three times the 2012 result (0.89) and the onshore rate (1.7) Overall 
fell by 41%. Company  FAR 

Contractor  FAR 
6 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
0 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 1-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1.3 Total recordable injuries 
  
Fig 1.3.1: Total recordable injury rate – company & contractors 
per million hours worked [Data page B-2] The rate for all recordable injuries (fatalities, lost work day 

cases, restricted work day cases and medical treatment cases) 
6 

Overall was 1.60 injuries per million hours worked (1.74 in 2012). 
Contractor 
Company The only region that showed an increase in TRIR in 2013 

5 
compared with the TRIR for 2012 was South & Central 

 
America (3%). 

4 
A  reduction  in  TRIR  from  2012  to  2013  was  shown  in 

 
Africa  (8%),  Asia/Australasia  (29%),  Europe  (2%),  FSU 

3 (18%), Middle East (12%) and North America (9%). 
 

2 
 

1 
 

0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
1-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1.4 Lost time injuries 
  

Fig 1.4.1: Lost time injury frequency – company & contractors 
The overall Lost Time Injury Frequency (LTIF) fell from per million hours worked [Data page B-3] 
0.48 in 2012 to 0.45 in 2013. This represents a reduction 

2.0 
of 6% compared with 2012 and 72 fewer lost time injuries. Overall 

 Contractor 
This reduction is similar in both company and contractor 

 Company 
performance. The company and contractor LTIF both show 
a reduction compared with 2012 (15% and 4% respectively). 1.5 

The onshore and offshore LTIF both also show a reduction  

compared with 2012 (11% and 5% respectively).  
 

There were 1627 reported injuries resulting in at least one 1.0 
day off work, 1312 incidents were contractor related and 315  
were company related.  

·  OGP member companies reported 45 772 days of work  

lost through injuries. 0.5 

·  The  greatest  number  of  incidents  was  reported  as            

‘Struck by’ (367 cases accounting for 23% of the total;            

2012 results showed 408 cases accounting for 24% of         
0.0   

the total). 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

·  ‘Caught in, under or between’ accounted for 341 cases, Fig 1.4.2: Lost work day cases – by category 
% LWDCs associated with each reporting category 

21% of the total (21% of the total in 2012). [Data page B-4] 
·  The lost time injury frequency has plateaued from 2007 Exposureelectrical0.9%        Pressurerelease0.7% 

Exposurenoise,chemical, 
for both companies and contractors. biological,vibration1.2% Assaultorviolentact0.6% 

Waterrelated,drowning1.3% Con  nedspace0.2% 
Explosionsorburns3.7% Struckby22.6% 

 
Other5.3% 
Cut,puncture, 
scrape6.1% 
 
Overexerstion, 
strain8.5% 
 
 
 
Fallsfromheight10.8% 

Caughtin,under 
orbetween21.0% 

Slipsandtrips(atsameheight)17.1% 

Fig 1.4.3: Lost work day cases – by activity 
% LWDCs associated with each activity 
[Data page B-4] 

Transport – air 1.7% Seismic/survey operations 0.9% 
 

Transport – land 5.6% Diving, subsea, ROV 0.6%  
Transport – water,    
including marine 
activity 6.5%   

Drilling, workover, 
  well services 20.0%  

 
Unspecified –  
other 7.3%  

  
  
Office, warehouse,    
accommodation, 
catering 8.4%    
    

Maintenance, 
Construction,  inspection, 

testing 14.8%  
commissioning, 
decommissioning 9.0%   
    
Lifting, crane, rigging,  
deck operations 11.6% Production operations 13.7%  

  
  

© OGP 1-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

2. Overall results 

 
 
 
 

In this section the primary indicators used to measure 
contributing OGP member companies’ safety 
performance are;   the number and nature of fatalities, 
total  recordable  injury  rate  (TRIR),  fatal  accident  rate 
(FAR), fatal incidents per 100 million work hours, and 
lost time injury frequency (LTIF). 

Third party incidents are not included in this report. 
 
 
 
 

 

2.1 Fatalities 
 

Fatalities Onshore  2013 
(2012) Offshore( 2 2001123) Total( 2 2001123)  

Company 13  (10) 2  (2) 15  (12) 
Contractor 34  (70) 31  (6) 65  (76) 
Total 47  (80) 33  (8) 80  (88) 
 
 
 
Company/contractor fatalities 

 
·  80 company and contractor fatalities were reported in Fig 2.1.1: Number of fatalities and fatal accident rate 

 
2013. This is 8 fewer than were reported in 2012 and 15 2004-2013 [Data page B-2] 

 
 

more than in 2011. 
120 6 

·  Fatalities 
The 80 fatalities occurred in 43 separate incidents. FAR  

·  In  2013,  13  contractors  died  as  a  result  of  a  single 100 5 
helicopter crash in the rainforest in Peru.   

·  11 contractors died when a tug capsized during static 80 4 
  

tow operations to an export tanker in Nigeria. 
60 3 

·  9 company employees and 31 third party individuals   
died as the result of a terror attack in Algeria. 

40 2 
·  4 contractors died as a result of a helicopter ditching in   

the sea in the UK. 20 1 
·  There   were   4   incidents   that   involved   2   fatalities.    

These were; 0 0 
2004    2005    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013 

ê A boat crashed and sank during a water inspection in 
Mexico 

ê An oil tank exploded during a maintenance operation © International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
From ‘OGP Safety Performance Indicators – 2013 data’ 

in China 
ê A fatal incident in the USA, no further information 

has been provided 
ê An uncontrolled release of pressure from a gas cooler 

in the Netherlands during a leak test 
  
  
  
  

 
 

© OGP 2-1 

Numberoffatalities 

FAR-Fatalaccidentsper100millionhoursworked 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR) 
   
   

  
Fig 2.2.1: Fatal accident rate – company & contractors 

2013  (2012)  FAR               Relative to 2012 FAR 
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2]  

 Company                           1.83  (1.58)                      (16% higher) 
8  Contractor                         2.20  (2.59)                        (15% lower) 
 Overall Overall                             2.12  (2.38)                        (11% lower) 
 Company  FAR Onshore                           1.70  (2.87)                      (41% lower) 
 Contractor  FAR Offshore                           3.27  (0.89)                 (267%  higher) 
6  
  
  
 ·  In 2013 there were 15 company fatalities (12 in 2012) as 
4 

a result of 7 separate incidents. 
 
 ê 9 of the company fatalities were as a result of a single 

 terror attack in Algeria in which a further 31 third 
2 party individuals lost their lives. 

·  In 2013 there were 65 contractor fatalities (76 in 2012). 
           ê 13  of  the  contractor  fatalities  were  the  result  of  a 

          
0 single helicopter crash in the rainforest in Peru. 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 ê 11 of the contractor fatalities were the result of a tug 
capsize  during  static  tow  operations  to  an  export 
tanker in Nigeria. 

Fig 2.2.2: Fatal accident rate – onshore & offshore  
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2] The  difference  between  the  onshore  and  offshore  FAR 

 
  displays  a  large  variation  over  the  10-year  period  shown. 
8 Neither is consistently lower. This is generally attributable 
 Overall to  single  transportation  or  fire  and  explosion  incidents 
 Onshore involving high numbers of fatalities. 
 Offshore 

6 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
0 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 
 
 
 
 

Fatal accident rate (FAR) 

The   number   of   company/contractor   fatalities   per 
100 000 000 (100 million) hours worked. 
  
  

2-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.3 Fatalities by incident category and activity 
  

·  The largest proportion of the fatalities reported in 2013  
were categorised as ‘Other’ (26%) (2% in 2012). Fig 2.3.1: Fatalities by reporting category 2013 

ê 13 of the fatalities were as a result of a single helicopter % fatalities associated with each reporting category 
crash in the rainforest in Peru [Data page B-3] 

ê 4  of  the  fatalities  were  the  result  of  a  helicopter Exposure noise, chemical,  
biological, vibration 1.3% Exposure electrical 1.3% 

ditching into the sea in the UK Overexertion, strain 1.3% 
Falls from height 3.8% Other 26.3% 

ê No   detailed   information   was   provided   by   the  
reporting company for 2 incidents Explosions or burns 5.0%  

·  21% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were categorised   
Pressure release 7.5% 

as ‘Water related, drowning’ (1% in 2012).   
ê 11  contractor  employees  lost  their  lives  when  a  tug   

capsized  during  static  tow  operations  to  an  export Caught in, under  
or between 8.8% 

tanker in Nigeria   
 

ê 2  workers  died  when  their  boat  crashed  and  sank Assault or violent 
act 11.3%  

during a water inspection in Mexico   
ê A technician drowned while bathing in a river in Peru   

 
ê One man was lost overboard when a seismic vessel was Water related, 

drowning 21.3% 
hit by unexpected waves in Uruguay Struck by 12.5% 

 
ê A contractor was lost overboard when the rig that he  

was working on capsized in Angola 
Fig 2.3.2: Fatalities by activity, 2013 

ê A mud logger fell into the sea from the access ramp to % fatalities associated with each activity 
a tender barge in Myanmar [Data page B-3] 

·  13% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were the result    
Seismic/survey operations 

of individuals being struck by falling or moving objects  
2.6%  

(16% in 2012). Unspeci   Transport – air 21.8% 
ed – other 3.8% 

ê Two of the fatalities involved separate motor vehicle  
Transport – land 7.7% 

crashes 
·  11% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were categorised Construction, commissioning,  

decommissioning 7.7% 
as ‘Assault or violent act’ (3% in 2012) and were the   

result of a single terror attack in Algeria.  
Production operations 
11.5%  

·  A reduction is seen in the number of deaths resulting  
from land transport incidents (6 fatalities) compared Drilling, 
with 2012 (9 fatalities in 2012, 15 in 2011). workover, 

well services 
16.7% 

ê 6 fatalities were associated with 6 separate incidents 
Maintenance, inspection, 

·  35 of the fatal incidents involved one fatality. testing 12.8%  
Transport – water, inc. marine activity 15.4% 

·  Incidents  which  involved  2  or  more  fatalities  were 
reported under the categories: 

ê Other (3 incidents). 
ê Water related, drowning (2 incidents). 
ê Assault and violent act (1 incident). 
ê Explosions or burns (1 incident). 
ê Pressure release (1 incident). 

·  There   were   no   fatal   incidents   reported   under   the 
following categories: 

ê Cut, puncture, scrape. 
ê Confined space. 
ê Slips, trips, falls (at same height). 

  
© OGP 2-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fatalities – by incident category and activity, 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 0 6 
Diving, subsea, ROV 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 2 0 2 2 0 13 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 
Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 2 0 10 
Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Production  operations 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 
Seismic/survey  operations 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 
Transport–air 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17 17 
Transport–land 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 6 
Transport–water,  including  marine  activity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 11 0 12 
Unspecified–other 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 
Total 9 7 0 0 4 1 1 3 1 6 0 10 17 21 80 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-4 ©OGP 

Assaultorviolentact 

Caughtin,underorbetween 

Confinedspace 

Cut,puncture,scrape 

Explosionorburns 

Exposureelectrical 

Exposurenoise,chemical,biological, 
vibration 

Fallsfromheight 

Overexertion,strain 

Pressurerelease 

Slips,trips(atsameheight) 

Struckby 

Waterrelated,drowning 

Other 

Total 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.4 Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours 
  
  
 

Fig 2.4.1: Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours – 
Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours 

company & contractors 
2013  (2012) Relative  to  2012 [Data page B-2] 

Company 0.85  (0.79)   (8% higher)  
6 

Contractor 1.22  (1.57)   (22% lower)  Overall 
Overall 1.14  (1.41)   (19% lower)  Contractor 
Onshore Company 

0.94  (1.58)   (41% lower)  
Offshore 1.68  (0.89) (89%  higher) Overall FAR* 

 

4 
   

The number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours   
is  a  measure  of  the  frequency  with  which  fatal  incidents   

occur, in contrast to the FAR which measures the frequency   

of   fatalities.   Accordingly,   for   company   and   contractor 2  

fatalities, the number of fatal incidents per 100 million work  
 

 
hours will be less than or equal to the FAR.  Comparison of  

 
FAR and number of fatal incidents per 100 million work  

 
hours gives an indication of the magnitude of the incidents  

 
in terms of lives lost. 0 

·  Overall the number of fatal incidents per 100 million 2004       2005       2006       2007       2008       2009       2010       2011       2012 2013 

work hours has decreased by 19% compared with last *FAR: Fatal Accident Rate 
(Number of fatalities per 100 million hours worked) 

year and is the lowest on record (43 fatal incidents in 
 

2013, 52 fatal incidents in 2012). 
Fig 2.4.2: Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours – 
onshore & offshore 
[Data page B-2] 

6 
Overall 
Onshore 
Offshore 
Overall FAR* 
 

4 
 

Fig 2.4.3: Number of fatalities and fatal incidents 
10 year trend 
   
140  

Fatalities 
 

Fatal incidents 2 
120  
  
100  
  

80 0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

60 *FAR: Fatal Accident Rate 
(Number of fatalities per 100 million hours worked) 

40 
Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours 

20    
 The  number  of  incidents  that  result  in  one  or  more 

   
0 fatalities per 100,000,000 (100 million) hours. 

2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013   
  
  

© OGP 2-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.5 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) 
  
  

 
Fig 2.5.1: Total recordable injury rate – company & contractors 

2013  (2012)  TRIR              Relative to 2012 TRIR 
per million hours worked [Data page B-2] 

Company                           0.95  (1.12)                        (15% lower) 
6 

Overall Contractor                          1.77  (1.90)                         (7% lower) 
 Contractor Overall                             1.60  (1.74)                       (8% lower) 

Company Onshore                           1.33  (1.49)                       (11% lower) 
5 

Offshore                           2.34  (2.53)                    (8%  lower) 
 

 
4  
  

 
3 Submissions  without  information  on  medical  treatment 
 cases  were  filtered  out,  leaving  a  dataset  of  3665  million 
2 hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A). 

An overall reduction in TRIR of 8% is seen in 2013. 

1 
 

0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

 
 

Fig 2.5.2: Total recordable injury rate – onshore & offshore 
per million hours worked [Data page B-2] 

 
6 

Overall 
 

Onshore 
 Offshore 
5 
 
 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 
 
 
1 
 

0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

 
 
 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) 

The  number  of  recordable  injuries  (fatalities  +  lost 
work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical 
treatment cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked. 
  
  

2-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.6 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 
  
  

2013  (2012)  LTIF   Relative to 2012 LTIF Fig 2.6.1: Lost time injury frequency – company & contractors 
Company 0.40  (0.47)   (15% lower) per million hours worked [Data page B-3] 
Contractor 0.47  (0.49)   (4% lower) 2.0 

Overall 
Overall 0.45  (0.48)   (6% lower) 

Contractor 
Onshore 0.34  (0.38)   (11% lower) Company 
Offshore 0.77  (0.81) (5%  lower) 

1.5 
  
  
  
1.0 

·  The overall LTIF decreased by 6% from 0.48 in 2012 
 

to 0.45 in 2013.  
·  The company LTIF decreased by 15% compared with  

2012. 0.5 
  

There were 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in 
  

at least one day off work, which equates to an average of 31  
injuries  resulting  in  at  least  one  day  off  work  every  week 0.0 
of  the  year.  Although  the  absolute  number  of  LWDCs 2004       2005       2006       2007       2008       2009       2010       2011       2012 2013 

has reduced (1699 in 2012), the time away from work has  
 

increased compared with 2012. See Section 2.8 for further 
information on Lost Work Day Case severity. Fig 2.6.2: Lost time injury frequency – onshore & offshore 

per million hours worked [Data page B-3] 
2.0 

Overall 
Onshore 
Offshore 

1.5 
 
 
 
1.0 
 
 
 
0.5 
 
 
 
0.0 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 

The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
day cases) per 1 000 000   hours worked. 
  
  

© OGP 2-7 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.7 Lost work day cases by categories and activities 
  
  
Fig 2.7.1: Lost work day cases – by category Lost work day cases by category 
% LWDCs associated with each reporting category Number             % 
[Data page B-4] 

Assault  or  violent  act                                       10            0.6 
Exposure electrical 0.9%          Pressure release 0.7% Caught  in,  under  or  between                               341             21 

Exposure noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.2% Assault or violent act 0.6% Confined  space                                             4            0.2 

Cut,  puncture,  scrape                                      99            6.1 
Water related, drowning 1.3% Con   ned space 0.2% 

Explosion  or  burns                                         60            3.7 
Struck by 22.6% 

Explosions or burns 3.7% 
Exposure  electrical                                         14            0.9 

 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration                20            1.2 

Other 5.3% 
Falls  from  height                                          176           10.8 

Cut, puncture, 
Overexertion,  strain                                       138            8.5 

scrape 6.1% 
 Pressure  release                                           11            0.7 

Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height)                             279           17.1 
Overexerstion, 
strain 8.5% Struck  by                                                367           22.6 

Water  related,  drowning 21 1.3 
Other 87 5.3 
Total 1627 
 

Falls from height 10.8% 
Caught in, under 
or between 21.0% 

Slips and trips (at same height) 17.1%  
Of the 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in at least 
one  day  off  work,  1312  incidents  (81%)  were  contractor- 
related  and  315  (19%)  were  company-related  (1356  and 
343 respectively for 2012). The lost work day case category 
was provided for all of the Lost Work Day Cases reported, 
although 5% of the cases were categorised as ‘Other’. 

The pie chart shows the percentage of LWDCs within each 
of the reporting categories for 2013. 

·  The  greatest  number  of  incidents  was  reported  as 
‘Struck by’ (367 cases accounting for 23% of LWDCs), 
(2012 results showed 408 cases accounting for 24%). 

·  ‘Caught in, under or between’ accounted for 21% of the 
total reported cases (21% in 2012). 

·  In comparison with 2012, the 2013 results were very 
similar. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day case (LWDC) 

A   Lost   work   day   case   is   an   incident   resulting 
in  at  least  one  day  off  work.  Fatal  incidents  are 
not included. 
  
  

2-8 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by category – company & contractors 
  
  
 

Fig 2.7.2: Lost work day cases – by category 
Company Contractor 

Assault  or  violent  act 2 8 Company [Data page B-5] 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 64 277 Assault or violent act 0.6% Exposure – Electrical 0.6% 
Confined  space 0 4 Exposure – noise, chemical, 

biological, vibration 1.0% Pressure release 0.6% 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 29 70 

Explosions or burns 2.5% Water related, drowning 0.6% 
Explosion  or  burns 8 52  Slips and trips 
Exposure  electrical 2 12 

Other 5.1% (at same height) 25.1% 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration 3 17  
Falls  from  height 33 143 

Cut, puncture, scrape 9.2% 
Overexertion,  strain 35 103 
Pressure  release 2 9  
Slips  and   

trips  (at  same  height) 79 200 
Struck  by 40 327 

Falls from height 10.5% 
Water  related,  drowning 2 19 
Other 16 71 
Total 315 1312 

   
Overexertion, strain 11.1% Caught in, under 

Of  the  1627  reported  lost  work  day  cases  resulting  in  at or between 20.3% 
 

least  one  day  off  work,  879  incidents  (54%)  were  related Struck by 12.7% 
to onshore activity and 748 (46%) were related to offshore  

activity (972 and 727 respectively for 2012). Fig 2.7.3: Lost work day cases – by category 
Contractor [Data page B-5] 

Exposure – Electrical 0.9% Pressure release 0.7%  
Exposure – noise, chemical, biological, vibration 1.3% Assault or violent act 0.6%  
Water related, drowning 1.4% Confined space 0.3%  
   
Explosions or burns 4.0%   
Cut, puncture, scrape 5.3% Struck by 24.9%  
  
Other 5.4%  

 
  

 
  

 
Overexertion, strain 7.9%  

 
  

 
  

 
  
Falls from height 10.9%  

 
  

 
Caught in, under or 

Slips and trips 
(at same height) 15.2% between 21.1%  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-9 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by category – onshore & offshore 
  
  

 
Fig 2.7.4: Lost work day cases – by category 

Onshore       Offshore 
Onshore [Data page B-5] Assault  or  violent  act                                        7             3 

Assault  or  violent  act  0.8% Exposure  –  Electrical  0.5% Caught  in,  under  or  between                               142           199 
Pressure  release  0.9% Confined  space                                             3             1 

Exposure  –  noise, Confined  space  0.3% 
chemical,  biological, Cut,  puncture,  scrape                                       42            57 
vibration  1.6%  

ater  related,  drowning  0.3% Explosion  or  burns                                         38            22 
Explosions  or  burns  4.3% W

Exposure  electrical                                          4            10 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape  4.8% Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration                14             6 

Struck  by  23.7% Falls  from  height                                          105            71 
 Overexertion,  strain                                        65            73 

Other  7.3% Pressure  release                                             8             3 
 Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height)                             176           103 
Overexertion, Struck  by                                                208           159 
strain  7.4% Water  related,  drowning                                     3            18 
 

Other                                                    64            23 
 Total                                                    879           748 

Slips  and  trips  
(at  same  height) 

Falls  from  height  11.9% 20.0% 
 Of  the  1627  reported  lost  work  day  cases  resulting  in  at 

Caught  in,  under  or  between  16.2% least  one  day  off  work,  879  incidents  (54%)  were  related 
 to onshore activity and 748 (46%) were related to offshore 

Fig 2.7.5: Lost work day cases – by category 
activity (972 and 727 respectively for 2012). 

Offshore [Data page B-5] 
Exposure – Electrical 1.3% Exposure – noise, chemical, biological, vibration 0.8% 

 or violent act 0.4% 
Water related, drowning 2.4% Assault

 ressure release 0.4%   
Explosions or burns 2.9% P

 Con   ned space 0.1%  
 Other 3.1%   
 Cut, puncture, Caught in, under or  

tween 26.6% 
 scrape 7.6% be

   
   
 Falls from 

  
 height 9.5% 

  
 

   
 

 
verexertion,   

O

 strain 9.8% 
  

  
  

 Slips and trips Struck by 21.3%  
 (at same height) 13.8%  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-10 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by activity 
  
  
 

Fig 2.7.6: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Number % 

Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning 146 9 % LWDCs associated with each activity 
[Data page B-5] 

Diving,  subsea,  ROV 9 0.6 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 326 20 Transport  –  air  1.7%             Seismic/survey  operations  0.9% 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 189 11.6 

iving,  subsea,  ROV  0.6% 
Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 241 Transport  –  land  5.6% D

14.8 
Transport  –  water,  

Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 136 8.4 including  marine 
y  6.5% 

Production  operations 223 13.7 activit
Drilling,  workover, 

 well  services  20.0% 
Seismic/survey  operations 14 0.9 
Transport  –  air 27 1.7  

Unspecified  – 
 other  7.3%  

Transport  –  land 91 5.6 
Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity 106 6.5   

Office,  warehouse, 
Unspecified  –  other 119 7.3 accommodation,  

ering  8.4% 
Total 1627 cat  

 
Maintenance, 

Lost  work  day  case  activities  were  reported  for  all  of  the  inspection, 
Construction, testing  14.8% 

1627 Lost Work Day Cases reported, although 7% of the commissioning, 
decommissioning  9.0%  

cases  were  reported  as  ‘Unspecified-other’.  In  2012,  12%   
were reported as ‘Unspecified-other’. 

Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  
deck  operations  11.6% Production  operations  13.7% 

In comparison with 2012, 2013 results were very similar. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-11 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by activity – company & contractor 
  
  

 
Fig 2.7.7: Lost work day cases – by activity 

Company     Contractor 
Company [Data page B-5] Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning                 9           137 

 
Transport  –  water,  including Diving,  subsea,  ROV                                         0             9 

Transport  –  air  1.9% marine  activity  0.6% Drilling,  workover,  well  services                              28           298 
Construction,  commissioning,  Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations                        26           163 
decommissioning  2.9%  Maintenance,  inspection,  testing                             54           187 
 

Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering                  48            88 
Transport  –  land  4.1%  

 Production  operations                                       91           132 
Lifting,  crane, Production Seismic/survey  operations                                    0            14 
rigging,  deck operations  28.9% 
operations  8.3% Transport  –  air                                              6            21 
 Transport  –  land                                            13            78 
Drilling,  workover, Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity                     2           104 
well  services  8.9% 

Unspecified  –  other                                         38            81 
Total 315 1312 
 

Unspecified  – 
other  12.1% 
  

Office,  warehouse, Maintenance, 
accommodation, inspection, 
catering  15.2% testing  17.1% 

 
 

Fig 2.7.8: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Contractor [Data page B-5] 
 

Transport  –  air  1.6% Seismic/survey  operations1.1% 
Transport  –  land  5.9% 

Diving,  subsea,  ROV  0.7% 
 

 
Unspecified  –  other  6.2% Drilling,  workover, 

well  services  22.7% 
Office,  warehouse, 
accommodation, 
catering  6.7% 
Transport  –  water, 
including  marine 
activity  7.9% 
 
Production 
operations  10.1% 

Maintenance, 
inspection, 
testing  14.3% 

   
Construction,  commissioning, 
decommissioning  10.4% Lifting,  cra ne,  rigging,  

deck  opera tions  12.4%  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-12 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by activity – onshore & offshore 
  
  
 

ig 2.7.9: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Onshore F

Offshore 
Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning 108 38 Onshore [Data page B-5] 
Diving,  subsea,  ROV 1 8   

eismic/survey 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 177 149 Transport  –  water, S

operations1.4% Transport  –  air  0.8% 
including  marine 

Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 84 105 activity  1.5% 
Diving,  subsea,  ROV  0.1% 

Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 97 144 
Unspecified  –  other  8.6%  

Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 91 45  
Production  operations 124 99 Drilling,  workover, 

 well  services  20.1% 
Seismic/survey  operations 12 2 

Lifting,  crane,  rigging, 
Transport  –  air 7 20 deck  operations  9.6% 
Transport  –  land 89 2 
Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity 13 93 
Unspecified  –  other 76 43 Transport  –  
Total 879 748 land  10.1% 

Production 
 operations 

14.1% 
Office,  warehouse,  
accommodation, 
catering  10.4%  
 

Maintenance, Construction,  commissioning, 
inspection,  testing  11.0% 

decommissioning  12.3% 
 
 

Fig 2.7.10: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Offshore [Data page B-5] 

  
Diving,  subsea, Seismic/survey 
ROV  1.1% operations  0.3% 

Transport  –  air  2.7% 
Transport  –  land  0.3% 

Construction,  commissioning, 
decommissioning  5.1%  
 

Drilling,  workover, 
Unspecified  –  other  5.7% well  services  19.9% 

 
Office,  warehouse, 
accommodation,  
catering  6.0% 
  
  
Transport  –  water,  
including  marine 

Maintenance, 
activity  12.4% 

inspection, 
testing  19.3% 

 

Production  operations  13.2% 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging, 
deck  operations  14.0% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-13 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.8 Severity of lost work day cases 
  
  

 
Fig 2.8.1: Severity of lost work day cases – company & contractors 

2013  (2012)  severity     Relative  to  2012 
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5] severity Rela2t0iv1e2    taov e 2ra0g0e8 - 

severity 
60 

Company             43.52  (38.81)         12%  higher           18%  higher 
 

Contractor            42.88  (41.28)          4%  higher             6%  higher 
50 Overall               42.98  (40.74)          6%  higher             9%  higher 

Onshore 35.76  (36.83) 3%  lower 1%  lower 
Offshore 51.21  (45.99) 11%  higher 11%  higher 

40 
  

 
30 

OGP  member  companies  reported  a  total  of  45 777  days 
lost (LWDC days) through injuries. 

20 
Overall ·  The number of days lost was reported for 66% of the 

 
Contractor database (see Appendix A and Appendix C). 

10 Company 
·  The   offshore   LWDC   severity   is   43%   higher   than 

onshore. 
0           ·  The number of days lost per lost work day case overall 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 has increased by 6% compared with 2012 results. 
 
 

Fig 2.8.2: Severity of lost work day cases – onshore & offshore 
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5] 
60 
 

50 
 

40 
 

30 
  

 
20 

Overall 
 

Onshore 
Offshore 

10 
 

0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Severity of lost work day cases 

Severity  is  defined  as  the  average  number  of  days 
lost (where reported) for each lost work day case. 
  
  

2-14 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

The figures show the average number of days lost per LWDC Fig 2.8.3: Severity of lost work day cases – company & contractors 
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5] 

in 2013 compared with the average for the previous 5-year 
period. A 9% increase is shown in overall LWDC severity 2008-2012 

when compared with the previous 5-year period. 2013 
 
 

Company 
 
 
 

Contractor 
 
 
 

Overall 
 

0                   20                  40                  60 
 

Fig 2.8.4: Severity of lost work day cases – onshore & offshore 
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5] 

2008-2012 
2013 
 
 

Offshore 
 
 
 

Onshore 
 
 
 

Overall 
 

0                   20                  40                  60 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-15 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.9 Severity of restricted work day cases 
  
  

 
Fig 2.9.1: Severity of restricted work day cases – 

2013  (2012) 
company & contractors severity Relative  steov  e2r0it1y2  Relative  to  200se8v-e2r0it1y2  
average days lost per RWDC [Data page B-6] Company            17.17  (13.84)         24%  higher             19%  higher 
20 Contractor          14.24  (12.05)         18%  higher             16%  higher 

Overall 14.51  (12.21) 19%  higher 16%  higher 
Onshore 15.42  (11.48) 34%  higher 25%  higher 
Offshore 13.03  (13.41) 3%  lower 2%  higher 

15 
    
    
   
10   A total of 12 507 days were restricted (RWDC days) as a 

   result of restricted work day cases, in the sense that normal 
   duties could not be performed. This compares with 45 777 
   days   lost   (LWDC   days)   on   a   24%   larger   dataset   (see 

5  Appendix A and Appendix C). 
Overall 

  ·  The number of days lost per restricted work day case 
Contractor 

 
Company  overall  has  increased  by  19%  compared  with  2012 

   results. 
0 

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011       2012 2013 ·  The  number  of  days  lost  to  restricted  work  per  case 
 increased most noticeably in onshore operations with 

Fig 2.9.2: Severity of restricted work day cases – a rate of 15.42 for 2013, an increase of 34% compared 
onshore & offshore with the 2012 rate (11.48). 
average days lost per RWDC [Data page B-6] 

·  The severity for company activities of 17.17 represents 
20 

an  increase  of  24%  compared  with  the  rate  for  2012 
(13.84). 

 

15 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 

5 
Overall 
Onshore 
Offshore 

0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

 
 

Severity of restricted work day cases 

The  average  number  of  days  of  restricted  work  per 
restricted work day case. 

Restricted   work   day   case   days   are   not   reported 
by  all  companies.  The  database  for  this  analysis  is 
therefore reduced to 2,008 million work hours, 53% 
of all reported hours (see Appendix A). 
  
  

2-16 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

The  figures  show  the  average  number  of  days  lost  per Fig 2.9.3: Severity of restriced work day cases – 
RWDC in 2013 compared with the average for the previous company & contractors 

average days of restricted work per RWDC [Data page B-6] 
5-year period.  The overall average shows an increase of 16% 

 
compared with the average for the previous 5-year period. 

2008-2012 
2013 
 
 

Company 
 
 
 

Contractor 
 
 
 

Overall 
 

0              5             10             15             20 
 
 
 

Fig 2.9.4: Severity of restriced work day cases – 
onshore & offshore 
average days of restricted work per RWDC [Data page B-6] 

2008-2012 
2013 
 
 

Offshore 
 
 
 

Onshore 
 
 
 

Overall 
 

0              5              10             15             20 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-17 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.10   Incident triangles 
  
  

Year Ratio  of  lost  time  injuries  to In this section the relative numbers of types of occupational 
fatalities Ratio  of  total  recordable  fiantjaulriiteiess   to 

injury  are  shown  in  the  form  of  ‘incident  triangles’.  The 
2013 21:1 73:1 

ratios  have  been  corrected  to  account  for  the  absence,  in 
2012 20:1   72:1 
2011 22:1   93:1 some data submissions, of medical treatment cases. 
2010 15:1   60:1 
2009 16:1 63:1 

 

2013 incident triangles 
 

Overall 

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries 

73 recordable injuries 
 

Company 

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries 

48 recordable injuries 
 

Contractor 

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries 

79 recordable injuries 
 
 
 

2012 incident triangles 
   

Lost time injuries   Overall 
Lost work day cases and fatalities.   

  1 fatality 
Recordable injuries   20           lost time injuries 
Fatalities,   lost   work   day   cases,   restricted   work   

  72 recordable injuries 
day  cases  and  medical  treatment  cases.  Data  are 

  
only  included  where  medical  treatment  cases  are  
reported for the data set.   Company 

  
Ratio of lost time injuries to fatalities 1 fatality 

  
The   number   of   lost   time   injuries   divided   by   the   28                lost time injuries 
total    number    of    fatalities    (Lost    time    injuries/   69 recordable injuries 
fatalities).    
Ratio of total recordable injuries to fatalities   

Contractor 
  

The number of recordable injuries divided by the total   1 fatality 
number of fatalities (recordable injuries/fatalities).   

18          lost time injuries 
  
  72 recordable injuries 
  
  

2-18 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The   varying   ratio   of   fatalities   to   lost   time   injuries   to 
recordable injuries for 2012-2013 challenges the traditional 
notion of recordable injuries and lost time injuries overall as 
a precursor to fatalities as shown in the incident triangles. In 
some incident categories however such as “confined space”, 
“assault or violent act” and “water related, drowning”, the 
ratio will be higher as shown in the tables below. 
 
 

Category LTIs  (fatalities+LWDCs) Fatalities   Ratio LTI: Fatality 
Assault  or  violent  act 19 9 2:1 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 348 7 50:1 
Confined  space 4 0 n/a 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 99 0 n/a 
Explosions  or  burns 64 4 16:1 
Exposure  electrical 15 1 15:1 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration 21 1 21:1 
Falls  from  height 179 3 60:1 
Overexertion,  strain 139 1 139:1 
Pressure  release 17 6 3:1 
Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height) 279 0 n/a 
Struck  by 377 10 38:1 
Water  related,  drowning 38 17 2:1 
Other 108 21 5:1 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity LTIs  (fatalities+LWDCs) Fatalities   Ratio LTI: Fatality 
Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning 152 6 25:1 
Diving,  subsea,  ROV 9 0 n/a 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 339 13 26:1 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 191 2 96:1 
Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 251 10 25:1 
Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 136 0 n/a 
Production  operations 232 9 26:1 
Seismic  /  survey  operations 16 2 8:1 
Transport  –  air 44 17 3:1 
Transport  –  land 97 6 16:1 
Transport  –  water,  incl.  marine  activity 118 12 10:1 
Unspecified  –  other 122 3 41:1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-19 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2.11   Causal factors analysis 
 

The allocation of ‘causal factors’ to fatal incidents and high 
potential  events  was  requested  as  part  of  the  2013  data 
submission. This request was first made in 2010, therefore a 
comparison of four years of data is possible. 

To standardise the response an OGP list of causal factors 
and a glossary was provided to the member companies as 
part  of  the  OGP  User  Guide.  The  causal  factors  list  is 
divided into two sections: 

·  People (Acts) classifications usually involve either the 
actions of a person or actions which were required but 
not carried out or were incorrectly performed. There 
are four major categories of actions, with an additional 
level of detail under each of the major categories. 

·  Process   (Conditions)   classifications   usually   involve 
some type of physical hazard or organizational aspect 
out of the control of the individual. There are five major 
classification  categories,  with  an  additional  level  of 
detail under each of the major categories. 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-20 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2.11.1   Fatal incident causal factors 
  
Causal factors are divided into two separate groups, People The causal factors assigned to fatal incidents are shown below. 
(Acts)  and  Process  (Conditions),  see  OGP  User  Guide The highlighted content indicates the top 10 causal factors 
(Report 2013su) and Glossary for details. assigned to fatal incidents in 2013 compared with 2012, 2011 

·  34  of  the  43  fatal  incidents  reported  were  assigned and 2010. Seven of the ten were the same for all four years. 
causal factors (47 of 52 in 2012) Additional  information  on  the  fatal  incidents  reported 

·  222 causal factors were assigned for the 43 fatal incidents by region can be found on the OGP Safety Zone website: 
·  Between  2  and  16  causal  factors  were  assigned  per http://info.ogp.org.uk/Safety/.    The    information 

incident (between 1 and 11 in 2012). provided  includes  a  narrative  description  of  the  incident, 
the corrective actions and recommendations and the causal 

Causal  factors  assigned  for  fatal  incidents 2013 2012 
factors assigned by the reporting company. 

People  (acts) 95 92 
Process  (conditions): 127 120 Note: the top 11 causal factors have been shown 

for   2013,   as   both   the   10th   and   11th   most 
common causal factors were both assigned to 9 of 
the incidents. Similarly the top 12 causal factors 
have been shown for 2012, as the top 9th, 10th, 
11th and 12th causal factors were each assigned 
7 times. 

Causal  factors  assigned  for  fatal  incidents 2013 2012 2011 2010 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate training/competence  21 13 10 13 
People (acts): Inattention/Lack of Awareness: Improper decision making or lack of judgment   16 11 16 14 
Process  (conditions):   Organisational:   Inadequate  work  standards/procedures 15 15 8 10 
Process  (conditions):   Organisational:   Inadequate  supervision 14 16 18 18 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment  13 17 15 30 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Improper position (in the line of fire)   12 13 9 16 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Violation unintentional (by individual or group)   11 13 9 12 
People (acts): Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products: Improper use/position of tools/equipment/materials/products  10 7 6 9 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective guards or protective barriers   10 6 11 7 
Process (conditions): Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products: Inadequate/defective tools/equipment/materials/products   9 7 5 4 
Process  (conditions):   Tools,  Equipment,  Materials  &  Products:   Inadequate  maintenance/inspection/testing 9 5 6 4 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate communication  8 6 9 12 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Equipment or materials not secured  8 4 4 6 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Inadequate use of safety systems   7 9 4 5 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Personal Protective Equipment not used or used improperly  7 4 6 1 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Poor leadership/organisational culture   6 4 4 9 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Failure to warn of hazard   6 4 8 7 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective warning systems/safety devices  5 5 6 5 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective Personal Protective Equipment  4 5 5 
Process (conditions): Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products: Inadequate design/specification/management of change   4 7 5 10 
People (acts): Inattention/Lack of Awareness: Lack of attention/distracted by other concerns/stress   4 5 7 5 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Improper lifting or loading  4 7 2 8 
People (acts): Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products: Servicing of energized equipment/inadequate energy isolation   3 3 3 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Disabled or removed guards, warning systems or safety devices   3 2 2 2 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Inadequate surfaces, floors, walkways or roads   3 4 7 1 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Hazardous atmosphere (explosive/toxic/asphyxiant)  2 2 1 1 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Storms or acts of nature   2 5 2 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Work or motion at improper speed   2 1 2 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Violation intentional (by individual or group)  2 4 4 12 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Failure to report/learn from events   1 1 3 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate security provisions or systems   1 4 2 2 
Process  (conditions): Work  Place  Hazards: Congestion,  clutter  or  restricted  motion 4 4 2 
People  (acts): Following  Procedures: Overexertion  or  improper  position/posture  for  task 1 3 
People  (acts): Inattention/Lack  of  Awareness: Acts  of  violence 2 1 6 
People  (acts): Inattention/Lack  of  Awareness: Use  of  drugs  or  alcohol 1 
People  (acts): Inattention/Lack  of  Awareness: Fatigue 1 1 
  
  

© OGP 2-21 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2.11.2   High potential event causal factors 

·  124  of  the  179  high  potential  events  were  assigned The causal factors assigned to high potential events are shown 
causal factors (169 of 195 in 2012) below. The highlighted content indicates the top 10 causal 

·  444  causal  factors  were  assigned  for  the  179  high factors assigned tohigh potential events in 2013 compared 

potential events (603 in 2012) with 2012, 2011 and 2010. Six of the ten were the same for 
all four years Additional information on the high potential 

·  Between 1 and 16 causal factors were assigned per event 
events reported by region can be found on the OGP Safety 

(between 1 and 14 in 2012) 
Zone  website:  http://info.ogp.org.uk/Safety/.  The 

Causal  factors  assigned  for  high  potential  events 2013 2012 information provided includes a narrative description of the 
People  (acts) 134 225 event, the corrective actions and recommendations and the 
Process  (conditions): 310 378 causal factors assigned by the reporting company. 

Note: the top 11 causal factors have been shown 
for 2010, as the top 10th and 11th causal factors 
were each assigned 15 times. 
 

Causal  Factors  assigned  for  high  potential  events 2013 2012 2011 2010 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate work standards/procedures  44 54 20 37 
Process  (conditions):   Organisational:   Inadequate  hazard  identification  or  risk  assessment 35 61 24 47 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate training/competence  29 36 15 22 
Process (conditions): Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products: Inadequate design/specification/management of change  29 16 18 13 
Process  (conditions):   Tools,  Equipment,  Materials  &  Products:   Inadequate  maintenance/inspection/testing 29 37 12 21 
Process  (conditions):   Tools,  Equipment,  Materials  &  Products:   Inadequate/defective  tools/equipment/materials/products 28 27 13 16 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate communication  26 36 15 19 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Inadequate supervision   24 44 18 31 
PeopleE (acts): Inattention/Lack of Awareness: Improper decision making or lack of judgment  24 38 21 23 
People (acts): Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products: Improper use/position of tools/equipment/materials/products  22 21 17 9 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective guards or protective barriers  21 22 9 10 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective warning systems/safety devices   14 8 15 13 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Failure to warn of hazard   12 31 13 9 
People (acts): Inattention/Lack of Awareness: Lack of attention/distracted by other concerns/stress  11 21 8 15 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Violation unintentional (by individual or group)   11 23 15 27 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Violation intentional (by individual or group)   9 7 6 9 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Inadequate use of safety systems   9 19 12 2 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Equipment or materials not secured  9 15 9 3 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Poor leadership/organisational culture   9 10 9 15 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Improper position (in the line of fire)   8 13 3 9 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Improper lifting or loading  5 11 9 5 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Personal Protective Equipment not used or used improperly  4 8 3 6 
Process (conditions): Organisational: Failure to report/learn from events  4 3 2 4 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate/defective Personal Protective Equipment  4 2 1 3 
Process  (conditions): Work  Place  Hazards: Congestion,  clutter  or  restricted  motion 4 5 3 3 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Hazardous atmosphere (explosive/toxic/asphyxiant)   3 6 5 6 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Storms or acts of nature   3 2 2 
People (acts): Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products: Servicing of energized equipment/inadequate energy isolation   3 5 3 6 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Overexertion or improper position/posture for task   2 1 1 3 
People (acts): Following Procedures: Work or motion at improper speed  2 5 3 3 
People (acts): Use of Protective Methods: Disabled or removed guards, warning systems or safety devices   2 4 3 1 
Process (conditions): Work Place Hazards: Inadequate surfaces, floors, walkways or roads  2 5 2 5 
Process (conditions): Protective Systems: Inadequate security provisions or systems   2 4 3 1 
People (acts): Inattention/Lack of Awareness: Fatigue  1 1 4 4 
People  (acts): Inattention/Lack  of  Awareness: Acts  of  violence 2 1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-22 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The following 8 causal factors were common to the top ten for both fatal incidents and high potential events in 2013. 

·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence 
·  People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment 
·  People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Improper use/position of tools/equipment/ 

materials/products 
·  Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate maintenance/inspection/testing 
·  Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate/defective tools/equipment/materials/ 

products 

The following 5 causal factors appear consistently in the top ten for both fatal incidents and high potential events for 2013, 
2012, 2011 and 2010. 

·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence 
·  People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision 
·  Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment 

The 6th most common causal factor for fatal incidents, which did not show in the top 10 for high potential events was: 
·  People (acts):  Following procedures:  Improper position (line of fire) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 2-23 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2.12  OGP Life-Saving Rules 

OGP has released a set of life-saving rules (OGP Life-Saving Fig 2.12.1: OGP Life-Saving Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents 
per cent of total 2013 incidents 

Rules, OGP report № 459, released Feb 2012), intended for 
 

use by the oil & gas industry to mitigate risk and reduce 
Insufficient  information 

fatalities. Each OGP Life-Saving Rule consists of a simple 
to  assign  a  rule  14% Core  rules  16% 

icon   and   descriptive   text,   providing   clear,   simple   and  
consistent communication about risks in the workplace.  

These Rules were developed by using the fatal incident and  
 

high  potential  event  data  from  the  1991  to  2010  Safety 
Performance Indicators reports to identify the events and No  appropriate 

rule  19% 
activities  that  are  the  highest  risk  and  therefore  provide  
clear instructions on how to avoid them. The Life-Saving  
Rules are split into 8 ‘core rules’ and 10 ‘supplemental rules’.  
Assessment  of  the  applicability  of  the  OGP  Life-Saving  

Rules to fatal incident descriptions for 2013 data has shown Supplementary 
that at least 67% of the fatal incidents reported are covered rules  51% 

 
by the OGP Life-Saving Rules and may have been prevented 
by the adoption of this system. Insufficient information was Fig 2.12.2: OGP Life-Saving Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents 
provided to be able to assign a rule for 6 of the incidents. per cent of total 2013 incidents 

   
 Dropped  objects  2.3% Gas  test  2.3% 

Line  of  fire  – Journey  management  2.3% 
safe  area  32.6% 

Overhead  power  lines  2.3% 
Suspended  load  2.3% 

Seat  belt  4.7% 
Work  at 
height  7.0% 
 

Flotation 
device  11.6% 
 
 
 

No  appropriate 
rule  18.6% Itnos  ausffisicgienn  at    irnufloer  m14a.t0i%on  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

2-24 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

3. Results by region 

 
 
 

In this section the safety performance of the contributing 
OGP members is presented for regions and individual 
countries within those regions. 

A list of countries from which companies have reported 
information and the division of countries into regions is 
provided in Appendix D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Former Soviet Union 

North 
America Europe 
  
 Middle Ea st 

Asia/ 
Australasia 

  
 Africa 
 

South & 
Central 
America 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.1 Fatalities by region 
    

Fatalities FAR Fatal  incidents The table shows the number of fatal incidents and fatalities 
2013  (2012) 2013  (2012) 2013  (2012) in each of the 7 regions into which the data are partitioned. 

Africa 27  (17) 4.53  (2.83) 9  (13) Further  analysis  of  the  fatality  statistics  is  presented  in 
Asia/Australasia 8  (10) 0.87  (1.35) 7  (10) Section   3.5,   where   5-year   rolling   averages   of   FAR   are 
Europe 9  (2) 2.26  (0.52) 5  (2) presented for each of the regions. 
FSU 3  (2) 1.25  (0.55) 3  (2) 
Middle  East 4  (13) 0.63  (1.95) 4  (11) 
North  America 12  (42) 2.03  (7.50) 10  (12) 
South  &  Central 4.37  (0.54)               5  (2) 
America 17  (2) 

 
Overall 80  (88) 2.12  (2.38) 43  (52) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 3-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR) by region 
  
  

Fig 3.2.1: Fatal accident rate 2013       2012       2011       2010      2009 
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-7] 

Africa                    4.53       2.83       1.25       3.38       2.21 
8 

2013 Asia/Australasia           0.87       1.35       3.28       4.14       1.58 
 2012 

Europe                    2.26       0.52       0.87       0.97       6.58 
 2011 

2010 FSU                       1.25       0.55       1.59       2.17       3.14 
 2009 
6 Middle  East                0.63       1.95       1.74       1.63       2.16 
 North  America             2.03       7.50       1.50       5.08       4.37 
 0.54       2.42       1.57       2.37 

America 4.37 
 South  &  Central 
4  
 Overall                   2.12       2.38       1.88       2.76       2.76 
  
  
2  

Further Fatal Accident Rate analysis is presented in Section 
3.5, where 5-year rolling averages of FAR are presented for 
each of the regions. 

0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North         South  & Overall  

Australasia East America      Central  
America 

Fatal accident rate (FAR) 

The   number   of   company/contractor   fatalities   per 
100 000 000 (100 million) hours worked. 
 
 

3.3 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by region 
  
  
Fig 3.3.1: Total recordable injury rate 2013      2012       2011       2010      2009 
per million hours worked [Data page B-7] 

Africa                     1.05       1.14       1.22       1.40      1.65 
4 2013 Asia/Australasia            0.97       1.37       1.46       1.30      1.22 
 2012 

Europe                    2.58      2.64       2.81       3.05      3.48 
 2011 

2010 FSU                       0.81       0.99       0.99       1.08      1.21 
 2009 

Middle  East                0.90       1.02       0.78       0.98      0.92 
3 
 North  America             2.58       2.82       3.19       2.89      3.08 

America 3.13 
 3.05       3.17       2.76      3.17 
 South  &  Central 
2  
 Overall                    1.60       1.74       1.77       1.68      1.75 
  
  
1  

Submissions  without  information  on  medical  treatment 
cases were filtered out, leaving a database of 3665 million 
hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A). 

0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South  & Overall 

Australasia East America Central 
America 

Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) 

The  number  of  recordable  injuries  (fatalities  +  lost 
work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical 
treatment cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked. 
 

3-2  



 
 

©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.4 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) by region 
  
  
 

Fig 3.4.1: Lost time injury frequency 
LTIF 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 

per million hours worked [Data page B-7] 
Africa 0.31 0.33 0.30 0.36 0.42 
Asia/Australasia 0.15 0.26 0.30 0.29 0.29 1.4 
Europe 1.02 0.91 1.08 1.06 1.31  2013 

2012 
FSU 0.33 0.28 0.31 0.31 0.35 1.2 2011 
Middle  East 0.21 0.24 0.18 0.25 0.26  2010 

2009 
North  America 0.74 0.94 0.59 0.48 0.51 1.0 

South  &  Central 0.69       0.64      0.61     0.69  
America 0.85 0.8 
Overall 0.45 0.48 0.43 0.42 0.45 

0.6 
         
0.4        

Further  analysis  of  the  lost  time  injuries  is  presented  in 
        

Section  3.5,  where  5-year  rolling  averages  of  LTIF  are 
0.2        

presented for each of the regions, 100% of the database (see         
Appendix A). 

0.0        
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North     South Overall 

Australasia East America America 
Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 

The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
day cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 3-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.5 FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages by region 
 
 
 

The  five  year  rolling  average  is  calculated  by  summing  the  total  number  of  incidents  of  the  five  previous  years, 
and dividing by the sum of the work hours for these years. For example, the five year rolling average for 2013 is 
calculated by: 

(Number of injuries in 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013) 

(Total work hours in 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013) 

The  number  series  involved  in  the  calculation  is  frame  shifted  along  by  one  each  year,  e.g.  2011  will  calculate 
from 2007-2011. 
   
   

Fig 3.5.1: FAR 5-year rolling average  
In order to smooth out variability in the annual values for 

per 100 million hours worked [Data from B-8]  
the regional TR

6  IR, FAR and LTIF, 5-year rolling averages 
all  regions FSU are computed which should provide a more reliable indicator 
Africa Middle  East of performance trends. 
Asia/Australasia North  America 

5 Europe South  &  Central 
America The  figures  show  TRIR,  FAR  and  LTIF  5-year  rolling 

 averages for each of the seven regions, and includes the  all 
 regions curve. 
4 
 The increase in the North America 5-year rolling average 
 FAR for 2012 can be attributed to the effect of a gas leak 
3 
 and explosion following the loss of mechanical integrity of 

 a pipeline in Mexico (onshore) in which 31 individuals lost 
2 their lives. 

 
 

1 
 

0 
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

 
Fig 3.5.2: TRIR 5-year rolling average 
per million hours worked [Data from B-9] Fpiegr  3m.5il.l3io: nLT hIFo u5r-sy weaorr kroedll i[nDga atav efrroamge B -9] 

     
6 

all  regions FSU 2.0 
 all  regions FSU 

Africa Middle  East 
 Asia/Australasia North  America Africa Middle  East 
5 Europe South  &  Central Asia/Australasia North  America 

America Europe South  &  Central 
America 

1.5 
4 
  
  
3 1.0 

 

2 

0.5 
1 
  

0 0.0 
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

  
  

3-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.6 Severity of lost work day cases by region 
  
  
 

Fig 3.6.1: Severity of LWDC 
LWDC  severity  2013 Relative  to  2008-2012  LWDC 

severity Average days lost per LWDC [Data from B-9] 
Africa 29.20 11%  higher  

80  
Asia/Australasia 30.36 10%  higher  2008-2012  Average 

 
Europe 42.28 5%  higher 2013 

70  
FSU 50.98 35%  higher   

60  
Middle  East 13.64 26%  lower 
North  America 49.60 34%  higher   

50  
South  &  Central 16%  lower 
America 60.30  2013  Average  42.98 

40 
All  regions 42.98 9%  higher 

30 
 
20 

The number of days lost was reported for 65% of lost work  
day cases. 10 

  
The severity of lost work day cases is the highest in the South 0 

Africa               Asia/              Europe                FSU               Middl North South  & 
& Central America region compared with the other regions e America Central 

Australasia                                                                        E
(60 days lost per LWDC in 2013). This represents a 16% America 

ast 
reduction compared to the average for the previous 5-year  
period.  

Lost work day case (LWDC) 
Appendix A provides further information on the proportion A Lost work day case is an incident resulting in at least 
of  the  database  which  can  be  used  for  lost  work  day  case one day off work. Fatal incidents are not included. 
severity,  94%  of  the  data  submitted  for  South  &  Central 

Severity of lost work day cases 
America was usable for this metric, in comparison with only 
37% of equivalent data for the North America region. Severity  is  defined  as  the  average  number  of  days 
 lost (where reported) for each lost work day case. 

 
  
3.7 Individual country performance  

The  safety  performance  reported  by  participating  OGP LTIF equal to or lower than the overall average LTIF (0.45). 
member companies of individual countries is presented in The  majority  of  countries  in  Europe  and  North  America 
terms of the lost time injury frequency of companies jointly show an LTIF higher than the global average. 
with contractors. To preserve the anonymity of companies, The  chart  of  relative  TRIR  performance  compares  the 
performance is only published for those countries for which 

2013 performance with that of 2012 and 2011 for all 81 
at  least  2  companies  have  reported  statistics.  Countries 

countries.  TRIR  calculations  exclude  data  where  medical 
with less than 50 000 reported hours worked are excluded, 

treatment cases are not reported. 
since results for such small populations of hours would be 
unrepresentative.  Overall  averages  and  regional  averages The  majority  of  countries  in  Asia/Australasia,  FSU  and 
include data from all countries regardless of work hours or Middle East achieved a TRIR equal to or lower than the 
number of contributing companies. overall  average  TRIR  (1.60).  The  majority  of  countries 

in  Africa,  Europe,  North  America  and  South  &  Central 
Of the 110 countries from which data have been reported, 

America show a TRIR higher than the global average. 
29 are excluded by these constraints. 

For comparison, the 5-year rolling average FAR is shown 
The chart of relative LTIF performance for the remaining 

for  each  of  the  regions.  There  appears  to  be  little  if  any 
81 countries compares the 2013 performance with that of 

correlation between these values and the regional average 
2012 and 2011. 

LTIF and TRIR values. 
The majority of countries in Africa, Asia/Australasia, FSU, 
Middle  East  and  South  &  Central  America  achieved  an 

 ©
 

 



OGP  
 

3-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 3.7.1: Total recordable injury rate – companies with contractors 
per million hours worked [Data page B-10] 
 

By  region 
5-year  rolling  average  FAR  (0.0) 2013 
2013  average  TRIR  [Data  page  B-10] 2012 
2013  Global  average  TRIR  =  1.60 2011 
 

Africa (2.9) 
Morocco

South  africa  
Kenya 

Tunisia
Mauritania  
Ivory  coast 

Gabon
DR  Congo  

Tanzania 
Ghana 

Algeria
Cameroun  

Uganda 
Mozambique

Equatorial  Guinea  
Angola 

Libya
Congo  

Egypt
Nigeria  

Sudan
Madagascar  

Namibia 
Asia-Australasia (2.1)   11.06 

New  Zealand    10.87 
Australia

Singapore     14.46 
Myanmar

Papua  New  Guinea     
Thailand

Malaysia     
China 

India    
South  korea  

Indonesia    
Japan

Bangladesh     
Pakistan    

Vietnam
Philippines  

Brunei    
(2.2) 

Europe   
Denmark  

Germany   
Ireland  

Croatia    
Poland    

Norway
Netherlands     

UK
Hungary     

Italy
France     
Spain    

Romania
Greenland  

  
(1.8) 

FSU
Ukraine     

Azerbaijan  12.50 
Kazakhstan   

Russia   
Turkmenistan   
Middle  East (1.7)   

  
Iraq

Yemen   
Qatar    

UAE
Turkey     

Oman
Kuwait  

Iran    

  
North  America (4.1) 

Canada   
USA  

Mexico   
South  &  Central  America (2.3) 17.90 

Uruguay
Guyana  

17.39 
Peru

Brazil   
Bolivia

Trinidad  &  tobago   
Argentina 

Ecuador  
Venezuela  
Colombia 11.43 

Surinam 
0 1 (1.60) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
  

3-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 3.7.2: Lost time injury frequency – companies with contractors 
per million hours worked [Data page B-11] 
 

By  region 
5-year  rolling  average  FAR  (0.0) 2013 One  or  more  fatalities  (2013)  listed  in  orange 
 2013  average  LTIF  [Data  page  B-11] 2

2013  Global  average  LTIF  =  0.45  012  
2011 

   
 (2.9) 

Africa
Morocco  

 
Tunisia

Tanzania   
Algeria

DR  Congo   
Kenya

Mauritania   
Ghana 

Gabon  
Cameroun  

Uganda  
Equatorial  Guinea  

Mozambique  
Libya 

Egypt  
Angola  
Congo  

Nigeria
South  africa   

Sudan  
Ivory co

Madagascar   
 

ast 
(2.1) 

Namibia 
Asia-Australasia  

New  Zealand  
Japan

Singapore   
Myanmar 
Australia 

China  
Malaysi  

South  korea

a  
Vietnam  

India 
Indones  

Bangladesh
 

ia 
(2.2) 

Thailand
Papua  New  Guinea  

Pakistan 
Brunei

Philippines  

Croatia
Germany

Europe
 

Norway 
UK

Ireland  
Italy

Netherlands  
Hungary 

France 
Spain 

Romani
Denmark

a 
Poland

Greenland  
yana 
C Surinam (1.8)  

FSU
Russia

Kazakhstan  
o   

Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan  l   

Ukraine  
o  

Middle  East (1.7) 
Yemen m  

Iraq
Qatar   

b

UAE
Kuwait   

i

Oman 
Turkey  

a

Iran B  
North  America 

o  
Mexico 

USA l  
Canada  

South  &  Central  America i (2.3) 
Uruguay v

Peru
Brazil  

i
Venezuela

Trinidad  &  Tobago  
a 

Ecuador
Argentina  G

u



  
  
 12.50 
  
  
  
  
  
  
(4.1) 6.98 

 

15.35 
0 1 2 3 4 5 

 
 

© OGP 3-7 

(0.45) 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.8 Incident triangles by region 
  

In this section the relative numbers of types of occupational Lost time injuries 
injury  are  shown  in  the  form  of  ‘incident  triangles’.  The 
ratios  have  been  corrected  to  account  for  the  absence,  in Fatalities and lost work day cases. 

some data submissions, of medical treatment cases. Recordable injuries 

Fatalities,  lost  work  day  cases,  restricted  work  day 
cases  and  medical  treatment  cases  where  medical 
treatment cases are reported for the data set. 

Ratio of lost time injuries to fatalities 

The number of lost time injuries divided by the total 
number of fatalities (LTI / fatalities). 

Ratio of total recordable injuries to fatalities 

The number of recordable injuries divided by the total 
number of fatalities (recordable injuries/fatalities). 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 3.8.1: 2013 incident triangles – Africa Fig 3.8.2: 2013 incident triangles – Asia/Australasia 
  
Year Ratio of lost time injuries Year       Ratio of lost time injuries 

to fatalities iRnajutiroie osf t oto ftaatla rleitcieosr dable to fatalities Rinajutiroie os ft oto ftaatal rlieticeosr dable 
2013 7:1   23:1 2013                              17:1                            107:1 
2012 12:1   40:1 2012                              19:1                            101:1 
2011 24:1    97:1 2011                                9:1                              43:1 
2010 11:1 41:1 2010                                7:1                             31:1 
  

 
1 
7 17 

23 107 
 

1 n/a 
2 fatalities=0 
6 
1   

9  16 
 

99 
32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 fatality 
lost time injuries 
recordable injuries 

Overall Company   Contractor 
  

3-8 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
  
  
  
  
  
  

Fig 3.8.3: 2013 incident triangles – Europe Fig 3.8.4: 2013 incident triangles – FSU 
  
Year Ratio of lost time injuries Year       Ratio of lost time injuries 

to fatalities Rinajutiroie osf t too ftaatla rleitcieosr dable to fatalities Rinajutiroie os ft oto ftaatal rlieticeosr dable 
2013 45:1     113:1 2013                              27:1                              65:1 
2012 175:1     507:1 2012                              52:1                           180:1 
2011 124:1     316:1 2011                              19:1                              62:1 
2010 109:1 309:1 2010                              14:1                             50:1 
  

45 27 
113 65 
  
48 13 

102 32 
  
44 34 
117 82 
  

Fig 3.8.5: 2013 incident triangles – Middle East Fig 3.8.6: 2013 incident triangles – North America 
  
Year Ratio of lost time injuries Year       Ratio of lost time injuries 

to fatalities Rinajutiroie osf t too ftaatla rleitcieosr dable to fatalities Rinajutiroie os ft oto ftaatal rlieticeosrsd able 
2013 34:1     141:1 2013                              36:1                            116:1 
2012 12:1   52:1 2012                              13:1                              35:1 
2011 10:1   45:1 2011                              40:1                            213:1 
2010 16:1 60:1 2010                                9:1                             57:1 
  
  

34 36 
141 116 
  
n/a 40 

fatalities=0 
59 

  
27 35 
119 135 
  

 
Fig 3.8.7: 2013 incident triangles – South & Central America 

 
  
Year Ratio of lost time injuries  

to fatalities Rinajutiroie osf t too ftaatla rleitcieosr dable 
 

2013 19:1   72:1 
 

2012 129:1    570:1  
2011 26:1     131:1  
2010 39:1 175:1  
  
  

19  
72 

 
 

 
n/a 

fatalities=0  
 1 fatality 

lost time injuries 
17 

recordable injuries 
65 

Overall     Company   Contractor 
  

© OGP 3-9 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3-10 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

4. Results by function 

 
 
 

In  this  section  the  safety  performance  within  different 
functions performed in the E&P industry is presented. 
Functions are defined as ‘exploration’, ‘drilling’, 
‘production’, ‘construction’ and ‘unspecified’. The 
category ‘other’ is no longer in use. See the Glossary 
of Terms at Appendix E for definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 

4.1 Fatalities by function 
 

The distribution of company and contractor fatal incidents 
and fatalities between the functions is shown for both 2013 
and 2012. 
 
 
 

2013 2012 
Fatal Fatal 

 incidents Fatalities incidents Fatalities 

Exploration 3 3 4 4 
Drilling 15 15 11 12 
Production 17 33 12 15 
Construction 6 18 17 19 
Unspecified 2 11 8 38 
Total 43 80 52 88 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 4-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.2 Fatal accident rate (FAR) – 5-year rolling average 
 
 
 

The five year rolling average is calculated by summing the total number of incidents of the five previous years, and 
dividing by the sum of the work hours for these years. For example, the five year rolling average for drilling FAR 
for 2013 is calculated by: 

(Number of fatalities in drilling function 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013) 

(Total work hours in drilling 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013) 

The number series involved in the calculation is frame shifted along by one each year, e.g. 2011 will calculate from 
2007-2011, inclusive. 
 

% of 2013 work hours   % of 2012 work hours   % of 2011 work hours   % of 2010 work hours   % of 2009 work hours 

Exploration 3 2 2 2 2 
Drilling 15 18 19 15 10 
Production 35 33 35 28 26 
Construction 25 25 24 25 30 
Unspecified 23 22 20 29 32 
   
   

Fig 4.2.1: Fatal accident rate 5-year rolling average  
per 100 million hours worked [Data from B-12]  In order to smooth out variability in the annual fatal accident 

7 rate  values  5-year  rolling  averages  are  presented.  These 
Overall Construction 

should  provide  a  more  reliable  indicator  of  performance 
Exploration Unspecified 
Drilling trends. 

6 
Production 

 The  percentage  of  the  total  work  hours  reported  under 

5 each function has been detailed below. See Appendix B for 

 further data. 

4 The increase in the 2010 Drilling FAR can be attributed 
 to the effect of a fire and explosion offshore in the USA in 

which 11 individuals lost their lives. 
3 
 
2 
 
1 
 
0 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 

Note:   The   function   ‘other’   was   replaced   by 
‘construction’ for the first time in 2006, thus the 
2009  5-year  average  figure  for  ‘construction’  is 
not available. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.3 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by function 
      
      
     

2013 2012 2011 2010 Fig 4.3.1: Total recordable injury rate 
2009 

TRIR TRIR TRIR TRIR TRIR per million hours worked [Data from B-13] 
Exploration 1.87 2.14 2.70 2.30 2.31 5  
Drilling 3.05 2.59 2.84 2.94 3.81 2013 
Production 1.75 1.92 2.05 2.14 2.32  2012 

201  
4 1

Construction 1.13 1.32 1.13 0.99 0.78 2010 
Unspecified 0.90 1.21 0.95 1.13 1.53  2009 
Overall 1.60 1.74 1.76 1.68 1.75 

3 
 
  

  

 2 
 

Submissions  without  information  on  medical  treatment  
cases were filtered out, leaving a database of 3 665 million 1 
hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A). 

     
0 

Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified 
 
 
 
 

4.4 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) – 5-year rolling average by function 
 

Fig 4.4.1:  Lost time injury frequency5-year rolling average 
per million hours worked [Data from B-13] 
2.0 

Overall Construction 
Exploration Unspecified 
Drilling 
Production 

1.5 
 
 
 
1.0 
 
 
 
0.5 
 
 
 
0.0 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 

Note:   The   function   ‘other’   was   replaced   by 
‘construction’ for the first time in 2006, thus the 
2009  5-year  average  figure  for  ‘construction’  is 
not available. 
  
  
  
  

© OGP 4-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.5 Severity of lost work day cases by function 
  
  

Fig 4.5.1: Severity of LWDC The overall average number of days lost per lost work day 
average lost days per LWDC [Data from B-13] 

case (LWDC) is 43.0 in 2013 (40.7 in 2012). Offshore the 
60 LWDC severity is 51.2 days lost per LWDC compared with 

2008-2012  Average 35.8 days for onshore activities (46.0 and 36.8 respectively 
2013 for 2012). See Section 2.8 for additional information and 

50 
Section 3.6 for LWDC severity by region. 

2013  Average  43.0 
40 
 

30 
 

20 
 

10 
      

0      
Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.6 Exploration performance 
 
 

4.6.1 Exploration total recordable injury rate 
  
The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors 2.27 respectively; the overall average TRIR for exploration 
for exploration related activities, in different regions of the activities is 1.87. 
world. The  total  recordable  injury  rates  for  companies  operating 
88   million   work   hours   (92%   of   reported   exploration in the FSU and South & Central America show a strong 
work hours) were used in this analysis, of which company increase, this is against a relatively small number of work 
activities represent 22% and contractor activities represent hours (0.3 million and 0.8 million work hours respectively). 
78%. This is an increase of 6 million work hours compared 
with 2012 (82 million work hours in 2012; 27% company, 
73% contractor). 

In   2013   the   overall   TRIR   values   for   companies   and 
contractors engaged in exploration activities are 0.46 and 
 
 
 
 
Fig 4.6.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – exploration 
per million hours worked [Data from B-14] 

6    
6 

8.68 
Company  2013 Contractor  2013 

 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.46 Contractor  2013  Average  2.27  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

 
 
 
 

Exploration 

Geophysical, seismographic and geological 
operations, including their administrative and 
engineering aspects, construction, maintenance, 
materials   supply   and   transportation   of   personnel 
and equipment; excludes drilling 
  
  

© OGP 4-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.6.2 Exploration lost time injury frequency 
  
The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors Company LTIF values associated with exploration show a 
for exploration related activities, in different regions of the reduction in LTIF in all regions compared with the previous 
world. The  2013  result  is  compared  with  average  LTIF 5-year average. 
results in the previous 5-year period. 

Note:  In  many  instances  where  the  LTIF  or 
95 million work hours (100% of reported exploration work TRIR is reported as 0.00, the number of work 
hours) were used in this analysis of which company activities hours reported for the specific function and region 
represent 24% and contractor activities represent 76%. This are  relatively  low.    A  detailed  breakdown  of 
is an increase of 10 million work hours compared with 2012 the hours by region and function is presented in 
(27% company, 73% contractor in 2012). Appendix B. 

In   2013   the   overall   LTIF   values   for   companies   and 
contractors engaged in exploration activities are 0.09 and 
0.95 respectively; the overall average LTIF for exploration 
activities is 0.74. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 4.6.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – exploration 
per million hours worked [Data from B-14] 

   
6 6 

7.77 
Company  2013 Contractor  2013 

 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.09 Contractor  2013  Average  0.95  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.7 Drilling performance 
 
 

4.7.1 Drilling total recordable injury rate 
 

In   2013   the   overall   TRIR   values   for   companies   and 
The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors 

contractors engaged in drilling activities are 1.17 and 3.29 
for  drilling  related  activities  in  different  regions  of  the 

respectively; the overall TRIR for drilling activities is 3.05. 
world. 

553  million  work  hours  (95%  of  reported  drilling  work 
hours) were used in this analysis of which company activities 
represent 12% and contractor activities represent 88%. This 
represents a decrease of 110 million work hours compared 
with 2012, with a similar ratio of company to contractor 
activities (13% to 87% respectively). 
 
 
 
 

Fig 4.7.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – drilling 
per million hours worked [Data from B-14] 

     
6 6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 Contractor  2013  Average  3.29 
 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  1.17  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

 
 
 
 

Drilling 

All  exploration,  appraisal  and  production  drilling 
and workover as well as their administrative, 
engineering, construction, materials supply and 
transportation  aspects.  It  includes  site  preparation, 
rigging up and down and restoration of the drilling 
site   upon   work   completion.   Drilling   includes   ALL 
exploration, appraisal and production drilling. 
  
  

© OGP 4-7 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.7.2 Drilling lost time injury frequency 
 
580 million work hours (100% of reported drilling work 
hours)   were   used   in   this   analysis,   of   which   company 
activities represent 13% and contractor activities represent 
87%. This represents a reduction of 93 million work hours 
compared  with  2012,  with  the  same  ratio  of  company  to 
contractor activities. 

The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors in 
drilling related activities in different regions of the world. In 
2013 the overall LTIF for both companies and contractors 
engaged in drilling activities is 0.94. 

In   2013   the   overall   LTIF   values   for   companies   and 
contractors engaged in drilling activities are 0.96 and 0.93 
respectively. 
 
Fig 4.7.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – drilling 
per million hours worked [Data from B-14] 

6   
6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 
 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.96 Contractor  2013  Average  0.93  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-8 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.8 Production performance 
 
 

4.8.1 Production total recordable injury rate 
  
The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors In   2013   the   overall   TRIR   values   for   companies   and 
for production related activities in different regions of the contractors  engaged  in  production  activities  are  1.39  and 
world. 1.88 respectively; the overall average TRIR for production 

1279  million  work  hours  (97%  of  reported  production activities is 1.75. 
 

work hours) were used in this analysis, of which company 
 

activities represent 27% and contractor activities represent  
73%. This represents an increase of 34 million work hours  
compared  with  2012,  with  a  similar  ratio  of  company  to  
contractor activities (27% to 73% respectively).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Fig 4.8.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – production  
per million hours worked [Data from B-15]  
6 6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 
Company  2008–2012 Contractor 
Company  2013  Average  1.39 2008–2012 

Contractor  2013 
 Average  1.88 
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

 
 

Production 

Petroleum   and   natural   gas   producing   operations, 
including their administrative and engineering 
aspects,   minor   construction,   repairs,   maintenance 
and  servicing,  materials  supply,  and  transportation 
of personnel and equipment. It covers all mainstream 
production   operations   including   wireline.   It   does 
not cover production drilling and workover. See the 
Appendix E: Glossary of Terms for details 
  
  

© OGP 4-9 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.8.2 Production lost time injury frequency 
  
The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors 0.52 respectively; the overall average LTIF for production 
for production related activities in different regions of the activities is 0.53. 
world. 

1313  million  work  hours  (100%  of  reported  production 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company 
activities represent 27% and contractor activities represent 
73%. This is an increase of 93 million work hours over 2012, 
with the same ratio of company to contractor activities. 

In   2013   the   overall   LTIF   values   for   companies   and 
contractors  engaged  in  production  activities  are  0.55  and 
 
 

Fig 4.8.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – production 
per million hours worked [Data from B-15] 

    
6 

Company  2013 6 
Contractor  2013 

 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.55 Contractor  2013  Average  0.52  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-10 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.9 Construction performance 
  

The company and contractor results for 2013 construction are much greater than those reported for company employees. 
performance are presented below. Refer to Appendix B for detailed information. 

Construction   activities   are   predominately   conducted   by  
 

contractors therefore the work hours reported for contractors  
  
  
4.9.1 Company total recordable injury rate  

923  million  work  hours  (99%  of  reported  construction In   2013   the   overall   TRIR   values   for   companies   and 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company contractors engaged in construction activities are 0.35 and 
activities  represent  8%  and  contractor  activities  represent 1.19 respectively; the overall average TRIR for construction 
92%. This represents an increase of 16 million work hours activities is 1.13. 
compared  with  2012,  with  a  similar  ratio  of  company  to 
contractor activities (6% to 94% respectively). 
 
 

Fig 4.9.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – construction 
per million hours worked [Data from B-15] 

    
6 6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 
 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.35 Contractor  2013  Average  1.19  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

 
 
 
 
 

Construction 

All major construction, fabrication activities and also 
disassembly, removal and disposal (decommissioning) 
at  the  end  of  the  facility  life.  Includes  construction 
of   process   plant,   yard   construction   of   structures, 
offshore   installation,   hook-up   and   commissioning, 
and removal of redundant process facilities. 
  
  

© OGP 4-11 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4.9.2 Construction lost time injury frequency 
  
930  million  work  hours  (100%  of  reported  construction In   2013   the   overall   LTIF   values   for   companies   and 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company contractors engaged in construction activities are 0.03 and 
activities  represent  8%  and  contractor  activities  represent 0.22 respectively; the overall average LTIF for construction 
92%. This represents an increase of 19 million work hours activities is 0.21. 
compared  with  2012,  with  a  similar  ratio  of  company  to 
contractor activities (6% to 94% respectively). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 4.9.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – construction 
per million hours worked [Data from B-15] 

    
6 

Company  2013 6 
Contractor  2013 

 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.03 Contractor  2013  Average  0.22  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-12 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4.10   Unspecifed performance 
 
 

4.10.1 Unspecified total recordable injury rate 

822  million  work  hours  (97%  of  work  hours  reported  as compared  with  2012,  with  a  similar  ratio  company  to 
unspecified) were used in this analysis, of which company contractor activities (32% to 68% respectively in 2012). 
activities represent 33% and contractor activities represent In   2013   the   overall   TRIR   values   for   companies   and 
67%. This represents an increase of 33 million work hours 

contractors engaged in activities where the work function 
 

was not specified are 0.53 and 1.08 respectively; the overall 
 
 average TRIR for unspecified activities is 0.90. 

 
 
 
 
 

Fig 4.10.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – unspecified 
per million hours worked [Data from B-16] 

  
6 6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 
 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.53 Contractor  2013  Average  1.08  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

 
 
 
 

Unspecified 

Unspecified is used for the entry of data associated 
with office personnel who’s work hours and 
incident   data   cannot   be   reasonably   assigned   to 
the   administrative   support   of   one   of   the   function 
groupings   of   exploration,   drilling,   production   or 
construction.  Corporate  overhead  support  function 
personnel  such  as  finance  or  human  resources  staff 
may   be   examples   where   work   hours   cannot   be 
specifically assigned to a particular function. 
  

 
 

© OGP 4-13 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.10.2 Unspecified lost time injury frequency 
  
852 million work hours (100% of work hours reported as Reported under the ‘unspecified’ function in 2013 were: 
unspecified) were used in this analysis of which company ·  5 company and 6 contractor fatalities 
activities represent 34% and contractor activities represent ·  53 company and 141 contractor lost work day cases 
66%. This represents an increase of 50 million work hours 
over  2012,  with  a  similar  ratio  of  company  to  contractor Reported  under  the  ‘unspecified’  function  from  2008  to 
activities (32% to 68% respectively). 2012 were: 

In   2013   the   overall   LTIF   values   for   companies   and ·  39 company and 83 contractor fatalities 

contractors engaged in activities where the work function ·  420 company and 1060 contractor lost work day cases 
was not specified are 0.20 and 0.26 respectively; the overall 
average LTIF for unspecified activities is 0.24. 
 

Fig 4.10.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – unspecified 
per million hours worked [Data from B-16] 

  
6 6 

Company  2013 Contractor  2013 
 Company  2008–2012 Contractor  2008–2012  
 Company  2013  Average  0.20 Contractor  2013  Average  0.26  
  
  

4 4 
  
  
  
  
  
2 2 

                
                
                
                
                

0 0 
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

4-14 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

5. Results by company 

 
 
 
 

This   section   compares   the   safety   performance   of 
individual  companies  with  each  other  and  with  their 
performance in previous years. 
 
 
 

5.1 Overall company results 
  

For  reasons  of  anonymity  each  of  the  50  companies  that treatment  cases  so  their  data  could  not  be  included  in 
has  contributed  relevant  data  and  is  to  be  included  in the TRIR analysis.   Results for all of the 50 participating 
this  analysis  has  been  allocated  a  unique  code  letter  (A companies are therefore shown in this section. 
to XX). These codes change every year in line with LTIF  
performance.  All  companies  reported  both  company  and  
contractor  data.  One  company  did  not  report  medical  
  
  
  

 
5.1.1 Fatal accident rate by company  
In 2013 OGP member companies reported 65 contractor ·  8    of    the    20    companies    with    their    contractors 
and  15  company  employee  fatalities.  In  the  figure  below performed  below  the  overall  average  for  companies 
the FAR is presented for those companies that, with their with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours 
contractors, reported more than 50 million hours worked. worked (0.98). 
20 companies met this criterion in 2013, compared with the ·  The range in 2013 was between 0.00 and 4.94 fatalities 
same number in 2012. Companies are shown in rank order per 100 million hours worked. 
of company-with-contractor FAR. 

·  15 of the 20 companies suffered one or more fatalities. 
 
 
 

Fig 5.1.1.1: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors, joint hours >50 million – fatal accident rate 
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

 
6 

Company with contractors                                                                                  Top quartile 
 

5 
 
 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 

Average companies with contractors 0.98 
1 
 
 
0 

W E JJ J EE UU DD S QQ KK FF Z Y LL L II OO RR TT VV 
  
  
  
  

© OGP 5-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

5.1.2 Total recordable injury rate by company fatality in either company or contractor operations is also 
indicated*. Details of results are tabulated in Appendix B. 

The  TRIR  for  companies  together  with  their  contractors 
·  18 of the 49 companies presented below suffered one 

is presented below. Data are only included where Medical 
Treatment   Cases   (MTC)   are   reported.   One   company or  more  company  or  contractor  fatality,  of  which  16 

did not report MTC therefore 49 of the 50 participating companies suffered one or more contractor fatality. 

companies qualified for inclusion. ·  In 6 instances, contractors achieved a lower TRIR than 
the companies they were employed by. 

The TRIR for company alone is plotted alongside the TRIR 
for  company  and  contractors  jointly.  The  incidence  of  a 

 
 
 
 
 

Fig 5.1.2.1: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined – total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

6 
Company only Company with contractors Top quartile 

*   Fatality in 2013 
5 
 
 
4 
 
 
3 
 
 
2 

Average companies with contractors 1.60 
 

1 
 
 
0 

B X E C D J Q H M I O L F K    GG   N     BB     G R U    AA     T V     CC     Z     HH     S     DD     LL EE    KK Y XX   NN   FF   OOMM  UU     P     V V   SS II RR    W     TT     PP JJ    QQWW 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
5-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

In the figure below the TRIR for contractors alone is plotted 
alongside the TRIR for company and contractors jointly. 
One company did not report MTC for its contractors and 
so is excluded from the graph which reduces the number of 
companies shown to 48 of the 50. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 5.1.2.2: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined – total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

10 
 Contractor only            Company with contractors Top quartile 

9 
 *    

Fatality in 2013 
 

8  
 

 
7 
  
6  
  
5  
  
4 
  
3  
 

Average companies with contractors 1.60 
2 
 
1 
 
0 

B X E C D J Q H M I O L F    GG    N     BB     G R U     AA T V     CC     Z     HH     S     DD    LL EE    KK Y XX   NN   FF   OOMM  UU P     V  V   SS II RR    W     TT     PP JJ    QQWW 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP 5-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  

In  the  figures  below  the  TRIR  is  presented  for  those ·  The  range  for  companies  jointly  with  contractors  in 
companies that, with their contractors, reported more than 2013 was between 0.27 and 4.18 injuries per million 
50 million hours worked. 20 companies met this criterion in hours worked. 
2013, compared with the same number in 2012. Companies ·  The range for companies only was between 0.84 and 
are  shown  in  rank  order  of  the  company-with-contractor 2.70. 
TRIR  for  companies  alone  vs.  company-with-contractor 

·  The range for contractors only was between 0.22 and 
TRIR and for contractors alone vs. company-with- 

4.77. 
contractor TRIR. 

·  14 of the 20 companies suffered one or more company 
·  14   of   the   20   companies   with   their   contractors 

or contractor fatality, of which 12 companies suffered 
performed  below  the  overall  average  for  companies 

one or more contractor fatality. 
with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours 
worked (1.56). 

Fig 5.1.2.3: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours >50 million 
– total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

  
4.5 

Company only          Company with contractors Top quartile 
   
4.0 

*   Fatality in 2013  
 

 
3.5 

 
 
3.0  
  
2.5  
  
2.0 

Average companies with contractors 1.56 
 
1.5 
 
1.0 
 
0.5 

                     
0.0 E J L Z S DD LL EE KK Y FF OO UU VV II RR W TT JJ QQ 

 
Fig 5.1.2.4: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours >50 million 
– total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
6 

Contractor only *   Fatality in 2013 Top quartile 
Company with contractors 

5 
 
 
4 
 
 
3 
  
  
2 

Average companies with contractors 1.56 
 
 
1 

                     
                     

0 E J L Z S DD LL EE KK Y FF OO UU VV II RR W TT JJ QQ 
 

 
5-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  

The remaining 28 companies which, with their contractors, ·  The  range  for  companies  jointly  with  contractors  in 
reported less than 50 million hours worked are presented 2013 was between 0.00 and 5.29 injuries per million 
below in rank order of the company-with-contractor TRIR hours worked. 
for  companies  alone  vs.  company-with-contractor  TRIR ·  The range for companies only was between 0.00 and 2.76. 
and   for   contractors   alone   vs.   company-with-contractor 

·  The range for contractors only was between 0.00 and 9.37. 
TRIR. 

·  4  of  the  28  smaller  companies  suffered  one  or  more 
·  21 of the 28 companies with their contractors performed 

company  or  contractor  fatality,  all  of  which  suffered 
above the overall average for smaller companies with 

one or more contractor fatality. 
contractors (1.67). 

 
 
 

Fig 5.1.2.5: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours <50 million 
– total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

6    
Company only *   Fatality in 2013 Top quartile 
Company with contractors 

5 
 
 
4 
 
 
3 
  
  
2 Average companies with contractors 1.64 
 
 
1 

                          
                          

0 
B X C D Q H M I O F N GG BB G R U AA T V CC   HH XX NN  MM P SS PP   WW 

 
Fig 5.1.2.6: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours <50 million 
– total recordable injury rate 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
10 

Contractor only          Company with contractors Top quartile 

9 *   Fatality in 2013 

8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 
Average companies with contractors 1.64 

2 

1 
                       

0 
B X C D Q H M I O F N GG   BB G R U AA T V CC   HH XX   NN  MM P SS PP  WW 

 
 

© OGP 5-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  

5.1.3 Lost time injury frequency ·  38 companies with their contractors delivered a LTIF 
of less than 1. 

The  figure  shows  the  LTIF  in  rank  order  for  companies 
together with their contractors. All of the 50 participating ·  22 of the 50 companies presented below suffered one 

companies  (A  to  WW)  contributed  both  company  and or more fatality. 

contractor data, although not always for every country in ·  In 6 instances, contractors achieved a lower LTIF than 
which operations were conducted. the companies they were employed by. 

The LTIF for the company alone and contractors alone is 
plotted  alongside  the  LTIF  for  company  and  contractors 
jointly.  The  incidence  of  a  fatality  in  either  company  or 
contractor operations is also indicated*. Details of results 
are tabulated in Appendix B. 
 

Fig 5.1.3.1: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 

  
3.5 
 Company only           Company with contractors Top quartile 

3.0 *   Fatality in 2013 

 
 

2.5 
 
2.0 
 
 
1.5 
 
1.0 

Average companies with contractors 0.45 
 

0.5 
 
0.0 

A B C D E F G H I J K L M     N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z    AA   BB   CC  DD   EE    FF   GG  HH     II JJ     KK    LL   MMNNOO   PP   QQ  RR    SS    TT    UU V  VWW XX 
 

Fig 5.1.3.2: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
   
7 
 Contractor only           Company with contractors Top quartile 

6 *   Fatality in 2013 

 

5 
 

4 
 

3 
 

2 
 

1 
Average companies with contractors 0.45 

0 
A B C D E F G H I J K L M     N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z    AA   BB   CC  DD   EE    FF   GG  HH     II JJ     KK    LL   MMNNOO   PP   QQ  RR    SS    TT    UU   VVWW XX 

 
 

5-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  

·  In  the  figures  below  the  LTIF  is  presented  for  those ·  The range for companies jointly with their contractors 
companies that, with their contractors, reported more in 2013 was between 0.03 and 1.51 lost time injuries 
than 50 million hours worked. 20 companies met this per million hours worked. 
criterion  in  2013,  compared  with  the  same  number ·  The range for companies only was between 0.13 and 
in  2012.  Companies  are  shown  in  rank  order  of  the 1.37. 
company-with-contractor LTIF. 

·  The range for contractors only was between 0.03 and 
·  13   of   the   20   companies   with   their   contractors 1.57. 

performed  below  the  overall  average  for  companies 
·  15 of the 20 companies suffered one or more fatalities. 

with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours 
worked (0.38). 

 
 
 

Fig 5.1.3.3: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours>50 million – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
2.0 

Company only Company with contractors Top quartile 
1.8  
 *   Fatality in 2013  
1.6  
  
1.4 

 
 

 
1.2 

 
1.0 

 
  
0.8  
  
0.6 

Average companies with contractors 0.38 
 
0.4 
 
0.2 
0.0 

E J L S W Y Z DD EE FF II JJ KK LL OO QQ RR TT UU VV 
 

Fig 5.1.3.4: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours>50 million  – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
 
2.0 

Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile 
1.8  
 *   Fatality in 2013  
1.6  
  
1.4 

 
 

 
1.2 

 
1.0 

 
  
0.8  
  
0.6 
 Average companies with contractors 0.38 
0.4 
 
0.2 
0.0 

E J L S W Y Z DD EE FF II JJ KK LL OO QQ RR TT UU VV 
 

 
© OGP 5-7 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  

The remaining 30 companies which, with their contractors, ·  The  range  for  companies  jointly  with  contractors  in 
reported less than 50 million hours worked are presented 2013 was between 0.00 and 3.16 lost time injuries per 
below in rank order of the company-with-contractor LTIF. million hours worked. 

·  16 of the 30 companies with their contractors performed ·  The range for companies only was between 0.00 and 1.94. 
below the overall average for smaller companies with ·  The range for contractors only was between 0.00 and 6.09. 
contractors (0.71). 

·  5 of the 29 smaller companies presented below suffered 
one or more fatalities. 

 
 
 
 

Fig 5.1.3.5: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours≤50 million – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
   
3.5   
 Company only           Company with contractors Top quartile 

3.0 *   Fatality in 2013 

 
 

2.5 
 
2.0 
 
 
1.5 
 
1.0 

Average companies with contractors 0.71 
 

0.5 
 
0.0 

A B C D F G H I K M N O P Q R T U V X AA BB CC GG HH MM NN PP SS WW XX 
 
 

Fig 5.1.3.6: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours≤50 million  – lost time injury frequency 
per million hours worked [Data page B-17] 
   

  
7 
 Contractor only          Company with contractors Top quartile 

*   Fatality in 2013  
6 

 
 

 
5  
  

 
4 
  

 
3  
  
2  
  

Average companies with contractors 0.71 
1 
 

0 
A B C D E F G H I K M N O P Q R T U V X AA BB CC GG HH MM NN PP SS WW XX 

 
 

5-8 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5.2 Company results by function 
  

Results   of   companies   together   with   their   contractors against smaller numbers of hours would not have statistical 
have  been  analysed  by  function  to  allow  more  in-depth significance. The company code letters are the same as used 
benchmarking  between  companies.   The  TRIR  indicator elsewhere in this section. 
has been selected, and the ranked results are shown in the Exploration was the only function where the top quartile 
following  charts.  Only  companies  that  provided  data  by 

company  with  contractors  shows  a  TRIR  of  zero.  It  is 
function  are  included,  and  then  only  those  companies 

also the function with the smallest number of work hours 
that  reported  more  than  100,000  hours  worked.  Results 

reported (2% of the total in 2013, see Appendix A). 
 

Fig 5.2.1: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – exploration 
per million hours worked [Data page B-18] 
   
12  

Company with contractors 
 Top quartile 
  
10  
  
  

8  
  
  
6  
  
  
4  
  
 

Overall 1.87 (all companies with contractors) 
2 
 
 
0 

L J CC      F R T X EE    GG     Z Q N LL S E FF     QQ  MM   UU      TT     NN   W II AA      B BB H I JJ K M O      OO     P RR V XX 
 

Fig 5.2.2: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – drilling 
per million hours worked [Data page B-18] 
   
12 

Company with contractors Top quartile 
 

10 
 
 

8 
 
 
6 
 
 
4 

Overall 3.05 (all companies with contractors) 
 

2 
 
 
0 

W B G      O E N U H Q F C J T L K I V Y S     GG   R LL    NN   RR    DD    X      HH    Z      CC    FF    VV      II XX    EE    M     AA    TT   OO  UU  QQ  BB      JJ P 
  
  

© OGP 5-9 

119.05 
12.46 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 5.2.3: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – production 
per million hours worked  [Data page B-18] 
   
12 

Company with contractors Top quartile 
 

10 
 
 

8 
 
 
6 
 
 
4 
 

Overall 1.75 (all companies with contractors) 
2 
              
              
0 

X Q     M     AA   O E BB     J G     CC   C L I Y     GG   R U F LL      V K     OO  N      EE     P      DD    Z S FF  MMHH  UU NN   PP    RR      II     VV    TT   QQ  SS     JJ     W      T    WW 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig 5.2.4: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – construction 
per million hours worked [Data page B-18] 
   
   
12 

Company with contractors Top quartile 
  
  
10 

 
 

 
 

 
8 
  

  
6  
  
  
4  
  
  
2 

Overall 1.13 (all companies with contractors) 
                         

0                         
C U BB I AA      F N V GG      J O P G E Z T CC    DD   NN    EE     UU    HH      LL VV      S II FF TT Y OO    RR     W     QQ     JJ M PP      Q X 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

5-10 ©OGP 

17.44 119.05 
13.42 12.46 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Appendix A 

Database dimensions 

Fig A-1: Work hours reported 
millions [Data page B-19] 
4000 
 
3500 
 
3000 
 
2500 
 
2000 
  
1500 

work hours contractor 
 

 
1000  
 

500  
work hours company 

       
0 

1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2013 
  

 
 

The database for the year 2013 covers 3 770 546 000 hours Work hours reported (‘000s) 

worked in the exploration and production sector of the oil Onshore           Offshore       Overall 
and gas industry. The database is 2% larger than it was in 

Company      637 277 (16.9%)   1 83 579 (4.9%)      820 856 
2012. 

Contractor   2 123 159 (56.3%)  826 531 (21.9%)    2 949 690 
·  73% of the hours reported were associated with onshore 

Overall                 2760 436          1 010 110   3 770 546 
activities, 27% with offshore activities. 

·  110 countries are represented in the database, 3 more 
than  in  the  2012  database.  Countries  are  listed  in 
Appendix D. 

·  50 companies contributed data, of which 49 companies 
contributed contractor statistics, though not in every 
case for each country of operation. 

·  Of the 50 companies, 47 had contributed data in 2012 
which accounted for 95% of the database in 2012 and 
96%  of  the  database  in  2013.  43  of  the  companies 
submitting 2013 data had also provided data in 2011. 

·  23 of the companies contributed 90% of the hours. 7 
companies  between  them  covered  51%  of  the  hours, 
and the largest contributor accounted for 12%. 

·  22% of the reported work hours were related to company 
personnel and 78% were related to contractors. 

A summary of the key elements of the database is shown in 
the table at the end of this section. 

  
  
  
  
  
  

 
 

© OGP A-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig A-2: Exposure hours – by region, 2013 [Data page B-19] Fig A-3: Exposure hours – by region, 2012 [Data page B-19] 
    

 
FSU 6% FSU 10% Asia/Australasia 20% 

Asia/Australasia 24% 
South & South & Central 
Central America 10% America 10% 

 
 
 

Europe 11% 
Europe 11% 

Middle 
Middle 
East 17% East 18% 

    
 

North America 16% North America 15%  
 Africa 16% 

Africa 16% 
 
 
 
 

Fig A-4: Exposure hours – by function, 2013 [Data page B-19] Fig A-5: Exposure hours – by function, 2012 [Data page B-19] 
    

Exploration 2% Exploration 2% 
Production 35% Production 33% 

   
   

Drilling 15%  Drilling 18% 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Unspecified 23%  

 Unspecified 22% 
Construction 25% Construction 25% 

 
 
 
 

‘Unspecified (as a work function)’ is used for the entry of 
data  associated  with  office  personnel  whose  work  hours 
and  incident  data  cannot  be  reasonably  assigned  to  the 
administrative  support  of  one  of  the  function  groupings 
of    exploration,    drilling,    production    or    construction. 
Corporate  overhead  support  function  personnel  such  as 
finance  or  human  resources  staff  may  be  examples  where 
work hours cannot be specifically assigned to a particular 
function.  All  other  data  that  are  not  separated  out  by 
function are reported as ‘unspecified’. 

  
  
  

A-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Proportion of database used in analysis 
  
  

For calculations of FAR, fatal incidents per 100 ·  In 2011, this database was 2876 million hours, 78% of 

million work hours, and LTIF: the total database. 

·  All hours in the database were used. ·  North America and Europe have only 37% and 57% 
severity information respectively, whereas 94% of the 

For calculations of TRIR: South & Central America database was useable. 
·  Submissions without information on medical 

For calculations of restricted work day severity: 
treatment cases were filtered out, leaving a database of 
3665 million hours, 97% of the database. ·  Submissions without information on days assigned to 

·  In 2012, the TRIR database was 3651 million hours, restricted activities were filtered out, leaving a database 

99% of the total database. of 2088 million hours, 55% of the total database. 

·  The   region   where   the   smallest   proportion   of   the ·  In 2012 this database was 2183 million hours, 59% of 

database could be used was North America (92%). the total database. 

More detailed information is shown in the tables below. 
For calculations of lost work day severity: 

 
·  Submissions  without  information  on  days  off  work  

were  filtered  out,  leaving  a  database  of  2625  million  
hours, 70% of the total database.  
  
  
  
  

Percent. of useable data  –  regions Percent. of useable data  –  functions 

TRIR  
Restricted work TRIR  

Restricted work 
analyses Ldoayst c wasoer k day case severity analyses dLoays tc awseo rk day case severity 

severity analyses severity analyses 
analyses analyses 

Africa 99% 85% 64% Exploration     93%           75%             60% 
Asia/ 67%             56% Drilling          95%           74%             60% 
Australasia 96% 

Production      97%           70%             58% 
Europe 99% 58% 42% Construction    99%           64%             49% 
FSU 100% 77% 62% 
Middle East 98% 76% 51% 
North America 92% 38% 34% 
South & Central 96%             89% 

 America 100% 

 
Percent. of useable data  –  overall 

TRIR 
analyses Lseovset rwitoyr akn daalys ceass e Rseevsetrriictyte adn awlyosreks d ay case 

97% 70% 55% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP A-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
A-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Appendix B 

Data tables 

 

Summary of 2013 data 
 

Hours worked 
 (‘000s) fataliNtieos. LWDNCos.  RWDNCos.  MNTCos.  FAR LTIF TRIR 

Africa Company Onshore 91 322 9 10 8 20 9.86 0.21 0.48 
Company Offshore 17 739 0 3 8 2 0.00 0.17 0.73 
Contractor Onshore 357 858 4 95 73 155 1.12 0.28 0.92 
Contractor Offshore 128 718 14 52 88 99 10.88 0.51 1.89 
Sub Total 595 637 27 160 177 276 4.53 0.31 1.05 

Asia/Australasia   Company Onshore 111 895 0 5 13 21 0.00 0.04 0.37 
Company Offshore 41 884 0 5 4 12 0.00 0.12 0.53 
Contractor Onshore 564 950 4 66 147 320 0.71 0.12 0.97 
Contractor Offshore 200 334 4 51 105 108 2.00 0.27 1.37 
Sub Total 919 063 8 127 269 461 0.87 0.15 0.97 

Europe Company Onshore 111 701 2 60 5 54 1.79 0.56 1.08 
Company Offshore 33 553 0 34 11 37 0.00 1.01 2.49 
Contractor Onshore 112 789 1 89 42 91 0.89 0.80 2.02 
Contractor Offshore 140 777 6 213 108 269 4.26 1.56 4.24 
Sub Total 398 820 9 396 166 451 2.26 1.02 2.58 

FSU Company Onshore 49 280 1 10 4 10 2.03 0.22 0.51 
Company Offshore 10 897 0 2 3 2 0.00 0.18 0.64 
Contractor Onshore 139 775 2 51 15 37 1.43 0.38 0.75 
Contractor Offshore 40 644 0 14 15 29 0.00 0.34 1.43 
Sub Total 240 596 3 77 37 78 1.25 0.33 0.81 

Middle East Company Onshore 84 911 0 25 12 36 0.00 0.29 0.88 
Company Offshore 10 511 0 3 5 7 0.00 0.29 1.80 
Contractor Onshore 479 241 4 86 114 183 0.83 0.19 0.81 
Contractor Offshore 62 581 0 17 21 50 0.00 0.27 1.41 
Sub Total 637 244 4 131 152 276 0.63 0.21 0.90 

North America Company Onshore 149 948 1 57 31 78 0.67 0.39 1.14 
Company Offshore 33 728 2 59 7 10 5.93 1.81 1.67 
Contractor Onshore 326 000 5 223 290 589 1.53 0.70 3.37 
Contractor Offshore 80 413 4 83 40 73 4.97 1.08 1.96 
Sub Total 590 089 12 422 368 750 2.03 0.74 2.58 

South & Central 38 220 0 14 9 21 0.00 0.37 1.16 
America Company Onshore 

Company Offshore 35 267 0 28 6 34 0.00 0.79 1.93 
Contractor Onshore 142 546 14 88 135 219 9.82 0.72 3.20 
Contractor Offshore 173 064 3 184 97 366 1.73 1.08 3.76 
Sub Total 389 097 17 314 247 640 4.37 0.85 3.13 

Total Company Onshore 637 277 13 181 82 240 2.04 0.30 0.82 
Company Offshore 183 579 2 134 44 104 1.09 0.74 1.44 
Contractor Onshore 2 123 159 34 698 816 1594 1.60 0.34 1.48 
Contractor Offshore 826 531 31 614 474 994 3.75 0.78 2.52 
 
Grand Total 3 770 546 80 1627 1416 2932 2.12 0.45 1.60 
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP B-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 

The following data are presented in relation to the sections of the report where the data have been used. 
 

Section 1 Summary 
 
Section 1 Summary intentionally excluded 

Section 2 Overall results 
Total recordable injury rate 

Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
2004 3.71 4.00 3.94 3.17 6.36 
2005 1.76 3.50 3.05 2.82 3.87 
2006 1.85 3.24 2.92 2.68 3.66 
2007 2.41 2.76 2.68 2.51 3.26 
2008 1.49 2.23 2.08 1.75 3.09 
2009 1.28 1.89 1.75 1.45 2.79 
2010 1.19 1.81 1.68 1.41 2.45 
2011 1.32 1.88 1.76 1.45 2.84 
2012 1.12 1.90 1.74 1.49 2.53 
2013 0.95 1.77 1.60 1.33 2.34 
Hours  2013 2 898 602          3 665 476           2 698 156            967 320 

 (‘000s) 766 874 

 
 

Fatal accident rate 
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
2004 2.82 6.18 5.24 5.00 6.02 
2005 1.25 4.36 3.53 3.94 1.99 
2006 2.04 4.54 3.92 4.64 1.58 
2007 1.65 3.39 2.99 3.01 2.92 
2008 2.81 3.20 3.12 3.38 2.25 
2009 1.58 3.11 2.76 2.75 2.78 
2010 3.17 2.64 2.76 2.62 3.16 
2011 1.33 2.03 1.88 1.94 1.67 
2012 1.58 2.59 2.38 2.87 0.89 
2013 1.83 2.20 2.12 1.70 3.27 
Hours  2013 2 949 690          3 770 546          2 760 436           1 010110 
(‘000s) 820 856 

 
 

Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours 

Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
2004 3.29 5.15 4.63 4.95 3.58 
2005 1.72 3.96 3.36 3.62 2.38 
2006 1.91 4.04 3.51 4.10 1.58 
2007 1.35 2.85 2.51 2.74 1.69 
2008 2.53 2.47 2.48 2.71 1.72 
2009 1.22 2.06 1.87 1.86 1.90 
2010 1.10 1.86 1.70 1.70 1.69 
2011 0.80 1.63 1.45 1.57 1.03 
2012 0.79 1.57 1.41 1.58 0.89 
2013 0.85 1.22 1.14 0.94 1.68 
 Hours  2013 2 949 690          3 770 546          2 760 436           1 010110 
( ‘000s) 820 856 

 
  
  

B-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency 
Year Onshore Offshore Overall Company Contractor 
2004 1.04 1.26 1.09 0.87 1.17 
2005 0.92 1.12 0.97 0.83 1.02 
2006 0.95 1.13 0.99 0.89 1.03 
2007 0.62 0.82 0.66 0.54 0.70 
2008 0.47 0.81 0.55 0.52 0.56 
2009 0.38 0.70 0.45 0.44 0.46 
2010 0.35 0.62 0.42 0.41 0.42 
2011 0.34 0.74 0.43 0.42 0.43 
2012 0.38 0.81 0.48 0.47 0.49 
2013 0.34 0.77 0.45 0.40 0.47 
Hours  2013 1 010110          3 770 546            820 856          2 949 690 
(‘000s) 2 760 436 
  
  
  

Fatalities by category, 2013 Fatalities by activity, 2013 
Category No. % Activity                                                  No.         % 
Assault  or  violent  act 9 11.3 Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning               6           7.5 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 7 8.8 Diving,  subsea,  ROV                                       0           N/A 
Confined  space 0 N/A Drilling,  workover,  well  services                             13          16.3 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 0 N/A Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations                      2           2.5 
Explosions  or  burns 4 5.0 Maintenance,  inspection,  testing                            10          12.5 
Exposure  electrical 1 1.3 Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering                 0           N/A 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration 1 1.3 Production  operations                                      9           11.3 
Falls  from  height 3 3.8 Seismic/survey  operations                                  2           2.5 
Overexertion,  strain 1 1.3 Transport  –  air                                            17          21.3 
Pressure  release 6 7.5 Transport  –  land                                           6           7.5 
Slips  and  rrips  (at  same  height) 0 N/A Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity                   12          15.0 
Struck  by 10 12.5 Unspecified – other                                       3           3.8 
Water  related,  drowning 17 21.3 
Other 21 26.3 
 
 
 

Fatalities by category, 2013 
Cause Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
Assault  or  violent  act 9 0 9 9 0 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 1 6 7 7 0 
Confined  space 0 0 0 0 0 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 0 0 0 0 0 
Explosions  or  burns 0 4 4 1 3 
Exposure  electrical 1 0 1 0 1 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration 1 0 1 1 0 
Falls  from  height 1 2 3 0 3 
Overexertion,  strain 0 1 1 1 0 
Pressure  release 1 5 6 1 5 
Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height) 0 0 0 0 0 
Struck  by 1 9 10 9 1 
Water  related,  drowning 0 17 17 1 16 
Other 0 21 21 17 4 

15 65 80 47 33 
  
  
  

© OGP B-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fatalities by activity, 2013 

Activity Company Contractors Overall Onshore Offshore 
Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning 0 6 6 6 0 
Diving,  subsea,  ROV 0 0 0 0 0 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 2 11 13 6 7 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 1 1 2 1 1 
Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 1 9 10 2 8 
Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 0 0 0 0 0 
Production  operations 9 0 9 9 0 
Seismic/survey  operations 0 2 2 1 1 
Transport  –  air 0 17 17 13 4 
Transport  –  land 1 5 6 6 0 
Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity 1 11 12 0 12 
Unspecified  –  other 0 3 3 3 0 

15 65 80 47 33 
  
  
  
  
  

Lost work day cases by category, 2013 Lost work day cases by activity, 2013 
Category Number % Activity                                                     Number  % 
Assault  or  violent  act 10 0.6 Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning                     146       9 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 341 21 Diving,  subsea,  ROV                                               9     0.6 
Confined  space 4 0.2 Drilling,  workover,  well  services                                   326      20 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 99 6.1 Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations                             189    11.6 
Explosions  or  burns 60 3.7 Maintenance,  inspection,  testing                                  241    14.8 
Exposure  electrical 14 0.9 Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering                       136     8.4 
Exposure  noise,  chemical,  biological,  vibration 20 1.2 Production  operations                                            223    13.7 
Falls  from  height 176 10.8 Seismic/survey  operations                                         14     0.9 
Overexertion,  strain 138 8.5 Transport  –  air                                                   27     1.7 
Pressure  release 11 0.7 Transport  –  land                                                  91     5.6 
Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height) 279 17.1 Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity                         106     6.5 
Struck  by 367 22.6 Unspecified  –  other                                              119      7.3 
Water  related,  drowning 21 1.3 
Other 87 5.3 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-4 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by category, 2013 

Category Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
Assault  or  violent  act 2 8 10 7 3 
Caught  in,  under  or  between 64 277 341 142 199 
Confined  space 0 4 4 3 1 
Cut,  puncture,  scrape 29 70 99 42 57 
Explosions  or  burns 8 52 60 38 22 
Exposure  electrical 2 12 14 4 10 
Exposure noise, pressure, chemical, biological, vibration 3 17 20 14 6 
Falls  from  height 33 143 176 105 71 
Overexertion,  strain 35 103 138 65 73 
Pressure  release 2 9 11 8 3 
Slips  and  trips  (at  same  height) 79 200 279 176 103 
Struck  by 40 327 367 208 159 
Water  related,  drowning 2 19 21 3 18 
Other 16 71 87 64 23 

315 1312 1627 879 748 
 
 
 

Lost work day cases by activity, 2013 
Activity Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
Construction,  commissioning,  decommissioning 9 137 146 108 38 
Diving,  subsea,  ROV 0 9 9 1 8 
Drilling,  workover,  well  services 28 298 326 177 149 
Lifting,  crane,  rigging,  deck  operations 26 163 189 84 105 
Maintenance,  inspection,  testing 54 187 241 97 144 
Office,  warehouse,  accommodation,  catering 48 88 136 91 45 
Production  operations 91 132 223 124 99 
Seismic/survey  operations 0 14 14 12 2 
Transport  –  air 6 21 27 7 20 
Transport  –  land 13 78 91 89 2 
Transport  –  water,  including  marine  activity 2 104 106 13 93 
Unspecified  –  other 38 81 119 76 43 

315 1312 1627 879 748 
 
 

Lost work day case severity 
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
2004 21.01 24.85 23.79 23.42 25.10 
2005 25.59 23.74 24.18 24.46 23.11 
2006 20.59 26.22 24.85 24.66 25.48 
2007 32.73 35.55 35.00 33.04 42.02 
2008 35.21 34.58 34.72 32.05 41.01 
2009 35.30 38.25 37.53 34.77 44.40 
2010 35.43 46.02 43.90 39.39 52.56 
2011 41.06 42.58 42.26 39.84 46.42 
2012 38.81 41.28 40.74 36.83 45.99 
2013 43.52 42.88 42.98 35.76 51.21 
Hours  2013  (‘000s) 551 063 2 074 235 2 625 298 1 974 117 651 181 
  
  
  

 
 

© OGP B-5 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restricted work day case severity 

Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore 
2004 13.75 11.20 11.44 10.98 12.90 
2005 12.45 13.77 13.66 14.74 9.55 
2006 11.78 11.07 11.15 10.33 13.01 
2007 15.28 10.46 10.93 8.90 15.95 
2008 16.08 13.39 13.72 13.34 14.35 
2009 15.26 13.80 13.94 12.42 15.75 
2010 14.72 13.78 13.88 13.59 14.35 
2011 12.92 10.17 10.40 11.67 8.55 
2012 13.84 12.05 12.21 11.48 13.41 
2013 17.17 14.24 14.51 15.42 13.03 
Hours  2013  (‘000s) 443 753 1 644 019 2 087 772 1 548 970 538 802 
 
 
 
 
 

Life Saving Rules 

Rule Fatal  incidents Core  rule? 
Dropped  objects 1 No 
Gas  test 1 No 
Journey  management 1 Yes 
Overhead  power  lines 1 No 
Suspended  load 1 Yes 
Seat  belt 2 Yes 
Work  at  height 3 Yes 
Flotation  device 5 No 
Line  of  fire  -  safe  area 14 No 
No  appropriate  rule 8 n/a 
Insufficient  information  to  assign  a  rule 6 n/a 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-6 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 

 

Section 3 Results by region 
Fatalities 

Region Fatalities 
2013  (2012) 2013  (20FA12R)  Fat2a0l 1 i3n c (i2d0e1n2t)s  

Africa 27  (17) 4.53  (2.83) 9  (13) 
Asia/Australasia 8  (10) 0.87  (1.35) 7  (10) 
Europe 9  (2) 2.26  (0.52) 5  (2) 
FSU 3  (2) 1.25  (0.55) 3  (2) 
Middle  East 4  (13) 0.63  (1.95) 4  (11) 
North  America 12  (42) 2.03  (7.5) 10  (12) 
South  &  Central  America 17  (2) 4.37  (0.54) 5  (2) 
 
 
 

Fatal accident rate 
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 

Africa 4.53 2.83 1.25 3.38 2.21 
Asia/Australasia 0.87 1.35 3.28 4.14 1.58 
Europe 2.26 0.52 0.87 0.97 6.58 
FSU 1.25 0.55 1.59 2.17 3.14 
Middle  East 0.63 1.95 1.74 1.63 2.16 
North  America 2.03 7.50 1.50 5.08 4.37 
South  &  Central  America 4.37 0.54 2.42 1.57 2.37 
All  regions 2.12 2.38 1.88 2.76 2.76 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate 
 

 South  & 
Central 

Africa Asia/
Australasia  Europe FSU Middle  East   North  America America       All  regions 

2008 2.18 1.34 3.89 1.22 0.83 4.25 3.15 2.09 
2009 1.65 1.22 3.48 1.21 0.92 3.08 3.17 1.75 
2010 1.40 1.30 3.05 1.08 0.98 2.89 2.76 1.68 
2011 1.22 1.46 2.81 0.99 0.78 3.19 3.17 1.77 
2012 1.14 1.37 2.64 0.99 1.02 2.82 3.05 1.74 
Ave  2008-2012 1.50 1.33 3.14 1.08 0.90 3.19 3.06 1.80 
2013 1.05 0.97 2.58 0.81 0.90 2.58 3.13 1.60 
Hours  2013 591 850 883 067 394 926 239 681 627 269 540 224 388 459 3 665 476 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency 
 

 South  & 
Africa Asia/ Central 

Australasia  Europe FSU Middle  East   North  America America       All  regions 
2008 0.61 0.29 1.38 0.45 0.29 0.55 0.90 0.55 
2009 0.42 0.29 1.31 0.35 0.26 0.51 0.69 0.45 
2010 0.36 0.29 1.06 0.31 0.25 0.48 0.61 0.42 
2011 0.30 0.30 1.08 0.31 0.18 0.59 0.64 0.43 
2012 0.33 0.26 0.91 0.28 0.24 0.94 0.69 0.48 
Ave  2008-2012 1.76 0.96 4.80 1.25 1.21 3.09 2.60 2.28 
2013 0.31 0.15 1.02 0.33 0.21 0.74 0.85 0.45 
Hours  2013 595 637 919063 398 820 240 596 637 244 590 089 389 097 3 770 546 
  
  
  

© OGP B-7 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hours worked (‘000s) 
Year 

Africa             Asia/
Australa s i a         Europe              FSU       &

Middle  East     North  America       South
  America       C  e n tAralll   regions 

2002 387 675 391 368 180 858 173 002 294 692 465 426 227 808 2 120 829 
2003 443 101 377 806 187 209 201 375 368 936 458 471 210 128 2 247 026 
2004 453 714 364 929 191 992 364 741 370 625 242 906 301 546 2 290 453 
2005 472 879 348 806 191 127 443 782 383 968 224 603 315 505 2 380 670 
2006 473 646 473 100 282 856 451 036 447 657 302 632 506 047 2 936 974 
2007 496 830 540 809 296 407 418 534 553 424 285 769 321 028 2 912 801 
2008 499 818 562 677 310 258 444 115 835 031 304 046 348 223 3 304 168 
2009 542 110 697 524 319 176 350 794 1 018 682 320 541 337 015 3 585 842 
2010 562 121 725 171 308 870 461 827 676 337 295 339 381 479 3 411 144 
2011 558 573 609 466 344 762 439 420 690 171 400 902 412 784 3 456 078 
2012 600 478 741 523 384 668 363 944 666 915 560 027 373 485 3 691 040 
2013 595 637 919 063 398 820 240 596 637 244 590 089 389 097 3 770 546 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages 

Fatal accident rate – 5-year rolling average 

Year 
Africa            Asia/ &

Australa s i a         Europe              FSU       Middle  East    North  America   South
  America       C eAnll t rraelg ions 

2003 8.9 2.8 4.3 6.3 5.9 4.7 5.0 5.4 
2004 8.3 2.6 3.5 6.8 6.1 5.0 4.6 5.4 
2005 7.0 2.1 3.5 6.6 4.9 4.5 3.8 4.7 
2006 6.6 1.8 3.5 6.3 4.3 4.0 3.9 4.4 
2007 6.0 1.5 3.0 5.5 4.2 3.6 3.8 4.1 
2008 5.1 1.4 3.5 5.2 3.6 2.8 3.9 3.7 
2009 4.1 1.4 4.6 4.4 2.8 2.4 3.7 3.2 
2010 3.8 2.1 4.0 3.7 2.5 3.1 3.3 3.1 
2011 2.9 2.3 3.4 2.9 2.3 2.7 2.9 2.7 
2012 2.8 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.0 4.4 2.4 2.6 
2013 2.9 2.1 2.2 1.8 1.7 4.1 2.3 2.4 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-8 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate – 5-year rolling average 
Year 

Africa            Asia/
Australa s i a         &

Europe              FSU       Middle  East    North  America   South
  America       C eAnllt  rraelg ions 

2003 2.5 2.3 7.9 2.0 4.3 7.7 5.9 4.4 
2004 3.1 2.3 7.5 2.1 3.8 7.3 5.7 4.3 
2005 3.0 2.1 6.4 1.9 3.6 6.5 5.2 3.8 
2006 3.0 1.9 6.0 1.9 3.3 5.7 4.5 3.4 
2007 2.9 1.7 5.3 2.2 3.0 5.2 4.1 3.2 
2008 2.8 1.6 4.7 2.1 1.9 4.9 3.8 2.8 
2009 2.2 1.4 4.3 1.9 1.5 4.4 3.5 2.4 
2010 2.0 1.4 3.9 1.8 1.3 4.0 3.2 2.2 
2011 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.6 1.1 3.6 3.1 2.0 
2012 1.5 1.3 3.1 1.1 0.9 3.2 3.1 1.8 
2013 1.3 1.2 2.9 1.0 0.9 2.9 3.1 1.7 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency – 5-year rolling average 

Year 
Africa            Asia/ Central 

Australasia       Europe           FSU              &
Middle  East       North  America     South

  America  All  regions 
2003 1.0 0.6 2.3 0.8 1.6 1.4 2.5 1.4 
2004 1.0 0.6 2.2 0.9 1.4 1.4 2.5 1.3 
2005 0.8 0.5 2.0 0.8 1.2 1.2 2.3 1.2 
2006 0.7 0.4 1.8 0.8 1.0 1.0 2.2 1.1 
2007 0.7 0.4 1.7 0.8 0.9 0.9 2.0 1.0 
2008 0.7 0.3 1.5 0.7 0.6 0.8 1.7 0.8 
2009 0.6 0.3 1.5 0.6 0.4 0.7 1.4 0.7 
2010 0.5 0.3 1.4 0.5 0.4 0.6 1.2 0.6 
2011 0.5 0.3 1.2 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.5 
2012 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.5 
2013 0.3 0.3 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.5 
 
 
 

Severity of lost work day cases 
Year 

Africa            Asia/
Australa s i a         Europe              FSU       &

Middle  East    North  America   South
  America       C eAnllt  rraelg ions 

2008 21.63 27.32 43.47 29.85 16.01 37.16 56.66 34.72 
2009 23.08 31.77 42.26 32.55 20.37 38.92 68.87 37.53 
2010 27.22 27.61 32.83 42.23 14.68 46.63 98.54 43.90 
2011 27.63 26.74 44.50 46.44 12.31 31.29 71.60 42.26 
2012 35.94 24.23 38.06 41.42 26.21 36.67 69.53 40.74 
Ave  2008-2012 26.31 27.53 40.37 37.87 18.33 37.01 71.89 39.56 
2013 29.20 30.36 42.28 50.98 13.64 49.60 60.30 42.98 
Hours  2013 508  116 616  518 231  685 184  628 484  572 225  406 374  373 2  625  298 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP B-9 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate by country 
Region Country TRIR One  or Region          Country              TRIR                          One  or 

2013 more more 
2012 2011 2013     2012     2011 

fatalities  in fatalities  in 
2013 2013 
 Norway              3.05     2.99     3.76     no 

Africa Morocco 9.62 4.67 0.00 no Netherlands         2.71     2.48     3.34     yes 
South  Africa 4.43 2.51 0.00 no Europe average       2.58 
Kenya 4.29 2.59 5.17 no UK                  2.54     2.83     2.40     yes 
Tunisia 3.38 3.38 3.04 no Hungary             1.28      3.12      3.87     no 
Mauritania 3.10 1.25 7.06 no Italy                 1.01      1.62      1.79     no 
Ivory  coast 2.74 8.33 0.00 no France               0.99     0.49     1.11      no 
Gabon 2.35 2.29 2.76 yes Spain                0.98      1.29     2.00     no 
Congo  -  Democratic Romania             0.83     1.08     0.86     yes 
Republic  of  the 
Congo Greenland           0.00     0.00     8.54     no 
(formerly  Zaire) 2.33 2.54 2.14 no  
Tanzania 2.03 3.47 7.56 yes FSU            Ukraine              2.62     3.55     12.50    no 
Ghana 1.95 1.91 2.62 no Azerbaijan           1.24     0.81      0.96     no 
Algeria 1.81 1.27 1.19 yes FSU average         0.81 
Cameroun 1.75 2.59 2.62 yes Kazakhstan           0.80     0.84     0.77     no 
Uganda 1.71 2.43 2.42 no Russia                0.72     1.14      1.12     yes 
Mozambique 1.52 2.75 2.34 no Turkmenistan         0.11      0.64     1.28     no 
Equatorial  Guinea 1.34 1.50 1.21 no  
Angola  1.10   1.48   1.56  yes Iraq                 2.11      2.52     2.06     no 
Africa average  1.05 Middle  East Yemen               1.05     1.28      1.23     no 
Libya 0.97 0.91 1.14 no Qatar                1.04     1.17      1.01     yes 
Congo 0.82 1.38 1.98 no UAE                 1.00      0.74      0.33     no 
Egypt 0.77 0.71 1.27 no Middle East average  0.90 
Nigeria 0.31 0.51 0.63 yes Turkey               0.86     3.48     1.84     no 
Sudan 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Oman               0.73     2.17      1.61     no 
Madagascar 0.00 4.10 1.58 no Kuwait               0.32     0.83     0.84     yes 
Namibia  0.00  n/a  0.00  no Iran                 0.00     0.00     1.45     no 

   
Asia/ New  Zealand         11.06    10.87    14.46    no Canada             2.63     2.91      3.31     yes 

 
Australasia Australia             2.64     4.45     4.25     no North  America 

Singapore            2.43     0.00     3.46     no North  America average             2.58 
Myanmar            1.01      1.81      1.17     yes  USA                 2.57     2.80     3.15     yes 

 Mexico              0.00     0.00     2.18     no 
Asia-Australasia 
average             0.97   
Papua  New  Guinea   0.91      1.61      2.26     yes Uruguay             17.90     0.00     n/a      yes 

South  &  Central 
Thailand             0.89     1.11      1.34     no America Guyana              17.39     0.00     0.00     no 
Malaysia             0.72     0.88     0.90     yes Peru                 4.70     4.32     4.43     yes 
China                0.66     0.51     0.93     yes Brazil                3.35      3.21      3.82     yes 
India                 0.63     1.51      1.96     no South  &  Central 
South  Korea          0.59     0.85     0.45     no America average      3.13 
Indonesia            0.49     0.59     0.74     Bolivia               2.27     3.24     0.76     no 

no 
Japan                0.44     1.47     3.76     no Trinidad  &  Tobago    2.08     2.25     1.80     no 
Bangladesh          0.41     0.60     0.61     no Argentina            1.74      1.91      1.50     no 
Pakistan              0.35     1.05     0.78     no Ecuador              1.61      2.13      3.30     no 
Vietnam              0.35     2.08     0.92     Venezuela            1.27     0.84     1.03     no 

no 
Philippines           0.19      0.93     0.99     Colombia            1.24     2.23     3.11     no 

no 
Brunei               0.00     1.37      1.24     Surinam             0.00     11.43    1.86     no 

no 
 

Europe Denmark 6.07 5.04 6.09 no 
Germany 4.17 4.51 3.21 no 
Ireland 3.95 2.11 2.13 yes 
Croatia 3.55 1.59 3.47 no 
Poland 3.47 6.11 2.62 no 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-10 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency by country 
Region Country LTIF One  or Region          Country              LTIF                          One  or 

more more 
2013 2012 2011 2013     2012     2011 

fatalities  in fatalities  in 
2013 2013 
 Italy                 1.01      1.55     1.55     no 

Africa Morocco 4.81 4.67 0.00 no Netherlands          0.75     0.65     0.88     yes 
Tunisia 1.47 1.61 1.89 no Hungary             0.64     1.76      2.44     no 
Tanzania 1.27 0.87 3.24 yes France               0.56     0.27     0.43     no 
Algeria 1.00 0.24 0.19 yes Spain                0.49     0.64     2.00     no 
Congo  -  Democratic Romania             0.47     0.60     0.53     yes 
Republic  of  the 
Congo Denmark             0.39     1.04     1.93     no 
(formerly  Zaire) 0.97 0.63 0.64 no Poland               0.00     3.66     0.00     no 
Kenya 0.83 0.43 1.29 no Greenland           0.00     0.00     4.27     no 
Mauritania 0.77 0.63 1.57 no  
Ghana 0.60 1.43 0.52 no FSU            Russia                0.50     0.27     0.32     yes 
Gabon 0.57 0.70 0.72 yes FSU average         0.33 
Cameroun 0.55 0.59 0.62 yes Kazakhstan           0.29     0.33     0.29     no 
Uganda 0.50 0.37 0.40 no Azerbaijan           0.21      0.11      0.17     no 
Equatorial  Guinea 0.45 0.32 0.11 no Turkmenistan          0.00     0.32     0.46     no 
Mozambique 0.35 0.78 1.11 no Ukraine              0.00     3.55     12.50   no 
Libya   0.31 0.54 0.52 no  
Africa average  0.31 Yemen               0.36     0.43     0.34     no 
Egypt 0.26 0.27 0.29 no Middle  East Iraq                 0.27     1.15      1.00     no 
Angola 0.16 0.23 0.28 yes Qatar               0.25     0.26      0.22     yes 
Congo 0.15 0.34 0.37 no Middle East average  0.21 
Nigeria 0.10 0.15 0.16 yes UAE                 0.19      0.16      0.06     no 
South  Africa 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Kuwait               0.14      0.12      0.14     yes 
Sudan 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Oman               0.00     0.00     0.00     no 
Ivory  coast 0.00 3.33 0.00 no Turkey               0.00     2.61      0.92     no 
Madagascar 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Iran                 0.00     0.00     0.00     no 
Namibia  0.00  0.00  0.00  no 

Mexico  3.14   6.98   2.18  yes 
Asia/ New  Zealand         2.07     3.11      2.07     no North  America 
Australasia Japan                0.44     0.00     1.50     no North  America average             0.74 

Singapore            0.35     0.00     0.00     no  USA                 0.58     0.56     0.65     yes 
 Canada             0.25     0.35     0.39     yes 

Myanmar            0.27     0.46     0.86     yes 
Australia             0.27     0.64     0.60     no   
China                0.23     0.26     0.48     yes Uruguay             15.35    0.00     n/a      yes 

South  &  Central 
Malaysia             0.17      America Peru                 2.03     0.62     1.53     yes 

0.27     0.25     yes 
South  Korea          0.17      0.34     0.00     no Brazil                0.90      0.78     0.66     yes 
Vietnam              0.17      0.52     0.38     no South  &  Central 

America average      0.85 
India                0.15      0.43     0.74     no Venezuela            0.84     0.21      0.69     no 
Asia-Australasia 
average             Trinidad  &  Tobago    0.43     0.63     0.50     no 

0.15 
Indonesia            0.09     0.16      0.17     Ecuador              0.36     0.16      0.63     no 

yes 
Bangladesh          0.07     0.00     0.00     no Argentina            0.29     0.15      0.46     no 
Thailand             0.04     0.11      0.25     no Bolivia               0.22     0.76      0.19     no 
Papua  New  Guinea   0.04     0.13      0.25     yes Colombia            0.15      0.35     1.61     no 
Pakistan              0.03     0.05     0.28     yes Guyana              0.00     0.00     0.00     no 
Brunei               0.00     0.00     0.00     no Surinam             0.00     0.00     0.00     no 
Philippines 0.00  0.37   0.40 no 
 

Europe Croatia 1.75 1.38 1.78 no 
Germany 1.68 0.92 0.92 no 
Norway 1.13 0.98 1.27 no 
UK 1.11 0.82 0.95 yes 
Ireland   1.08   0.00  0.53  yes 
Europe average   1.02 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP B-11 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 4 Results by function 
 

Fatal incidents and fatalities by function (‘000s) 

2013 2012 
Fatal  incidents Fatalities Fatal  incidents Fatalities 

Exploration 2 3 4 4 
Drilling 15 15 11 12 
Production 17 33 12 15 
Construction 6 18 17 19 
Unspecified 2 11 8 38 
All  functions 43 80 52 88 
 
 

Exposure hours by function (‘000s) 

2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 
Exploration 95 197 84 947 74 306 83 397 61 435 
Drilling 579 757 672 728 642 462 518 505 348 515 
Production 1 313 488 1 220 365 1 208 473 965 145 948 771 
Construction 930 481 911045 839 178 869 540 1 076 322 
Unspecified 851 623 801 955 691 659 974 557 1 150 799 
All  functions 3 770 546 3 691 040 3 456 078 3 411 144 3 585 842 
 
 

Fatal accident rate – 5-year rolling average 

Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall 
2008 6.16 4.11 3.81 3.57 3.68 
2009 6.15 4.24 3.76 2.76 3.23 
2010 4.54 5.06 3.54 1.87 2.80 3.08 
2011 1.91 3.82 3.35 1.80 2.35 2.69 
2012 2.42 3.43 2.90 1.69 2.62 2.57 
2013 2.50 3.19 2.58 1.71 2.30 2.38 
 

Note:  the  method  of  calculating  rolling  averages  changed  with  the  publication  of  2010  data.  Historic  figures  presented  above  have  been  recalculated  accordingly. 
 
 

Fatal accident rate 
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified 
2008 6.16 4.11 3.81 3.57 
2009 6.15 4.24 3.76 2.76 
2010 4.54 5.06 3.54 1.87 2.80 
2011 1.91 3.82 3.35 1.80 2.35 
2012 2.42 3.43 2.90 1.69 2.62 
2013 2.50 3.19 2.58 1.71 2.30 
 

Note:  the  method  of  calculating  FAR  on  a  functional  basis  has  changed  with  the  publication  of  2010  data  to  use  the  incident  function  instead  of  the  function  of 
the  victim.Historic  figures  presented  above  have  been  recalculated  acordingly. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-12 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate 
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall 
2008 3.81 4.63 2.64 1.00 1.72 2.08 
2009 2.31 3.81 2.32 0.78 1.53 1.75 
2010 2.30 2.94 2.14 0.99 1.13 1.68 
2011 2.70 2.84 2.05 1.13 0.95 1.76 
2012 2.14 2.59 1.92 1.32 1.21 1.74 
Ave  2008-2012 2.63 3.14 2.18 1.04 1.34 1.80 
2013 1.87 3.05 1.75 1.13 0.90 1.60 
Hours  2013  (‘000s) 88 319 552 984 1 279 428 922 610 822 135 366 5476 
 
 
 

Lost time injury frequency – 5-year rolling average 
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall 
2008 0.83 1.52 1.00 0.66 0.83 
2009 0.81 1.37 0.89 0.55 0.70 
2010 0.68 1.19 0.77 0.29 0.48 0.60 
2011 0.60 0.96 0.64 0.25 0.35 0.50 
2012 0.56 0.88 0.58 0.23 0.34 0.47 
2013 0.56 0.84 0.55 0.22 0.31 0.45 
 

Note:  the  method  of  calculating  rolling  averages  changed  with  the  publication  of  2010  data.  Historic  figures  presented  above  have  been  recalculated  accordingly. 
 

Lost time injury frequency 
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Other Unspecified Overall 
2004 0.61 1.71 1.23 0.77 1.12 1.09 
2005 1.12 1.53 1.22 0.76 0.69 0.97 
2006 0.91 1.73 1.16 0.50 0.84 0.99 
2007 0.79 1.31 0.82 0.38 0.49 0.66 
2008 0.78 1.33 0.70 0.26 0.41 0.55 
2009 0.47 1.02 0.64 0.21 0.36 0.45 
2010 0.42 0.82 0.54 0.24 0.25 0.42 
2011 0.53 0.70 0.55 0.21 0.22 0.43 
2012 0.60 0.81 0.49 0.24 0.46 0.48 
2013 0.74 0.94 0.53 0.21 0.24 0.45 
Hours  2013  (‘000s) 95 197 579 757 1 313 488 930 481 - 851 623 3 770 546 
 
 
 

Severity of lost work day cases 

Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall 
2008 37.6 42.2 30.2 26.9 37.6 34.7 
2009 45.5 44.3 38.4 34.7 29.9 37.5 
2010 28.7 55.8 49.8 27.3 22.6 43.9 
2011 42.4 51.8 40.4 36.4 22.8 42.3 
2012 37.6 50.3 39.6 36.8 26.2 40.7 
Ave  2008-2012 37.8 49.1 39.1 32.4 29.7 39.6 
2013 27.0 51.4 47.5 23.7 27.9 43.0 
Hours  2013  (‘000s) 66 784 415 548 885 366 591 557 538 219 2 497 474 
  
  
  

 
 

© OGP B-13 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Exploration – TRIR for company & contractor by region 

work
Company Contractor Company

hours (‘w00o0rks)  Contractor
hours  (‘000  s)  

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.31 1.35 2.02 2.44 3250 20 338 
Asia/Australasia 0.36 0.45 1.21 2.80 5530 23 167 
Europe 0.46 0.92 1.25 2.56 4339 3990 
FSU 3.91 0.93 1.76 0.87 256 5108 
Middle  East 0.00 0.75 2.81 2.76 901 9616 
North  America 0.43 0.85 4.85 4.73 4635 2475 
South  &  Central  America 1.26 0.70 8.68 5.38 796 3918 
All  regions 0.46 0.81 2.27 3.29 19 707 68612 
 
 

Exploration – LTIF for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
hours (‘w00o0rks)  Contractor

hours (‘w00o0rks)  
Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.00 0.45 0.53 0.47 3250 20 692 
Asia/Australasia 0.17 0.27 0.08 0.45 6025 23 533 
Europe 0.23 0.55 0.50 1.38 4339 4020 
FSU 0.00 0.86 1.15 0.17 256 5212 
Middle  East 0.00 0.60 0.47 0.77 1086 10 648 
North  America 0.00 0.14 7.77 0.49 7460 3859 
South  &  Central  America 0.00 0.30 3.04 0.85 874 3943 
All  regions 0.09 0.37 0.95 0.62 23 290 71 907 
 
 

Drilling – TRIR for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
(‘000s) Contractor

hours work hours (‘w00o0rks)  
Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.95 1.37 2.48 3.59 6309 86 191 
Asia/Australasia 0.51 0.90 1.68 2.65 9828 97 734 
Europe 2.62 1.98 5.87 5.17 17 146 38 135 
FSU 0.61 1.76 2.82 1.31 1647 14 552 
Middle  East 0.36 1.59 1.79 3.12 5497 51879 
North  America 0.08 0.48 4.07 5.01 13 137 106 073 
South  &  Central  America 1.43 1.47 4.70 4.46 11 211 93 645 
All  regions 1.17 1.51 3.29 3.39 64 775 488 209 
 
 

Drilling – LTIF for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
(‘000s) Contractor

hours work hours (‘w00o0rks)  
Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.30 0.28 0.79 1.13 6572 87 622 
Asia/Australasia 0.00 0.30 0.32 0.75 10 510 101 745 
Europe 1.28 1.19 2.41 2.01 17 182 39 790 
FSU 0.61 0.51 1.23 0.33 1647 14 594 
Middle  East 0.17 0.84 0.34 0.78 5774 53 198 
North  America 1.84 1.29 0.98 0.92 22 783 113 365 
South  &  Central  America 0.44 0.50 1.33 1.12 11 256 93 719 
All  regions 0.96 0.72 0.93 0.90 75 724 504 033 
  
  
  

B-14 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Production – TRIR for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
(‘000s) Contractor

hours work
work hours  (‘000  s)  

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.78 1.53 0.86 1.42 44 811 186 056 
Asia/Australasia 0.47 1.40 0.80 1.23 64 509 181 415 
Europe 1.80 2.09 3.89 4.93 66 147 89 820 
FSU 0.55 0.73 0.58 0.73 31 192 55 028 
Middle  East 1.45 1.59 1.02 1.36 38 629 112 759 
North  America 2.68 2.75 3.22 4.12 46 586 127 437 
South  &  Central  America 1.89 1.99 2.97 2.92 49 178 185 861 
All  regions 1.39 1.76 1.88 2.36 341052 938 376 
 

Production – LTIF for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
hours (‘w00o0rks)  Contractor work

hours  (‘000  s)  
Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.29 0.43 0.26 0.39 45 120 187 136 
Asia/Australasia 0.07 0.40 0.22 0.31 67 674 189 715 
Europe 0.81 0.87 1.41 1.56 66 324 91 364 
FSU 0.25 0.40 0.18 0.30 31 440 55 549 
Middle  East 0.46 0.66 0.24 0.36 40 904 115 351 
North  America 1.09 0.65 0.93 0.76 54 377 133 495 
South  &  Central  America 0.75 0.55 0.65 0.59 49 178 185 861 
All  regions 0.55 0.59 0.52 0.57 355 017 958 471 
 
 

Construction – TRIR for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
(‘000s) Contractor

hours work work
hours  (‘000  s)  

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.26 0.43 1.39 1.59 7831 66 130 
Asia/Australasia 0.48 0.46 1.20 1.70 16 587 292 580 
Europe 0.60 0.49 2.26 3.60 8366 65 075 
FSU 1.00 0.57 0.80 0.94 2994 44 795 
Middle  East 0.07 0.58 0.52 0.45 14 042 298 007 
North  America 0.22 0.67 2.58 3.34 17 812 68 650 
South  &  Central  America 0.57 1.12 3.34 2.78 1755 17 986 
All  regions 0.35 0.53 1.19 1.07 69 387 853 223 
 
 

Construction – LTIF for company & contractor by region 

Company Contractor Company
(‘000s) Contractor

hours work hours (‘w00o0rks)  
Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.00 0.07 0.27 0.36 7831 66 130 
Asia/Australasia 0.00 0.13 0.12 0.24 17 569 296 361 
Europe 0.12 0.10 0.74 1.20 8366 65 075 
FSU 0.00 0.26 0.20 0.34 2994 44 795 
Middle  East 0.00 0.16 0.10 0.11 14 310 298 197 
North  America 0.05 0.08 0.29 0.44 20 462 68 650 
South  &  Central  America 0.00 0.56 1.56 0.91 1755 17 986 
All  regions 0.03 0.14 0.22 0.24 73 287 857 194 
  
  

© OGP B-15 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Unspecified – TRIR for company & contractor by region 

work
Company Contractor Company

hours (‘w00o0rks)  Contractor
hours  (‘000  s)  

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.26 0.64 0.48 1.02 46 016 124 918 
Asia/Australasia 0.31 0.65 0.73 0.80 44974 146 743 
Europe 0.66 1.20 1.73 2.64 48 607 53 301 
FSU 0.42 0.99 0.75 1.15 23 840 60 269 
Middle  East 0.91 0.74 1.30 1.80 31 981 63 958 
North  America 0.68 1.04 2.15 3.24 66 378 87 041 
South  &  Central  America 0.10 0.41 1.36 1.46 10 157 13 952 
All  regions 0.53 0.88 1.08 1.55 271 953 550 182 
 

Unspecified – LTIF for company & contractor by region 

w
Company Contractor Company

hours (‘w00o0rks)  Contractor o
hours  (‘000  s) rk 

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013 
Africa 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.23 46 288 124 996 
Asia/Australasia 0.08 0.22 0.08 0.15 52 001 153 930 
Europe 0.37 0.56 0.64 0.85 49 043 53 317 
FSU 0.17 0.34 0.40 0.31 23 840 60 269 
Middle  East 0.24 0.22 0.39 0.42 33 348 64 428 
North  America 0.22 0.34 0.34 0.70 78 594 87 044 
South  &  Central  America - 0.11 0.21 0.32 10 424 14 101 
All  regions 0.20 0.31 0.26 0.36 293 538 558 085 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-16 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Section 5 Results by company 
   

Company  & Company  & Company  & 
Company Contractor Contractor   

Contractor 
code FAR TRIR Company  ToRnIlRy Contractor  ToRnIRly  LTIF Company  oLnTlIyF Contractor  oLTnIFly  
A 12.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.16 1.94 6.09 
B 0.00 5.29 0.00 9.37 2.65 0.00 4.68 
C 0.00 4.13 1.31 6.66 2.27 0.44 3.92 
D 27.66 4.01 1.45 5.59 1.66 0.72 2.24 
E 4.91 4.18 2.70 4.77 1.51 1.37 1.57 
F 34.18 3.42 2.43 3.66 1.41 0.69 1.59 
G 0.00 2.81 0.24 3.95 1.37 0.00 1.97 
H 0.00 3.82 0.00 4.56 1.27 0.00 1.52 
I 0.00 3.54 1.40 4.28 1.19 0.56 1.41 
J 3.91 3.95 1.32 4.40 1.08 0.53 1.18 
K 4.13 3.32 3.32 0.99 1.58 0.34 
L 0.70 3.42 1.86 3.75 0.89 0.78 0.92 
M 0.00 3.68 1.76 4.61 0.89 0.75 0.95 
N 0.00 3.18 1.35 3.57 0.81 0.27 0.92 
O 0.00 3.47 2.11 3.85 0.80 0.56 0.86 
P 0.00 0.79 0.49 0.94 0.80 0.49 0.94 
Q 0.00 3.93 1.60 5.82 0.72 0.80 0.65 
R 0.00 2.64 1.08 2.98 0.69 0.24 0.79 
S 2.36 1.65 0.91 2.18 0.66 0.46 0.81 
T 0.00 2.39 0.34 2.98 0.60 0.34 0.67 
U 0.00 2.58 0.00 4.43 0.59 0.00 1.02 
V 6.83 2.32 0.71 2.71 0.55 0.00 0.68 
W 4.94 0.64 0.24 0.85 0.54 0.19 0.73 
X 0.00 4.56 2.76 6.76 0.51 0.00 1.13 
Y 0.90 1.28 1.71 1.17 0.48 0.61 0.45 
Z 1.05 1.81 0.57 2.12 0.46 0.42 0.47 
OVERALL 2.12 1.60 0.95 1.77 0.45 0.40 0.47 
AA 0.00 2.57 1.29 3.22 0.43 0.64 0.32 
BB 0.00 3.00 0.95 5.27 0.43 0.27 0.60 
CC 0.00 2.25 0.61 2.80 0.42 0.00 0.56 
DD 2.53 1.58 0.71 1.96 0.37 0.35 0.37 
EE 2.82 1.41 0.53 1.67 0.37 0.12 0.44 
FF 1.27 1.11 0.67 1.20 0.34 0.22 0.37 
GG 0.00 3.18 2.62 3.24 0.31 0.00 0.38 
HH 0.00 1.76 0.27 2.07 0.28 0.27 0.28 
II 0.00 0.69 0.27 0.82 0.24 0.09 0.28 
JJ 4.30 0.38 0.31 0.40 0.24 0.07 0.30 
KK 1.27 1.32 0.40 1.53 0.23 0.13 0.25 
LL 0.73 1.55 1.41 1.58 0.20 0.28 0.18 
MM 0.00 0.93 1.43 0.76 0.19 0.71 0.00 
NN 2.55 1.12 0.59 1.27 0.18 0.12 0.20 
OO 0.00 0.97 0.72 1.02 0.17 0.13 0.18 
PP 0.00 0.44 0.89 0.22 0.15 0.45 0.00 
QQ 1.31 0.27 0.84 0.22 0.15 0.38 0.13 
RR 0.00 0.66 0.84 0.64 0.15 0.00 0.16 
SS 0.00 0.69 1.10 0.59 0.12 0.00 0.15 
TT 0.00 0.60 0.22 0.68 0.11 0.06 0.13 
UU 2.81 0.90 0.53 0.99 0.11 0.06 0.13 
VV 0.00 0.77 0.40 0.80 0.04 0.13 0.03 
WW 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
XX 0.00 1.16 0.00 1.47 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP B-17 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total recordable injury rate by function 
 

Exploration Drilling Production Construction 
Company  code Company  & Company  & Company  & Company  & 

Contractor Company  code Contractor Company  code Contractor Company  code Contractor 
L 10.98 W 119.05 X 9.45 C 17.44 
J 7.47 B 12.46 Q 8.05 U 13.42 
CC 6.65 G 8.95 M 5.53 BB 10.01 
F 5.75 O 8.34 AA 5.41 I 8.51 
R 5.62 E 8.10 O 5.17 AA 5.56 
T 5.10 N 7.61 E 4.34 F 4.87 
X 3.53 U 7.09 BB 3.94 N 4.55 
EE 3.40 H 6.74 J 3.88 V 4.23 
GG 2.98 Q 6.23 G 3.63 GG 3.57 
Z 2.78 F 6.17 CC 3.42 J 3.07 
Q 2.53 C 6.04 C 3.21 O 2.96 
N 2.39 J 5.64 L 2.88 P 2.86 
Overall 1.87 T 5.06 I 2.73 G 2.76 
LL 1.84 L 4.72 Y 2.55 E 2.50 
S 1.80 K 4.70 GG 2.49 Z 2.50 
E 1.76 I 4.69 R 2.41 T 2.08 
FF 1.37 V 4.23 U 2.35 CC 1.88 
QQ 1.27 Y 3.89 F 2.32 DD 1.66 
MM 0.81 S 3.74 LL 2.17 NN 1.46 
UU 0.52 GG 3.53 V 2.06 EE 1.42 
TT 0.47 R 3.20 K 2.00 UU 1.41 
NN 0.40 LL 3.19 OO 1.91 Overall 1.13 
W 0.27 NN 3.11 Overall 1.75 HH 0.89 
II 0.23 Overall 3.05 N 1.73 LL 0.86 
AA 0.00 RR 3.01 EE 1.60 VV 0.84 
B 0.00 DD 2.99 P 1.43 S 0.79 
BB 0.00 X 2.87 DD 1.31 II 0.76 
H 0.00 HH 2.64 Z 1.00 FF 0.66 
I 0.00 Z 2.53 S 0.99 TT 0.59 
JJ 0.00 CC 2.44 FF 0.97 Y 0.56 
K 0.00 FF 2.28 MM 0.89 OO 0.54 
M 0.00 VV 1.99 HH 0.84 RR 0.33 
O 0.00 II 1.87 UU 0.82 W 0.23 
OO 0.00 XX 1.85 NN 0.73 QQ 0.05 
P 0.00 EE 1.84 PP 0.58 JJ 0.00 
RR 0.00 M 1.63 RR 0.57 M 0.00 
V 0.00 AA 1.39 II 0.53 PP 0.00 
XX 0.00 TT 1.30 VV 0.44 Q 0.00 

OO 1.26 TT 0.42 X 0.00 
UU 0.97 QQ 0.41 
QQ 0.89 SS 0.40 
BB 0.78 JJ 0.35 
JJ 0.64 W 0.24 
P 0.00 T 0.00 

WW 0.00 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B-18 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Database dimensions (Appendix A) 
Total exposure hours Exposure  hours  by  region  (‘000s) 

2013           2012 
Hours  worked  (millions) 

Africa                                595 637        600 478 
Year Overall Company Contractor 

Asia/Australasia                       919063        741 523 
1985 656 410 245 

Europe                               398 820        384 668 
1986 544 306 238 

FSU                                  240 596        363944 
1987 602 356 247 

Middle  East                           637 244        666915 
1988 616 364 253 

North  America                        590 089        560 027 
1989 656 331 325 

South  &  Central  America                389 097        373 485 
1990 721 332 389 

All  regions                          3 770 546      3 691 040 
1991 941 441 499 

 
1992 944 431 513 

Exposure  hours  by  function  (‘000s) 
1993 919 410 509 

2013           2012 
1994 872 397 475 

Exploration                             95 197         84 947 
1995 841 356 485 

Drilling                               579 757        672 728 
1996 912 360 551 

Production                           1 313 488      1 220 365 
1997 1161 389 772 

Construction                           930 481        911045 
1998 1131 386 746 

Unspecified                           851 623        801 955 
1999 1197 395 802 

All  functions                         3 770 546      3 691 040 
2000 1634 572 1062 
2001 1977 633 1344 
2002 2121 636 1484 
2003 2247 664 1583 
2004 2290 639 1652 
2005 2381 639 1741 
2006 2937 734 2203 
2007 2913 668 2245 
2008 3304 712 2592 
2009 3586 822 2764 
2010 3411 726 2685 
2011 3456 753 2703 
2012 3691 760 2931 
2013 3771 821 2950 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP B-19 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
B-20 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Appendix C 

Contributing companies 

The table below shows the size of the database in thousands of hours worked for each contributing company and 
whether reported data include information on contractor statistics, breakdown by function, medical treatment 
cases, restricted work day cases, days lost following lost work day and restricted work day cases. All company 
submissions include data on numbers of fatalities and lost work day cases. 

COMPANY Hours LWDC days   RWDC days 
(‘000s) Condtartaac tor Dfuantcat iboyn  RWDCs 

Addax Petroleum Limited 14 638 yes yes yes yes yes 
ADNOC 116 965 yes yes yes yes yes 
Anadarko 76 766 yes yes yes partly partly 
Bashneft 60 766 yes yes yes yes yes 
BG Group 95 670 yes yes yes yes yes 
BHP 10 096 yes yes yes yes yes 
BP 158 162 yes yes mostly no no 
Cairn Energy 756 yes yes yes yes yes 
Cairn India 54 618 yes yes yes yes yes 
Chevron 462 348 yes yes mostly mostly mostly 
CNOOC 93 059 yes yes partly partly partly 
ConocoPhillips 157 910 yes no yes no no 
Dolphin Energy 6 754 yes yes yes yes yes 
Dong E&P 1 975 yes yes yes yes yes 
E.ON 2 356 yes yes mostly no no 
Eni 229 713 yes yes yes yes no 
ExxonMobil 274 351 yes yes yes no no 
Galp 265 yes yes yes yes yes 
GDF Suez E&P International 7231 yes no yes yes partly 
Hess Corporation 46 532 yes yes yes yes yes 
Inpex 6293 yes yes yes yes yes 
Kosmos 1731 yes yes yes yes yes 
Kuwait Oil Company 152 354 yes yes yes yes no 
Maersk Oil 24 809 yes yes yes no no 
Marathon Oil Company 27 686 yes yes yes no no 
MOL 24 232 yes yes no partly no 
Nexen Inc 32 573 yes yes yes yes no 
Oil Search 13 363 yes yes yes yes mostly 
OMV 84 640 yes yes yes yes yes 
Pan American Energy 21 540 yes yes yes yes no 
Pemex 49 747 yes yes partly partly partly 
Perenco 43 887 yes yes yes yes yes 
Petrobras 285 504 yes yes yes yes yes 
Petronas Carigali Sdn Bhd 97 345 yes yes yes no no 
Premier Oil 13 856 yes yes mostly no no 
PTTEP 39 255 yes yes yes yes yes 
Qatar Petroleum 111 618 yes yes mostly mostly mostly 
Rasgas 114 325 yes yes yes no no 
Repsol 26 191 yes yes yes yes mostly 
RWE DEA AG 4841 yes yes yes yes no 
Sasol 5357 yes yes no yes no 
Shell Companies 314 802 yes yes mostly mostly mostly 
Statoil 101 780 yes yes yes no no 
Suncor 4662 yes yes yes yes yes 
Talisman Energy 32 042 yes yes partly no no 
Total 213 077 yes yes yes yes yes 
Tullow Oil 21 061 yes yes yes yes yes 
Wintershall 8397 yes yes yes yes yes 
Woodside 13 993 yes yes yes yes yes 
Yemen LNG 8654 yes yes yes yes yes 
    

Note:   a  data  row  is  a  single  entry  for  a  company  for  one  country  and yes  =  reported  for  all  d ata  rows  
location  (one  of  company  onshore,  company  offshore,  contractor mostly  =  reported  for  m ore  than  50%  of  data  rows 
onshore,  contractor  offshore),  e.g.  Acompany,  UK,  company  

partly  =  reported  for  less  than  50%  of  data  rows 
offshore. no  -  not  reported  at  all  

© OGP C-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
C-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Appendix D 

Countries represented 

The tabulation shows the breakdown of reported hours worked in regions and countries. Also shown is the number 
of companies reporting data in each country. The table does not necessarily show all hours worked in the exploration 
& production sectors of the oil & gas industry in each country. 

No.  reporting Hours No.  reporting                     Hours 
Country companies (‘000s) Country                           companies                      (‘000s) 
Africa Europe  (continued) 
Algeria 10 30 908 Greenland                          2                             73 
Angola 9 89 240 Hungary                            2                         4670 
Benin 1 342 Ireland                              3                         2782 
Botswana 1 260 Italy                                 5                        15 884 
Cameroun 3 9131 Monaco                             1                           297 
Chad 1 13 436 Netherlands                        8                        21 368 
Congo 3 39 186 Norway                           22                       130 811 
Congo (Democratic Republic of)   2 5140 Poland                              5                          1153 
Egypt 8 57 117 Romania                            3                       53 002 
Equatorial Guinea 3 8943 Spain                                3                         2043 
Ethiopia 1 1902 Sweden                             1                             11 
Gabon 6 36 611 Switzerland                         1                           527 
Ghana 5 6676 UK                                 27                      116 090 
Ivory Coast 3 731 

FSU 
Kenya 3 7234 
Liberia 3 46 Azerbaijan                         4                       33 908 
Libya 12 22 625 Kazakhstan                         9                      118 228 
Madagascar 3 62 Russia                              14                        78 678 
Mauritiana 5 3874 Turkmenistan                        4                         8834 
Morocco 4 416 Ukraine                             3                           764 
Mozambique 5 14 490 Uzbekistan                          1                           184 
Namibia 2 82 Middle  East 
Nigeria 9 218 356 
Senegal 2 18 Iran                                  3                           226 
Sierra Leone 2 25 Iraq                                16                       44 803 
South Africa 4 451 Israel                                1                              9 
Sudan 2 79 Jordan                               1                           514 
Tanzania 2 3950 Kuwait                              5                      172 444 
Togo 1 662 Oman                               4                         5485 
Tunisia 8 13 599 Qatar                              10                      256 361 
Uganda 3 10 045 Saudi Arabia                       1                           816 

Syria                                2                             47 
Asia/Australasia 

Turkey                               2                         2322 
Australia 16 131 665 UAE                                12                      129 513 
Bangladesh 2 14  700 Yemen                               5                       24  704 
Brunei 3 1519 North  America 
Cambodia 1 22 
China 13 110 769 Canada                           12                      114 842 
India 4 59 989 Cuba                                1                              1 
Indonesia 17 247 218 Mexico                              5                       50 067 
Japan 4 2249 USA                                20                      425 179 
Malaysia 10 127 615 South  America 
Myanmar 4 18 824 
Nepal 1 3 Argentina                           6                        31 552 

Aruba                               1                            45 
New Zealand 3 1447 
Pakistan 6 31 240 Belize                               1                           461 

Bolivia                              3                         9243 
Papua New Guinea 3 89 405 

Brazil                              13                      303 526 
Philippines 2 5244 

Chile                                1                             76 
Singapore 7 2878 

Colombia                           9                          6737 
South Korea 5 11 912 

Ecuador                             2                          5596 
Taiwan 1 9 

Falklands Islands                   1                              4 
Thailand 7 56 400 

French Guiana                     1                          1619 
Timor Leste 1 6 

Guatamala                         1                          2352 
Vietnam 6 5949 

Guyana                             2                           115 
Europe 

Peru                                 4                        10 838 
Austria 1 3260 Surinam                             4                           216 
Croatia 2 10 842 Trinidad & Tobago                 7                        11 583 
Cyprus 1 135 Uruguay                            3                           391 
Denmark 5 10 385 Venezuela                          7                          4743 
France 6 14 206 
Germany 5 11 281 

  
© OGP D-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
D-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 
 

Appendix E: Glossary of terms 

  
  

Assault and violent act (as an incident/ Contractor(s) who is directly involved in execution of 

event category) prescribed work under a contract with the reporting Company. 

Intentional attempt, threat or act of bodily injury by a person Cut, puncture, scrape (as an incident/ 
or person(s) or by violent harmful actions of unknown intent, event category) 
includes intentional acts of damage to property. 

Abrasions, scratches and wounds that penetrate the skin. 
Caught in, under or between (as an 

Diving operations 
incident/event category) 

The personnel, equipment and management systems to support 
Injury where injured person is crushed or similarly injured 

a person who dives. A person ‘Dives’ if he enters water or any 
between machinery moving parts or other objects, caught 

other liquid, or a chamber in which he is subject to pressure 
between rolling tubulars or objects being moved, crushed 

greater than 100 millibars above atmospheric pressure: and in 
between a ship and a dock, or similar incidents. Also includes 

order to survive in such an environment he breathes air or other 
vehicle incidents involving a rollover. 

gas at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. Or for such 
Causal factors a purpose uses a vehicle, capsule or suit where a sealed internal 

atmospheric pressure is maintained and where the external 
See User Guide, OGP report 2013su pressure differential is greater than 100 millibars. 

Company employee Diving, subsea, ROV (as a type of activity) 
Any person employed by and on the payroll of the reporting Operations involving diving (see definition for diving 
Company, including corporate and management personnel operations), subsea equipment or activities and/or operations 
specifically involved in E&P. Persons employed under short- involving underwater remotely operated vehicles (ROV). 
service contracts are included as Company employees provided 
they are paid directly by the Company. Drilling (as a work function) 

Confined space (as an incident/ All exploration, appraisal and production drilling and workover 
as well as their administrative, engineering, construction, 

event category) 
materials supply and transportation aspects. It includes site 

Spaces that are considered “confined” because their preparation, rigging up and down and restoration of the 
configurations hinder the activities of employee who must drilling site upon work completion. Drilling includes ALL 
enter, work in, and exit them. Confined spaces include, but are exploration, appraisal and production drilling. 
not limited to underground vaults, tanks, storage bins, 

Drilling/workover/well services (as a type 
manholes, pits, silos, process vessels and pipelines. 

of activity) 
Construction (as a work function) 

Activities involving the development, maintenance work or 
Major construction, fabrication activities and also disassembly, remedial treatments related to an oil or gas well. 
removal and disposal (decommissioning) at the end of the 
facility life. Includes construction of process plant, yard Event 
construction of structures, offshore installation, hook-up and An unplanned or uncontrolled outcome of a business operation 
commissioning, and removal of redundant process facilities. 

or activity that has or could have contributed to an injury, 
Construction, commissioning, illness, physical or environmental damage. 

decommissioning (as a type of activity) Exploration (as a work function) 
Activities involving the construction, fabrication and Geophysical, seismographic and geological operations, 
installation of equipment, facilities or plant, testing activities to including their administrative and engineering aspects, 
verify design objectives or specification, and also disassembly, construction, maintenance, materials supply, and 
removal and disposal (decommissioning) at the end of the transportation of personnel and equipment; excludes drilling. 
facility life. 

Explosion or burn (as an incident/event 
Contractor 

category) 
A ‘Contractor’ is defined as an individual or organisation 

Burns or other effects of fires, explosions and extremes of 
performing work for the reporting company, following 

temperature. ‘Explosion’ means a rapid combustion, not an 
verbal or written agreement. ‘Sub-contractor’ is synonymous 

overpressure. 
with ‘Contractor’. 

Contractor employee 

Any person employed by a Contractor or Contractor’s Sub- 
  
  

© OGP E-1 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
  

Exposure: electrical (as an incident/event Key performance indicators (KPI) 
category) In this report, these include: number of fatalities, fatal 
Exposure to electrical shock or electrical burns etc. accident and incident rates, lost time injury frequency, and total 

recordable injury rate. 
Exposure: noise, chemical, biological, 

Lost time injury (LTI) 
vibration (as an incident/event category) 

A fatality or lost work day case. The number of LTIs is the sum 
Exposure to noise, chemical substances (including asphyxiation 

of fatalities and lost work day cases. 
due to lack of oxygen not associated with a confined space), 
hazardous biological material, vibration or radiation. Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 
Falls from height (as an incident/event The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work day 
category) cases) incidents per 1,000,000 hours worked. 

A person falls from one level to another. Lost work day case (LWDC) 

Fatal accident rate (FAR) Any work related injury other than a fatal injury which results 
in a person being unfit for work on any day after the day of 

The number of company/contractor fatalities per 100,000,000 
occurrence of the occupational injury. “Any day” includes rest 

(100 million) hours worked. days, weekend days, leave days, public holidays or days after 
Fatality ceasing employment. 

Cases that involve one or more people who died as a result of a LWDC severity 
work-related incident or occupational illness. The average number of lost days per lost work day case. 

First aid case Maintenance, inspection and testing (as a 
Cases that are not sufficiently serious to be reported as type of activity) 
medical treatment or more serious cases but nevertheless 

Activities related to preserving, repairing, examining and 
require minor first aid treatment, e.g. dressing on a minor cut, 

function testing assets, equipment, plant or facilities. 
removal of a splinter from a finger. First aid cases are not 
recordable incidents. Medical cause of death 

High potential event This is the cause of death given on the death certificate. Where 

Any incident or near miss that could have realistically resulted two types of causes are provided, such as “pulmonary oedema” 
caused by “inhalation of hot gases from a fire”, both are 

in one or more fatalities. 
recorded. 

Hours worked 
Medical treatment case (MTC) 

The actual ‘hours worked’, including overtime hours, are 
Cases that are not severe enough to be reported as fatalities or 

recorded in the case of onshore operations. The hours worked 
lost work day cases or restricted work day cases but are more 

by an individual will generally be about 2,000 per year. For 
severe than requiring simple first aid treatment. 

offshore workers, the ‘hours worked’ are calculated on a 12 
hour work day. Consequently, average hours worked per year Near miss 
will vary from 1,600 to 2,300 hours per person depending 
upon the on/off shift ratio. Vacations and leaves are excluded. An unplanned or uncontrolled event or chain of events that has 

not resulted in recordable injury, illness, physical or 
Hours worked in year (000’s) environmental damage but had the potential to do so in other 

Hours are rounded to the nearest thousand. circumstances. 

Incident Number of days unfit for work 
 

The sum total of calendar days (consecutive or otherwise) after 
An unplanned or uncontrolled Event or chain of Events that 

the days of the occupational injuries on which the employees 
has resulted in at least one fatality, recordable injury or illness, 

involved were unfit for work and did not work. 
or physical or environmental damage. 

Number of employees 
Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 
(as a type of activity) Average number of full-time and part-time employees involved 

in exploration & production, calculated on a full-time basis, 
Activities related to the use of mechanical lifting and hoisting 

during the reporting year. 
equipment, assembling and dis-assembling drilling rig 
equipment and drill pipe handling on the rig floor. 

  

E-2 ©OGP 



 
Safety performance indicators – 2013 data 

  
  
  
  
  
  

Number of fatalities Process safety event (PSE) 

The total number of Company’s employees and or Contractor’s A process safety event, which can also be referred to as an asset 
employees who died as a result of an incident. ‘Delayed’ deaths integrity event, is a Loss of Primary Containment (LOPC) and 
that occur after the incident are included if the deaths were a is recordable if: 
direct result of the incident. For example, if a fire killed one ·    the consequence was a reportable employee or contractor 
person outright, and a second died three weeks later from lung injury or fatality, a third party hospital admission or fatality, 
damage caused by the fire, both are reported. a community or site evacuation or a fire / explosion; or 

·    a pressure relief device discharge or material release occurs 
Occupational injury which  exceeded  defined  thresholds  (even  if  none  of  the 
Any injury such as a cut, fracture, sprain, amputation, etc., or consequences above occurred) 
any fatality, which results from a work-related activity or from as   specified   within   OGP   report   №   456,   Process   safety   – 
an exposure involving a single incident in the work recommended   practice   on   key   performance   indicators   which 
environment, such as deafness from explosion, one-time provides   consequence   and   threshold   definitions   consistent 
chemical exposure, back disorder from a slip / trip, insect or with  API  Recommended  Practice  No.754  http://www.ogp. 
snake bite. org.uk/pubs/456.pdf,  the  supplement  to  this  report  provides 

Process Safety Upstream PSE examples http://www.ogp.org.uk/ 
Office, warehouse, accommodation, pubs/456supp.pdf. 
catering (as a type of activity) Process safety related 
Activities related to work conducted in offices, warehouses, 

Process safety related events are those which do not meet the 
workshops, accommodation and catering facilities. 

specific criteria to be classified as Tier 1 or 2 Process Safety 
Offshore work Events but which have learning potential in the prevention of 

Process Safety Events. 
All activities and operations that take place at sea, including 
activities in bays, in major inland seas such as the Caspian Sea, Production (as a work function) 
or in other inland seas directly connected to oceans. Incidents 

Petroleum and natural gas producing operations, including 
including transportation of people and equipment from shore 

their administrative and engineering aspects, minor 
to the offshore location, either by vessel or helicopter, should be 

construction, repairs, maintenance and servicing, materials 
recorded as ‘offshore’. 

supply, and transportation of personnel and equipment. It 
Onshore work covers all mainstream production operations including 

wireline. Gas processing activities with the primary intent of 
All activities and operations that take place within a landmass, producing gas liquids for sale including; 
including those on swamps, rivers and lakes. Land-to-land ·    work on production wells under pressure 
aircraft operations are counted as onshore, even though flights ·    oil   (including   condensates)   and   gas   extraction   and 
are over water. separation (primary production) 

Other (as an incident/event category) ·    heavy oil production where it is inseparable from upstream 
(i.e. stream assisted gravity drainage) production 

Used to specify where an incident cannot be logically classed ·    primary oil processing (water separation, stabilisation) 
under any other category. In the case of incident activities, ·    primary  gas  processing  (dehydration,  liquids  separation, 
includes air transport incidents. sweetening, CO2 removal) 

·    Floating Storage Units (FSUs) and sub-sea storage units 
Note: the work function ‘Other’ was replaced by ‘construction’ for 

·    gas   processing   activities   with   the   primary   intent   of 
the first time in 2006. producing gas liquids for sale 
Overexertion or strain (as an incident/ ê   secondary  liquid  separation  (i.e.  Natural  Gas  Liquids 

[NGL] extraction using refrigeration processing) 
event category) 

ê   Liquefied   Natural   Gas   (LNG)   and   Gas   to   Liquids 
Physical overexertion e.g. muscle strain (GTL) operations 

·    flow-lines  between  wells  and  pipelines  between  facilities 
Pressure release (as an incident/ associated with field production operations 
event category) ·    oil  and  gas  loading  facilities  including  land  or  marine 

vessels (trucks and ships) when connected to an oil or gas 
Failure of or release of gas, liquid or object from a production process 
pressurised system. ·    pipeline operations (including booster stations) operated by 

company E&P business 
  
  
  
  
  

© OGP E-3 



 
International Association of Oil & Gas Producers 
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
Production excludes: Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) 
· production drilling or workover 

The number of recordable injuries (fatalities + lost work day 
· mining processes associated with the extraction of heavy oil 

tar sands cases + restricted work day cases + medical treatment cases) per 

· heavy oil when separable from 1,000,000 hours worked. 
upstream operations 

· secondary heavy oil processing (upgrader) Transport – air (as a type of activity) 
· refineries 

Involving aircraft, either fixed wing or helicopters. Injuries 
Production operations (as a type caused by accidents on the ground at airports are classified in 
of activity) one of the other categories. 

Activities related to the extraction of hydrocarbons from source Transport – land (as a type of activity) 
such as an oil or gas well or hydrocarbon bearing geological 

Involving motorised vehicles designed for transporting people 
structure, including primary processing, storage and transport 
operations. Includes normal, start-up or shut-down operations. and goods over land, e.g. cars, buses, trucks. Pedestrians struck 

by a vehicle are classified as land transport incidents. Incidents 
Recordable from a mobile crane would only be land transport incidents if 

the crane were being moved between locations. 
A type of event, incident, injury, illness, release or other 
outcome which has been determined to meet or exceed Transport – water, including Marine 
definitions, criteria or thresholds for inclusion and classification Activity (as a type of activity) 
in reported data. 

Involving vessels, equipment or boats designed for transporting 
Restricted work day case (RWDC) people and goods over water (including inland, marine, ice 
Any work-related injury other than a fatality or lost work day roads and marsh/swamp) e.g. supply vessels, crew boats. 

case which results in a person being unfit for full performance Unspecified – other (as a type of activity) 
of the regular job on any day after the occupational injury. 
Work performed might be: Incidents that cannot be logically classed under other headings 

· an assignment to a temporary job; or where the activity is unknown. 
· part-time work at the regular job; 

Unspecified (as a work function) 
· working full-time in the regular job but not performing all 

the usual duties of the job Unspecified is used for the entry of data associated with office 
Where no meaningful restricted work is being performed, the personnel whose work hours and incident data cannot be 
incident is recorded as a lost work day case (LWDC). reasonably assigned to the administrative support of one of the 

function groupings of exploration, drilling, production or 
Seismic/survey operations (as a type 

construction. Corporate overhead support function personnel 
of activity) such as finance or human resources staff may be examples where 
Activities relating to the determination of sub-surface work hours cannot be specifically assigned to a particular 

structures for the purpose of locating oil and gas deposits function. All other data that are not separated out by function 
including geophysical and seismic data acquisition. are reported as ‘unspecified’. 

Slips and trips (at the same height) (as an Water related/drowning (as an incident/ 

incident/event category) event category) 

Slips, trips and falls caused by falling over or onto something at Incidents/events in which water played a significant role 

the same height. including drowning. 

Struck by (as an incident/event category) Work-related injury 

Incidents/events where injury results from being hit by moving See occupational injury. 

equipment and machinery, or by flying or falling objects. Also 
includes vehicle incidents where the vehicle is struck by or 
struck against another object. 

Third party 

A  person  with  no  business  relationship  with  the  company 
or contractor. 

  
  
  
  
  

E-4 ©OGP 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For further information and publications, 
please visit our website at 

www.ogp.org.uk



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

209-215 Blackfriars Road 
London SE1 8NL 
United Kingdom 
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7633 0272 
Fax: +44 (0)20 7633 2350 
 
1 65 Bd du Souverain 
4th Floor 
B -1160 Brussels, Belgium 

International Telephone: +32 (0)2 566 9150 
Fax: +32 (0)2 566 9159 

Association  
of  Oil  &  Gas 

Internet site: www.ogp.org.uk 
Producers e-mail: reception@ogp.org.uk 



SAFETY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS – 2013 DATA
Report No. 2013s 
(July 2014)

OGP DATA SERIES

I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A s s o c i a t i o n  o f  O i l  &  G a s  P r o d u c e r s



P ublications

Global experience

The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers has access to a wealth of technical 
knowledge and experience with its members operating around the world in many different 
terrains. We collate and distil this valuable knowledge for the industry to use as guidelines 
for good practice by individual members.

Consistent high quality database and guidelines

Our overall aim is to ensure a consistent approach to training, management and best 
practice throughout the world.
The oil and gas exploration and production industry recognises the need to develop 
consistent databases and records in certain fields. OGP’s members are encouraged to use 
the guidelines as a starting point for their operations or to supplement their own policies 
and regulations which may apply locally.

Internationally recognised source of industry information

Many of our guidelines have been recognised and used by international authorities and 
safety and environmental bodies. Requests come from governments and non-government 
organisations around the world as well as from non-member companies.

Disclaimer

Whilst every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this publication, 
neither OGP nor any of its members past present or future warrants its accuracy or will, regardless of its 
or their negligence, assume liability for any foreseeable or unforeseeable use made thereof, which liability 
is hereby excluded. Consequently, such use is at the recipient’s own risk on the basis that any use by the 
recipient constitutes agreement to the terms of this disclaimer. The recipient is obliged to inform any 
subsequent recipient of such terms.

Copyright notice

The contents of these pages are © The International Association of Oil and Gas Producers. 
Permission is given to reproduce this report in whole or in part provided (i) that the copyright of OGP 
and (ii) the source are acknowledged. All other rights are reserved. Any other use requires the prior 
written permission of the OGP.
These Terms and Conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England 
and Wales. Disputes arising here from shall be exclusively subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of 
England and Wales.



OGP safety performance indicators 
2013 data

Report No: 2013s
July 2014

Revision history
Version Date Amendments
1.1 August 2014 Minor correction to TRIR and LTIF definitions (pp 3-2 and 3-3)
1.0 July 2014 First issued



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Preface

The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers, which will typically report its own data as well as that of its 
OGP, has been collecting safety incident data from its associated contractors (see Appendix C).
member companies globally since 1985. The data collected In 2010, data collection was initiated to capture “causal 
are entered into the OGP safety database, which is the factors” associated with fatal incidents and high potential 
largest database of safety performance in the E&P industry. events. These data are presented in section 2.11 of this report. 
The principal purpose of the data collection and analysis is Wherever practicable, results are presented graphically.  The 
to record the global safety performance of the contributing data underlying the charts are presented in Appendix B. The 
OGP member companies on an annual basis. The causal factors and chart data are available to OGP members 
submission of data is voluntary and is not mandated by in editable format from the members’ area of the OGP web-
OGP membership. The annual reports provide trend site.  The tables are organised according to the section in the 
analysis, benchmarking and the identification of areas and report where the chart appears. 
activities on which efforts should be focused to bring about Fatal incident and high potential event descriptions 
the greatest improvements in performance. previously included in this report as appendices C and D 
The OGP incident reporting system covers worldwide are now available for download on the OGP Safety Zone 
exploration and production (E&P) operations, both website: http://info.ogp.org.uk/safety.
onshore and offshore, and includes incidents involving both The main changes to the 2013 report are:
member companies and their contractor employees. 

•	 The addition of TRIR presented by country (see 
The key indicators presented are: number of fatalities, fatal Section 3.7)
accident rate, fatal incident rate, number of lost work day •	 FAR and LTIF by function are now presented as 5-year 
cases and number of lost work days, total recordable injury rolling average instead of the 3-year rolling average 
rate, lost time injury frequency, number of restricted duty 
case and restricted duty days, and number of medical •	 The region previously named South America is now 
treatment cases. The report presents contributing OGP referred to as South & Central America. The change 
members’ global results for these indicators, which are does not affect the historical results in this report.
then analysed by region, function and company.  A code is These changes reflect the Safety Data Subcommittee’s aim 
used to preserve the anonymity of the reporting company, to improve the consistency of presentation of the data.

Scope of reporting and data validation 
This report is published with two separate addendums companies is conducted by the OGP secretariat and any 
which can be downloaded from the OGP public website. data validated by an OGP workgroup is blind coded to 
These provide the narrative descriptions for the fatal preserve the anonymity of the reporting companies. A 
incidents and high potential events which have been self-assessment questionnaire is included within the data 
reported by the participating member companies. The data submission process to determine the alignment between 
requested from participating OGP member companies are the requested data and the company submissions. The 
published in an annual User Guide in two parts: information provided in this questionnaire is also used in 

•	 Part A contains definitions and the scope of the safety the validation process. Data that appear to be incorrect and 
data submission. This document is published on the that cannot be confirmed by the submitting company as 
OGP public website. correct may be excluded from the data set at the discretion 

•	 Part B contains practical information for the Company of the secretariat.
nominees submitting the data, copies of the data The scope of data included within this report is detailed in 
submission forms and a data submission checklist. Appendix A.

The safety data submission process is used for the collection 
of data relating to safety performance, process safety 
performance and motor vehicle crashes. The OGP safety 
database has built-in data validation requirements and 
each company data submission is validated by the OGP 
secretariat and the workgroup (Safety Committee Sub-
Committee, Task Force or Network) responsible for the 
data set in accordance with the OGP data collection and 
reporting procedure. Any communication with reporting 

ii ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Data series
Other OGP data reports include:

•	 Environmental Performance Indicators
•	 Health Performance Indicatorst
•	 Process Safety Event Data.

These are available from the OGP website:  
http://www.ogp.org.uk/publications/

© OGP iii



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

The safety statistics for 2013 were derived from data 
provided by the following companies:

Contributing OGP Members
Addax Petroleum Limited MOL
Adnoc Nexen Inc
Anadarko Oil Search
Bashneft OMV
BG Group Pan American Energy
BHP Pemex
BP Perenco
Cairn Energy Petrobras
Cairn India PETRONAS Carigali Sdn Bhd
Chevron Premier Oil
CNOOC PTT EP
ConocoPhillips Qatar Petroleum
Dolphin Energy RasGas
Dong E&P Repsol
E.ON RWE Dea AG
eni Sasol
ExxonMobil Shell Companies
GALP Statoil
GDF Suez E&P International Suncor
Hess Corporation Talisman Energy
INPEX Total
Kosmos Tullow Oil
Kuwait Oil Company Wintershall
Maersk Oil Woodside
Marathon Oil Company Yemen LNG

iv ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Contents
Executive Summary	 vii

1.  Summary	 1-1
1.1	 General................................................................................................................................................................................................... 1-1
1.2	 Fatalities................................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-2
1.3	 Total recordable injuries.....................................................................................................................................................................1-4
1.4	 Lost time injuries................................................................................................................................................................................. 1-5

2.  Overall results	 2-1
2.1	 Fatalities.................................................................................................................................................................................................2-1
2.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR)...................................................................................................................................................................2-2
2.3	 Fatalities by incident category and activity....................................................................................................................................2-3
2.4	 Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours..............................................................................................................2-5
2.5	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)...............................................................................................................................................2-6
2.6	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)..................................................................................................................................................2-7
2.7	 Lost work day cases by categories and activities...........................................................................................................................2-8
2.8	 Severity of lost work day cases.........................................................................................................................................................2-14
2.9	 Severity of restricted work day cases..............................................................................................................................................2-16
2.10	 Incident triangles...............................................................................................................................................................................2-18
2.11	 Causal factors analysis..................................................................................................................................................................... 2-20
2.12	 OGP Life-Saving Rules................................................................................................................................................................... 2-24

3.  Results by region	 3-1
3.1	 Fatalities by region...............................................................................................................................................................................3-1
3.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR) by region.................................................................................................................................................3-2
3.3	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by region.............................................................................................................................3-2
3.4	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) by region................................................................................................................................3-3
3.5	 FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages by region....................................................................................................... 3-4
3.6	 Severity of lost work day cases by region........................................................................................................................................3-5
3.7	 Individual country performance......................................................................................................................................................3-5
3.8	 Incident triangles by region...............................................................................................................................................................3-8

4.  Results by function	 4-1
4.1	 Fatalities by function..........................................................................................................................................................................4-1
4.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR) – 5-year rolling average.......................................................................................................................4-2
4.3	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by function.........................................................................................................................4-3
4.4	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) – 5-year rolling average by function...............................................................................4-3
4.5	 Severity of lost work day cases by function................................................................................................................................... 4-4
4.6	 Exploration performance...................................................................................................................................................................4-5
4.7	 Drilling performance..........................................................................................................................................................................4-7
4.8	 Production performance....................................................................................................................................................................4-9
4.9	 Construction performance..............................................................................................................................................................4-11
4.10	 Unspecifed performance................................................................................................................................................................. 4-13

5.  Results by company	 5-1
5.1	 Overall company results.....................................................................................................................................................................5-1
5.2	 Company results by function............................................................................................................................................................5-9

Appendix A: Database dimensions	 A-1

Appendix B: Data tables	 B-1

Appendix C: Contributing companies	 C-1

Appendix D: Countries represented	 D-1

Appendix E: Glossary of terms	 E-1

© OGP v



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

vi ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Executive Summary

The 2013 OGP Safety Performance Indicators show that the Fig 0.1: Number of fatalities and fatal accident rate
Fatal Accident Rate for reporting companies has decreased 2004–2013 [Data page B-2]

by 11% compared with 2012. The number of fatalities has 120 6
Fatalities

decreased from 88 in 2012 to 80 in 2013. 33 of the fatalities FAR

reported in 2013 occurred in 3 incidents. 100 5

Analysis of the fatal incident descriptions has shown that 
at least 67% of the fatal incidents reported in 2013 can 80 4

be linked to failure to follow the OGP Life Saving Rules 
published in March 2012, see OGP report 459. 60 3

There are a number of common causal factors related to the 40 2

fatal incidents and high potential events from 2010 to 2013. 
The top 5 causal factors for 2013 are also the 5 causal factors 20 1

that consistently appear in the 2012, 2011 and 2010 top 10 
for both fatal incidents and high potential events. These are: 0 0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate 

training/competence 
•	 People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  © International AsFsoigcia t0io.n2 o:f  OOil &G GPa sL Pirfoedu-cSeras ving Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents

From ‘OGP Safety Perfoprmeanrce  cIndeicantotrs  –o 2f0 1t3o dattaa’

Improper decision making or lack of judgment l 2013 incidents [Data page B-6]

•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate Insufficient information 
to assign a rule 14% Core rules 16%

work standards/procedures 
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate 

supervision
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate 

hazard identification or risk assessment No appropriate 
rule 19%

The 6th most common causal factor for fatal incidents, which 
did not show in the top 10 for High Potential Events, was:

•	 People (acts):  Following procedures:  Improper 
position (line of fire)

Personal injury performance shows the lost time injury Supplementary 
rules 51%

frequency decreasing by 6% and the total recordable injury 
rate decreasing by 8% compared with 2012 results. However 
it can be seen that the severity of lost work day cases has 
increased.

Fig 0.3: Lost time injury frequency and total recordable injury rate
Four fatal incidents were as a result of process safety events. per million hours worked [Data page B-2 & B-3]

5
TRIR

LTIF

4
Fatal accident rate (FAR)
The number of company/contractor fatalities per 
100,000,000 (100 million) hours worked. 3

Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)
The number of recordable injuries (fatalities + lost 2

work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical 
treatment cases) per 1,000,000 hours worked.
Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) 1

The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
day cases) per 1,000,000 hours worked. 0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

© OGP vii

Number of fatalities

FAR - Fatal accidents per 100 million hours worked



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

viii ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

1.  Summary

The OGP safety performance indicators report 
summarises the safety performance of contributing 
OGP member companies for 2013.
The key performance indicators (KPI) used to benchmark 
safety performance are: number of fatalities, fatal 
accident and incident rates, total recordable injury rate 
and lost time injury frequency.
Third party fatalities are not included in this report.

1.1	 General

•	 The safety performance of contributing OGP 
member companies in 2013 is based on the analysis of 
3 771 million work hours of data. 

•	 Submissions were made by 50 of the 62 operating 
company OGP members. 

•	 The data reported cover operations in 110 countries.

Hours worked
millions [Data page B-19]

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500 work hours contractor
1000

500
work hours company

0 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2013

© OGP 1-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

1.2	 Fatalities

Fig 1.2.1: Fatalities by reporting category, 2013
% fatalities associated with each reporting category Against the background of a 2% increase in work hours 
[Data page B-3] reported, the number of fatalities has decreased from 88 

Exposure noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.3% Exposure electrical 1.3% in 2012 to 80 in 2013. The 80 fatalities occurred in 43 
Overexertion, strain 1.3% separate incidents. The resulting Fatal Accident Rate (2.12) 

Other 26.3%
Falls from height 3.8% is 11% lower than last year’s figure (2.38). The company and 
Explosions or burns 5.0% contractor FAR are 1.83 and 2.20 respectively. Onshore and 

offshore FAR are 1.70 and 3.27 respectively. 
Pressure release 7.5% The reported fatalities are divided into ‘activity’ and 

‘category’. The activity with the highest number of fatalities 
Caught in, under reported by the OGP member companies is ‘Transport–air’ 
or between 8.8% (22%) with 17 fatalities as a result of 2 separate helicopter 

crash incidents. 13 fatalities (17%) were reported in 13 
Assault or violent 
act 11.3% separate incidents in the ‘Drilling, Workover, Well Services’ 

activity and 12 fatalities (15%) were reported in 2 separate 
events in the ‘Transport–water, including marine activity’ 
activity. These include a tug that capsized during static 

Water related, 
drowning 21.3%

Struck by 12.5% tow operations to an export tanker in Nigeria in which 
11 contractor employees lost their lives. One incident was 
reported in the ‘production operations’ activity (11% of the 
total fatalities) in which 9 company employees lost their 
lives in a terror attack in Algeria.

Fig 1.2.2: Fatalities by activity, 2013
% fatalities associated with each activity [Data page B-3] With regard to the incident category, 21 of the fatalities 

reported in 2013 (26%) were categorised as ‘Other‘ and were 
related to 5 fatal incidents including the 2 helicopter crashes 

Seismic/survey operations
2.6% in which 17 people died and 3 incidents in which 4 people 

Unspecied – other 3.8% Transport – air 21.8% died for which the details were not available (2% of fatal 
incidents reported in 2012 were in the category ‘Other‘). 

Transport – land 7.7%

Fatalities categorised as ‘Water related, drowning’ were the 
Construction, commissioning, 
decommissioning 7.7% second greatest contributors to the fatality statistics with 17 

fatalities in 6 separate incidents, accounting for 21% of the 
fatalities (1% in 2012). This includes the incident in Nigeria 

Production operations
11.5% where a tug capsized resulting in 11 contractor deaths.

Drilling, 
workover, 

well services
16.7%

Maintenance, inspection, 
testing 12.8%

Transport – water, inc. marine activity 15.4%

1-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Fig 1.2.3: Fatal accident rate - company and contractors
The fatal accident rate for 2013 is 2.12, 11% lower than the per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2]
2012 rate. The offshore FAR (3.27) for 2013 is more than 

8
three times the 2012 result (0.89) and the onshore rate (1.7) Overall
fell by 41%. 

Company FAR

Contractor FAR

6

4

2

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

© OGP 1-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

1.3	 Total recordable injuries
Fig 1.3.1: Total recordable injury rate – company & contractors
per million hours worked [Data page B-2] The rate for all recordable injuries (fatalities, lost work day 

cases, restricted work day cases and medical treatment cases) 
6

Overall was 1.60 injuries per million hours worked (1.74 in 2012). 
Contractor
Company The only region that showed an increase in TRIR in 2013 

5 compared with the TRIR for 2012 was South & Central 
America (3%). 

4 A reduction in TRIR from 2012 to 2013 was shown in 
Africa (8%), Asia/Australasia (29%), Europe (2%), FSU 
(18%), Middle East (12%) and North America (9%). 

3

2

1

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

1-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

1.4	 Lost time injuries
Fig 1.4.1: Lost time injury frequency – company & contractors

The overall Lost Time Injury Frequency (LTIF) fell from per million hours worked [Data page B-3]
0.48 in 2012 to 0.45 in 2013. This represents a reduction 
of 6% compared with 2012 and 72 fewer lost time injuries. 2.0

Overall
Contractor

This reduction is similar in both company and contractor Company
performance.  The company and contractor LTIF both show 
a reduction compared with 2012 (15% and 4% respectively). 1.5

The onshore and offshore LTIF both also show a reduction 
compared with 2012 (11% and 5% respectively).
There were 1627 reported injuries resulting in at least one 1.0
day off work, 1312 incidents were contractor related and 315 
were company related. 

•	 OGP member companies reported 45 772 days of work 
lost through injuries.  0.5

•	 The greatest number of incidents was reported as 
‘Struck by’ (367 cases accounting for 23% of the total; 
2012 results showed 408 cases accounting for 24% of 0.0
the total). 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

•	 ‘Caught in, under or between’ accounted for 341 cases, Fig 1.4.2: Lost work day cases – by category 

21% of the total (21% of the total in 2012). % LWDCs associated with each reporting category  
[Data page B-4]

•	 The lost time injury frequency has plateaued from 2007 Exposure electrical 0.9% Pressure release 0.7%
Exposure noise, chemical, 

for both companies and contractors. biological, vibration 1.2% Assault or violent act 0.6%

Water related, drowning 1.3% Conned space 0.2%

Struck by 22.6%
Explosions or burns 3.7%

Other 5.3%

Cut, puncture, 
scrape 6.1%

Overexerstion, 
strain 8.5%

Falls from height 10.8%

Caught in, under 
or between 21.0%

Slips and trips (at same height) 17.1%

Fig 1.4.3: Lost work day cases – by activity 
% LWDCs associated with each activity  
[Data page B-4]

Transport – air 1.7% Seismic/survey operations 0.9%

Transport – land 5.6% Diving, subsea, ROV 0.6%

Transport – water, 
including marine 
activity 6.5%

Drilling, workover, 
well services 20.0%

Unspecified – 
other 7.3%

Office, warehouse, 
accommodation, 
catering 8.4%

Maintenance, 
inspection, 

Construction, testing 14.8%
commissioning, 
decommissioning 9.0%

Lifting, crane, rigging, 
deck operations 11.6% Production operations 13.7%

© OGP 1-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

1-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

2.  Overall results

In this section the primary indicators used to measure 
contributing OGP member companies’ safety 
performance are;  the number and nature of fatalities, 
total recordable injury rate (TRIR), fatal accident rate 
(FAR), fatal incidents per 100 million work hours, and 
lost time injury frequency (LTIF).
Third party incidents are not included in this report.

2.1	 Fatalities

Fatalities Onshore 2013 Offshore 2013 Total 2013 
(2012) (2012) (2012)

Company 13 (10) 2 (2) 15 (12)

Contractor 34 (70) 31 (6) 65 (76)

Total 47 (80) 33 (8) 80 (88)

Company/contractor fatalities

•	 80 company and contractor fatalities were reported in Fig 2.1.1: Number of fatalities and fatal accident rate
2013. This is 8 fewer than were reported in 2012 and 15 2004-2013 [Data page B-2]

more than in 2011.  
120 6

•	 The 80 fatalities occurred in 43 separate incidents. Fatalities
FAR

•	 In 2013, 13 contractors died as a result of a single 100 5

helicopter crash in the rainforest in Peru.
•	 11 contractors died when a tug capsized during static 80 4

tow operations to an export tanker in Nigeria.
60 3

•	 9 company employees and 31 third party individuals 
died as the result of a terror attack in Algeria.

40 2
•	 4 contractors died as a result of a helicopter ditching in 

the sea in the UK. 20 1

•	 There were 4 incidents that involved 2 fatalities. 
These were; 0 0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
êêA boat crashed and sank during a water inspection in 

Mexico
êêAn oil tank exploded during a maintenance operat©io Innter national Association of Oil & Gas Producers

From ‘OGP Safety Performance Indicators – 2013 data’

in China
êêA fatal incident in the USA, no further information 

has been provided
êêAn uncontrolled release of pressure from a gas cooler 

in the Netherlands during a leak test

© OGP 2-1

Number of fatalities

FAR - Fatal accidents per 100 million hours worked



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR)

Fig 2.2.1: Fatal accident rate – company & contractors 2013 (2012) FAR Relative to 2012 FAR
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2]

Company 1.83 (1.58) (16% higher)

8 Contractor 2.20 (2.59) (15% lower)
Overall Overall 2.12 (2.38) (11% lower)

Company FAR Onshore 1.70 (2.87) (41% lower)

Contractor FAR Offshore 3.27 (0.89) (267% higher)
6

•	 In 2013 there were 15 company fatalities (12 in 2012) as 
4 a result of 7 separate incidents. 

êê9 of the company fatalities were as a result of a single 
terror attack in Algeria in which a further 31 third 

2 party individuals lost their lives.
•	 In 2013 there were 65 contractor fatalities (76 in 2012). 

êê13 of the contractor fatalities were the result of a 
single helicopter crash in the rainforest in Peru.

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 êê11 of the contractor fatalities were the result of a tug 

capsize during static tow operations to an export 
tanker in Nigeria.

Fig 2.2.2: Fatal accident rate – onshore & offshore
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-2] The difference between the onshore and offshore FAR 

displays a large variation over the 10-year period shown. 
8 Neither is consistently lower. This is generally attributable 

Overall to single transportation or fire and explosion incidents 
Onshore involving high numbers of fatalities.
Offshore

6

4

2

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Fatal accident rate (FAR)
The number of company/contractor fatalities per 
100 000 000 (100 million) hours worked.

2-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

2.3	 Fatalities by incident category and activity

•	 The largest proportion of the fatalities reported in 2013 
were categorised as ‘Other’ (26%) (2% in 2012).

Fig 2.3.1: Fatalities by reporting category 2013
êê13 of the fatalities were as a result of a single helicopter % fatalities associated with each reporting category  

crash in the rainforest in Peru [Data page B-3]

êê4 of the fatalities were the result of a helicopter Exposure noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.3% Exposure electrical 1.3%

ditching into the sea in the UK
Overexertion, strain 1.3%

êêNo detailed information was provided by the Other 26.3%
Falls from height 3.8%

reporting company for 2 incidents Explosions or burns 5.0%

•	 21% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were categorised 
as ‘Water related, drowning’ (1% in 2012). Pressure release 7.5%

êê11 contractor employees lost their lives when a tug 
capsized during static tow operations to an export Caught in, under 

or between 8.8%

tanker in Nigeria
êê2 workers died when their boat crashed and sank Assault or violent 

act 11.3%

during a water inspection in Mexico
êêA technician drowned while bathing in a river in Peru
êêOne man was lost overboard when a seismic vessel was Water related, 

drowning 21.3%
hit by unexpected waves in Uruguay Struck by 12.5%

êêA contractor was lost overboard when the rig that he 
was working on capsized in Angola

Fig 2.3.2: Fatalities by activity, 2013
êêA mud logger fell into the sea from the access ramp to % fatalities associated with each activity  

a tender barge in Myanmar [Data page B-3]

•	 13% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were the result 
of individuals being struck by falling or moving objects Seismic/survey operations

2.6%

(16% in 2012). Unspecied – other 3.8% Transport – air 21.8%

êêTwo of the fatalities involved separate motor vehicle 
Transport – land 7.7%

crashes
•	 11% of the fatalities reported in 2013 were categorised Construction, commissioning, 

decommissioning 7.7%

as ‘Assault or violent act’ (3% in 2012) and were the 
result of a single terror attack in Algeria.

Production operations
11.5%

•	 A reduction is seen in the number of deaths resulting 
from land transport incidents (6 fatalities) compared 

Drilling, 

with 2012 (9 fatalities in 2012, 15 in 2011). workover, 
well services

16.7%
êê6 fatalities were associated with 6 separate incidents 

•	 35 of the fatal incidents involved one fatality. Maintenance, inspection, 
testing 12.8%

Transport – water, inc. marine activity 15.4%
•	 Incidents which involved 2 or more fatalities were 

reported under the categories:
êêOther (3 incidents). 
êêWater related, drowning (2 incidents). 
êêAssault and violent act (1 incident). 
êêExplosions or burns (1 incident). 
êêPressure release (1 incident). 

•	 There were no fatal incidents reported under the 
following categories:

êêCut, puncture, scrape.
êêConfined space.
êêSlips, trips, falls (at same height).

© OGP 2-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Fatalities – by incident category and activity, 2013

Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 0 6
Diving, subsea, ROV 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Drilling, workover, well services 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 2 0 2 2 0 13
Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2
Maintenance, inspection, testing 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 1 2 0 10
Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Production operations 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9
Seismic/survey operations 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 2
Transport–air 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17 17
Transport–land 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 6
Transport–water, including marine activity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 11 0 12
Unspecified–other 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3
Total 9 7 0 0 4 1 1 3 1 6 0 10 17 21 80

2-4 ©OGP

Assault or violent act

Caught in, under or between

Confined space

Cut, puncture, scrape

Explosion or burns

Exposure electrical

Exposure noise, chemical, biological, 
vibration

Falls from height

Overexertion, strain

Pressure release

Slips, trips (at same height)

Struck by

Water related, drowning

Other

Total



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

2.4	 Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours

Fig 2.4.1: Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours – 
Number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours company & contractors

2013 (2012) Relative to 2012 [Data page B-2]
Company 0.85 (0.79) (8% higher)

6
Contractor 1.22 (1.57) (22% lower) Overall
Overall 1.14 (1.41) (19% lower) Contractor

Company
Onshore 0.94 (1.58) (41% lower)

Overall FAR*
Offshore 1.68 (0.89) (89% higher)

4

The number of fatal incidents per 100 million work hours 
is a measure of the frequency with which fatal incidents 
occur, in contrast to the FAR which measures the frequency 
of fatalities. Accordingly, for company and contractor 2
fatalities, the number of fatal incidents per 100 million work 
hours will be less than or equal to the FAR.  Comparison of 
FAR and number of fatal incidents per 100 million work 
hours gives an indication of the magnitude of the incidents 
in terms of lives lost. 0

•	 Overall the number of fatal incidents per 100 million 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

work hours has decreased by 19% compared with last *FAR: Fatal Accident Rate  
year and is the lowest on record (43 fatal incidents in          (Number of fatalities per 100 million hours worked)

2013, 52 fatal incidents in 2012). 
Fig 2.4.2: Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours – 
onshore & offshore
[Data page B-2]

6
Overall
Onshore
Offshore
Overall FAR*

4

Fig 2.4.3: Number of fatalities and fatal incidents
10 year trend

140
Fatalities

2
Fatal incidents

120

100

80 0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

60 *FAR: Fatal Accident Rate  
         (Number of fatalities per 100 million hours worked)

40

Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours
20

The number of incidents that result in one or more 
fatalities per 100,000,000 (100 million) hours.

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

© OGP 2-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.5	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)

Fig 2.5.1: Total recordable injury rate – company & contractors 2013 (2012) TRIR Relative to 2012 TRIR
per million hours worked [Data page B-2]

Company 0.95 (1.12) (15% lower)

6
Overall Contractor 1.77 (1.90) (7% lower)

Contractor Overall 1.60 (1.74) (8% lower)
Company Onshore 1.33 (1.49) (11% lower)

5
Offshore 2.34 (2.53) (8% lower)

4

3 Submissions without information on medical treatment 
cases were filtered out, leaving a dataset of 3665 million 
hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A).

2
An overall reduction in TRIR of 8% is seen in 2013. 

1

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Fig 2.5.2: Total recordable injury rate – onshore & offshore
per million hours worked [Data page B-2]

6
Overall
Onshore
Offshore

5

4

3

2

1

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)
The number of recordable injuries (fatalities + lost 
work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical 
treatment cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked.

2-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

2.6	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)

2013 (2012) LTIF Relative to 2012 LTIF Fig 2.6.1: Lost time injury frequency – company & contractors
per million hours worked [Data page B-3]

Company 0.40 (0.47) (15% lower)

Contractor 0.47 (0.49) (4% lower) 2.0
Overall

Overall 0.45 (0.48) (6% lower) Contractor
Onshore 0.34 (0.38) (11% lower) Company
Offshore 0.77 (0.81) (5% lower)

1.5

1.0
•	 The overall LTIF decreased by 6% from 0.48 in 2012 

to 0.45 in 2013.
•	 The company LTIF decreased by 15% compared with 

2012. 0.5

There were 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in 
at least one day off work, which equates to an average of 31 
injuries resulting in at least one day off work every week 0.0
of the year. Although the absolute number of LWDCs 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

has reduced (1699 in 2012), the time away from work has 
increased compared with 2012. See Section 2.8 for further 
information on Lost Work Day Case severity. Fig 2.6.2: Lost time injury frequency – onshore & offshore

per million hours worked [Data page B-3]

2.0
Overall
Onshore
Offshore

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)
The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
day cases) per 1 000 000  hours worked.

© OGP 2-7



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.7	 Lost work day cases by categories and activities

Fig 2.7.1: Lost work day cases – by category Lost work day cases by category
% LWDCs associated with each reporting category  Number %
[Data page B-4]

Assault or violent act 10 0.6
Exposure electrical 0.9% Pressure release 0.7% Caught in, under or between 341 21

Exposure noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.2% Assault or violent act 0.6% Confined space 4 0.2

Cut, puncture, scrape 99 6.1
Water related, drowning 1.3% Conned space 0.2%

Explosion or burns 60 3.7
Struck by 22.6%

Explosions or burns 3.7% Exposure electrical 14 0.9
Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 20 1.2

Other 5.3%
Falls from height 176 10.8

Cut, puncture, Overexertion, strain 138 8.5
scrape 6.1%

Pressure release 11 0.7

Slips and trips (at same height) 279 17.1
Overexerstion, 
strain 8.5% Struck by 367 22.6

Water related, drowning 21 1.3
Other 87 5.3
Total 1627

Falls from height 10.8%

Caught in, under 
or between 21.0%

Slips and trips (at same height) 17.1%
Of the 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in at least 
one day off work, 1312 incidents (81%) were contractor-
related and 315 (19%) were company-related (1356 and 
343 respectively for 2012). The lost work day case category 
was provided for all of the Lost Work Day Cases reported, 
although 5% of the cases were categorised as ‘Other’. 
The pie chart shows the percentage of LWDCs within each 
of the reporting categories for 2013. 

•	 The greatest number of incidents was reported as 
‘Struck by’ (367 cases accounting for 23% of LWDCs), 
(2012 results showed 408 cases accounting for 24%).

•	 ‘Caught in, under or between’ accounted for 21% of the 
total reported cases (21% in 2012).

•	 In comparison with 2012, the 2013 results were very 
similar.

Lost work day case (LWDC)
A Lost work day case is an incident resulting 
in at least one day off work. Fatal incidents are 
not included.

2-8 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost work day cases by category – company & contractors

Company Contractor Fig 2.7.2: Lost work day cases – by category
Assault or violent act 2 8 Company [Data page B-5]
Caught in, under or between 64 277 Assault or violent act 0.6% Exposure – Electrical 0.6%

Confined space 0 4 Exposure – noise, chemical, 
biological, vibration 1.0% Pressure release 0.6%

Cut, puncture, scrape 29 70 Explosions or burns 2.5% Water related, drowning 0.6%
Explosion or burns 8 52

Slips and trips 
Exposure electrical 2 12 Other 5.1% (at same height) 25.1%

Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 3 17
Falls from height 33 143

Cut, puncture, scrape 9.2%
Overexertion, strain 35 103
Pressure release 2 9
Slips and trips (at same height) 79 200
Struck by 40 327

Falls from height 10.5%
Water related, drowning 2 19
Other 16 71
Total 315 1312

Overexertion, strain 11.1% Caught in, under 

Of the 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in at or between 20.3% 

least one day off work, 879 incidents (54%) were related Struck by 12.7%

to onshore activity and 748 (46%) were related to offshore 
activity (972 and 727 respectively for 2012). Fig 2.7.3: Lost work day cases – by category

Contractor [Data page B-5]
Exposure – Electrical 0.9% Pressure release 0.7%

Exposure – noise, chemical, biological, vibration 1.3% Assault or violent act 0.6%

Water related, drowning 1.4% Confined space 0.3%

Explosions or burns 4.0%

Struck by 24.9%
Cut, puncture, scrape 5.3%

Other 5.4%

Overexertion, strain 7.9%

Falls from height 10.9%

Caught in, under or 
Slips and trips between 21.1% 
(at same height) 15.2%

© OGP 2-9



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Lost work day cases by category – onshore & offshore

Fig 2.7.4: Lost work day cases – by category Onshore Offshore
Onshore [Data page B-5] Assault or violent act 7 3

Assault or violent act 0.8% Exposure – Electrical 0.5% Caught in, under or between 142 199
Pressure release 0.9% Confined space 3 1

Exposure – noise, Confined space 0.3%
chemical, biological, Cut, puncture, scrape 42 57
vibration 1.6%

Water related, drowning 0.3% Explosion or burns 38 22
Explosions or burns 4.3%

Exposure electrical 4 10
Cut, puncture, scrape 4.8% Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 14 6

Struck by 23.7% Falls from height 105 71
Overexertion, strain 65 73

Other 7.3% Pressure release 8 3
Slips and trips (at same height) 176 103

Overexertion, Struck by 208 159
strain 7.4% Water related, drowning 3 18

Other 64 23
Total 879 748

Slips and trips 
(at same height) 

Falls from height 11.9% 20.0%
Of the 1627 reported lost work day cases resulting in at 

Caught in, under or between 16.2% least one day off work, 879 incidents (54%) were related 
to onshore activity and 748 (46%) were related to offshore 

Fig 2.7.5: Lost work day cases – by category activity (972 and 727 respectively for 2012).
Offshore [Data page B-5]

Exposure – Electrical 1.3% Exposure – noise, chemical, biological, vibration 0.8%

Water related, drowning 2.4% Assault or violent act 0.4%

Pressure release 0.4%
Explosions or burns 2.9%

Conned space 0.1%

Other 3.1%

Cut, puncture, Caught in, under or 
scrape 7.6% between 26.6% 

Falls from 
height 9.5%

Overexertion, 
strain 9.8%

Slips and trips Struck by 21.3%
(at same height) 13.8%

2-10 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost work day cases by activity

Number % Fig 2.7.6: Lost work day cases – by activity
Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 146 9 % LWDCs associated with each activity 

[Data page B-5]
Diving, subsea, ROV 9 0.6
Drilling, workover, well services 326 20 Transport – air 1.7% Seismic/survey operations 0.9%

Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 189 11.6
Transport – land 5.6% Diving, subsea, ROV 0.6%

Maintenance, inspection, testing 241 14.8
Transport – water, 

Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 136 8.4 including marine 
activity 6.5%

Production operations 223 13.7 Drilling, workover, 
well services 20.0%

Seismic/survey operations 14 0.9
Transport – air 27 1.7 Unspecified – 

other 7.3%
Transport – land 91 5.6
Transport – water, including marine activity 106 6.5

Office, warehouse, 
Unspecified – other 119 7.3 accommodation, 

catering 8.4%
Total 1627

Lost work day case activities were reported for all of the Maintenance, 
inspection, 

Construction, testing 14.8%
1627 Lost Work Day Cases reported, although 7% of the commissioning, 

decommissioning 9.0%
cases were reported as ‘Unspecified-other’. In 2012, 12% 
were reported as ‘Unspecified-other’.

Lifting, crane, rigging, 
deck operations 11.6% Production operations 13.7%

In comparison with 2012, 2013 results were very similar.

© OGP 2-11



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Lost work day cases by activity – company & contractor

Fig 2.7.7: Lost work day cases – by activity Company Contractor
Company [Data page B-5] Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 9 137

Diving, subsea, ROV 0 9
Transport – water, including 

Transport – air 1.9% marine activity 0.6% Drilling, workover, well services 28 298

Construction, commissioning, Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 26 163
decommissioning 2.9%

Maintenance, inspection, testing 54 187
Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 48 88

Transport – land 4.1%
Production operations 91 132

Lifting, crane, Production Seismic/survey operations 0 14
rigging, deck operations 28.9%
operations 8.3% Transport – air 6 21

Transport – land 13 78

Drilling, workover, Transport – water, including marine activity 2 104
well services 8.9%

Unspecified – other 38 81
Total 315 1312

Unspecified – 
other 12.1%

Office, warehouse, Maintenance, 
accommodation, inspection, 
catering 15.2% testing 17.1%

Fig 2.7.8: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Contractor [Data page B-5]

Transport – air 1.6% Seismic/survey operations1.1%

Transport – land 5.9%
Diving, subsea, ROV 0.7%

Unspecified – other 6.2% Drilling, workover, 
well services 22.7%

Office, warehouse, 
accommodation, 
catering 6.7%

Transport – water, 
including marine 
activity 7.9%

Production 
operations 10.1%

Maintenance, 
inspection, 
testing 14.3%

Construction, commissioning, 
decommissioning 10.4% Lifting, crane, rigging, 

deck operations 12.4%

2-12 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost work day cases by activity – onshore & offshore

Onshore Offshore Fig 2.7.9: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 108 38 Onshore [Data page B-5]
Diving, subsea, ROV 1 8
Drilling, workover, well services 177 149 Transport – water, Seismic/survey 

including marine operations1.4% Transport – air 0.8%
Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 84 105 activity 1.5%

Maintenance, inspection, testing 97 144 Diving, subsea, ROV 0.1%
Unspecified – other 8.6%

Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 91 45
Production operations 124 99 Drilling, workover, 

well services 20.1%
Seismic/survey operations 12 2

Lifting, crane, rigging, 
Transport – air 7 20 deck operations 9.6%
Transport – land 89 2
Transport – water, including marine activity 13 93
Unspecified – other 76 43 Transport – 
Total 879 748 land 10.1%

Production 
operations 
14.1%

Office, warehouse, 
accommodation, 
catering 10.4%

Maintenance, 
inspection, testing 11.0% Construction, commissioning, 

decommissioning 12.3%

Fig 2.7.10: Lost work day cases – by activity 
Offshore [Data page B-5]

Diving, subsea, Seismic/survey 
ROV 1.1% operations 0.3% 

Transport – air 2.7%

Construction, commissioning, Transport – land 0.3%
decommissioning 5.1%

Drilling, workover, 
Unspecified – other 5.7% well services 19.9%

Office, warehouse, 
accommodation, 
catering 6.0%

Transport – water, 
including marine 
activity 12.4% Maintenance, 

inspection, 
testing 19.3%

Production operations 13.2%
Lifting, crane, rigging, 
deck operations 14.0%

© OGP 2-13



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.8	 Severity of lost work day cases

Fig 2.8.1: Severity of lost work day cases – company & contractors 2013 (2012) severity Relative to 2012 Relative to 2008-
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5] severity 2012 average 

severity
60

Company 43.52 (38.81) 12% higher 18% higher

Contractor 42.88 (41.28) 4% higher 6% higher

50 Overall 42.98 (40.74) 6% higher 9% higher

Onshore 35.76 (36.83) 3% lower 1% lower

Offshore 51.21 (45.99) 11% higher 11% higher
40

30
OGP member companies reported a total of 45 777 days 
lost (LWDC days) through injuries. 

20
Overall •	 The number of days lost was reported for 66% of the 
Contractor database (see Appendix A and Appendix C).  
Company

10 •	 The offshore LWDC severity is 43% higher than 
onshore.

0 •	 The number of days lost per lost work day case overall 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 has increased by 6% compared with 2012 results. 

Fig 2.8.2: Severity of lost work day cases – onshore & offshore
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5]

60

50

40

30

20
Overall
Onshore
Offshore

10

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Severity of lost work day cases
Severity is defined as the average number of days 
lost (where reported) for each lost work day case.

2-14 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

The figures  show the average number of days lost per LWDC Fig 2.8.3: Severity of lost work day cases – company & contractors
in 2013 compared with the average for the previous 5-year average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5]

period. A 9% increase is shown in overall LWDC severity 2008-2012

when compared with the previous 5-year period. 2013

Company

Contractor

Overall

0 20 40 60

Fig 2.8.4: Severity of lost work day cases – onshore & offshore
average days lost per LWDC [Data page B-5]

2008-2012
2013

Offshore

Onshore

Overall

0 20 40 60

© OGP 2-15



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.9	 Severity of restricted work day cases

Fig 2.9.1: Severity of restricted work day cases –  2013 (2012) Relative to 2012 Relative to 2008-2012 
company & contractors severity severity severity
average days lost per RWDC [Data page B-6] Company 17.17 (13.84) 24% higher 19% higher

20 Contractor 14.24 (12.05) 18% higher 16% higher

Overall 14.51 (12.21) 19% higher 16% higher

Onshore 15.42 (11.48) 34% higher 25% higher

Offshore 13.03 (13.41) 3% lower 2% higher
15

A total of 12 507 days were restricted (RWDC days) as a 
10

result of restricted work day cases, in the sense that normal 
duties could not be performed. This compares with 45 777 
days lost (LWDC days) on a 24% larger dataset (see 

5 Appendix A and Appendix C). 
Overall •	 The number of days lost per restricted work day case 
Contractor
Company overall has increased by 19% compared with 2012 

results. 
0

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 •	 The number of days lost to restricted work per case 
increased most noticeably in onshore operations with 

Fig 2.9.2: Severity of restricted work day cases –  a rate of 15.42 for 2013, an increase of 34% compared 
onshore & offshore with the 2012 rate (11.48).
average days lost per RWDC [Data page B-6]

•	 The severity for company activities of 17.17 represents 
20 an increase of 24% compared with the rate for 2012 

(13.84). 

15

10

5
Overall
Onshore
Offshore

0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Severity of restricted work day cases
The average number of days of restricted work per 
restricted work day case.
Restricted work day case days are not reported 
by all companies. The database for this analysis is 
therefore reduced to 2,008 million work hours, 53% 
of all reported hours (see Appendix A).

2-16 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

The figures show the average number of days lost per Fig 2.9.3: Severity of restriced work day cases –  
RWDC in 2013 compared with the average for the previous company & contractors

5-year period.  The overall average shows an increase of 16% average days of restricted work per RWDC [Data page B-6]

compared with the average for the previous 5-year period.  
2008-2012
2013

Company

Contractor

Overall

0 5 10 15 20

Fig 2.9.4: Severity of restriced work day cases – 
onshore & offshore
average days of restricted work per RWDC [Data page B-6]

2008-2012
2013

Offshore

Onshore

Overall

0 5 10 15 20

© OGP 2-17



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.10	 Incident triangles

Year Ratio of lost time injuries to Ratio of total recordable injuries to In this section the relative numbers of types of occupational 
fatalities fatalities injury are shown in the form of ‘incident triangles’. The 

2013 21:1 73:1
ratios have been corrected to account for the absence, in 

2012 20:1 72:1
some data submissions, of medical treatment cases.

2011 22:1 93:1
2010 15:1 60:1
2009 16:1 63:1

2013 incident triangles

Overall

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries
73 recordable injuries

Company

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries

48 recordable injuries

Contractor

1 fatality 

21 lost time injuries

79 recordable injuries

2012 incident triangles

Lost time injuries Overall
Lost work day cases and fatalities.

1 fatality 
Recordable injuries

20 lost time injuries
Fatalities, lost work day cases, restricted work 
day cases and medical treatment cases. Data are 72 recordable injuries

only included where medical treatment cases are 
reported for the data set. Company

Ratio of lost time injuries to fatalities 1 fatality 

The number of lost time injuries divided by the 28 lost time injuries
total number of fatalities (Lost time injuries/ 69 recordable injuries
fatalities).
Ratio of total recordable injuries to fatalities Contractor
The number of recordable injuries divided by the total 1 fatality 
number of fatalities (recordable injuries/fatalities).

18 lost time injuries

72 recordable injuries

2-18 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

The varying ratio of fatalities to lost time injuries to 
recordable injuries for 2012-2013 challenges the traditional 
notion of recordable injuries and lost time injuries overall as 
a precursor to fatalities as shown in the incident triangles. In 
some incident categories however such as “confined space”, 
“assault or violent act” and “water related, drowning”, the 
ratio will be higher as shown in the tables below.  

Category LTIs (fatalities+LWDCs) Fatalities Ratio LTI: Fatality
Assault or violent act 19 9 2:1
Caught in, under or between 348 7 50:1

Confined space 4 0 n/a
Cut, puncture, scrape 99 0 n/a
Explosions or burns 64 4 16:1
Exposure electrical 15 1 15:1
Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 21 1 21:1
Falls from height 179 3 60:1
Overexertion, strain 139 1 139:1
Pressure release 17 6 3:1
Slips and trips (at same height) 279 0 n/a
Struck by 377 10 38:1
Water related, drowning 38 17 2:1
Other 108 21 5:1

Activity LTIs (fatalities+LWDCs) Fatalities Ratio LTI: Fatality
Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 152 6 25:1
Diving, subsea, ROV 9 0 n/a
Drilling, workover, well services 339 13 26:1
Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 191 2 96:1
Maintenance, inspection, testing 251 10 25:1
Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 136 0 n/a
Production operations 232 9 26:1
Seismic / survey operations 16 2 8:1
Transport – air 44 17 3:1
Transport – land 97 6 16:1
Transport – water, incl. marine activity 118 12 10:1
Unspecified – other 122 3 41:1

© OGP 2-19



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.11	 Causal factors analysis

The allocation of ‘causal factors’ to fatal incidents and high 
potential events was requested as part of the 2013 data 
submission. This request was first made in 2010, therefore a 
comparison of four years of data is possible.  
To standardise the response an OGP list of causal factors 
and a glossary was provided to the member companies as 
part of the OGP User Guide. The causal factors list is 
divided into two sections:

•	 People (Acts) classifications usually involve either the 
actions of a person or actions which were required but 
not carried out or were incorrectly performed. There 
are four major categories of actions, with an additional 
level of detail under each of the major categories.

•	 Process (Conditions) classifications usually involve 
some type of physical hazard or organizational aspect 
out of the control of the individual. There are five major 
classification categories, with an additional level of 
detail under each of the major categories. 

2-20 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

2.11.1	 Fatal incident causal factors

Causal factors are divided into two separate groups, People The causal factors assigned to fatal incidents are shown below. 
(Acts) and Process (Conditions), see OGP User Guide The highlighted content indicates the top 10 causal factors 
(Report 2013su) and Glossary for details. assigned to fatal incidents in 2013 compared with 2012, 2011 

•	 34 of the 43 fatal incidents reported were assigned and 2010. Seven of the ten were the same for all four years.
causal factors (47 of 52 in 2012) Additional information on the fatal incidents reported 

•	 222 causal factors were assigned for the 43 fatal incidents by region can be found on the OGP Safety Zone website: 
•	 Between 2 and 16 causal factors were assigned per http://info.ogp.org.uk/Safety/. The information 

incident (between 1 and 11 in 2012). provided includes a narrative description of the incident, 
the corrective actions and recommendations and the causal 

Causal factors assigned for fatal incidents 2013 2012 factors assigned by the reporting company.
People (acts) 95 92

Process (conditions): 127 120 Note: the top 11 causal factors have been shown 
for 2013, as both the 10th and 11th most 
common causal factors were both assigned to 9 of 
the incidents. Similarly the top 12 causal factors 
have been shown for 2012, as the top 9th, 10th, 
11th and 12th causal factors were each assigned 
7 times.

Causal factors assigned for fatal incidents 2013 2012 2011 2010
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence 21 13 10 13
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment 16 11 16 14
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures 15 15 8 10

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision 14 16 18 18

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment 13 17 15 30
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Improper position (in the line of fire) 12 13 9 16
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Violation unintentional (by individual or group) 11 13 9 12
People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Improper use/position of tools/equipment/materials/products 10 7 6 9
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective guards or protective barriers 10 6 11 7
Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate/defective tools/equipment/materials/products 9 7 5 4
Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate maintenance/inspection/testing 9 5 6 4

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate communication 8 6 9 12
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Equipment or materials not secured 8 4 4 6
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Inadequate use of safety systems 7 9 4 5
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Personal Protective Equipment not used or used improperly 7 4 6 1
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Poor leadership/organisational culture 6 4 4 9
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Failure to warn of hazard 6 4 8 7

Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective warning systems/safety devices 5 5 6 5
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective Personal Protective Equipment 4 5 5
Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate design/specification/management of change 4 7 5 10
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Lack of attention/distracted by other concerns/stress 4 5 7 5
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Improper lifting or loading 4 7 2 8
People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Servicing of energized equipment/inadequate energy isolation 3 3 3
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Disabled or removed guards, warning systems or safety devices 3 2 2 2
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Inadequate surfaces, floors, walkways or roads 3 4 7 1
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Hazardous atmosphere (explosive/toxic/asphyxiant) 2 2 1 1
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Storms or acts of nature 2 5 2
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Work or motion at improper speed 2 1 2
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Violation intentional (by individual or group) 2 4 4 12
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Failure to report/learn from events 1 1 3
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate security provisions or systems 1 4 2 2
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Congestion, clutter or restricted motion 4 4 2
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Overexertion or improper position/posture for task 1 3
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Acts of violence 2 1 6
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Use of drugs or alcohol 1
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Fatigue 1 1

© OGP 2-21



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.11.2	 High potential event causal factors
•	 124 of the 179 high potential events were assigned The causal factors assigned to high potential events are shown 

causal factors (169 of 195 in 2012) below. The highlighted content indicates the top 10 causal 
•	 444 causal factors were assigned for the 179 high factors assigned tohigh potential events in 2013 compared 

potential events (603 in 2012) with 2012, 2011 and 2010. Six of the ten were the same for 
all four years Additional information on the high potential 

•	 Between 1 and 16 causal factors were assigned per event events reported by region can be found on the OGP Safety 
(between 1 and 14 in 2012) Zone website: http://info.ogp.org.uk/Safety/. The 

Causal factors assigned for high potential events 2013 2012 information provided includes a narrative description of the 
People (acts) 134 225 event, the corrective actions and recommendations and the 
Process (conditions): 310 378 causal factors assigned by the reporting company.

Note: the top 11 causal factors have been shown 
for 2010, as the top 10th and 11th causal factors 
were each assigned 15 times.

Causal Factors assigned for high potential events 2013 2012 2011 2010
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures 44 54 20 37
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment 35 61 24 47

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence 29 36 15 22
Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate design/specification/management of change 29 16 18 13
Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate maintenance/inspection/testing 29 37 12 21

Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate/defective tools/equipment/materials/products 28 27 13 16

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate communication 26 36 15 19
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision 24 44 18 31
PeopleE (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment 24 38 21 23
People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Improper use/position of tools/equipment/materials/products 22 21 17 9
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective guards or protective barriers 21 22 9 10
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective warning systems/safety devices 14 8 15 13
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Failure to warn of hazard 12 31 13 9
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Lack of attention/distracted by other concerns/stress 11 21 8 15
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Violation unintentional (by individual or group) 11 23 15 27
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Violation intentional (by individual or group) 9 7 6 9
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Inadequate use of safety systems 9 19 12 2
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Equipment or materials not secured 9 15 9 3
Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Poor leadership/organisational culture 9 10 9 15
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Improper position (in the line of fire) 8 13 3 9
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Improper lifting or loading 5 11 9 5
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Personal Protective Equipment not used or used improperly 4 8 3 6

Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Failure to report/learn from events 4 3 2 4
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate/defective Personal Protective Equipment 4 2 1 3
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Congestion, clutter or restricted motion 4 5 3 3

Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Hazardous atmosphere (explosive/toxic/asphyxiant) 3 6 5 6
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Storms or acts of nature 3 2 2
People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Servicing of energized equipment/inadequate energy isolation 3 5 3 6
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Overexertion or improper position/posture for task 2 1 1 3
People (acts):  Following Procedures:  Work or motion at improper speed 2 5 3 3
People (acts):  Use of Protective Methods:  Disabled or removed guards, warning systems or safety devices 2 4 3 1
Process (conditions):  Work Place Hazards:  Inadequate surfaces, floors, walkways or roads 2 5 2 5
Process (conditions):  Protective Systems:  Inadequate security provisions or systems 2 4 3 1
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Fatigue 1 1 4 4
People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Acts of violence 2 1

2-22 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

The following 8 causal factors were common to the top ten for both fatal incidents and high potential events in 2013.
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence
•	 People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment
•	 People (acts):  Use of Tools, Equipment, Materials and Products:  Improper use/position of tools/equipment/

materials/products
•	 Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate maintenance/inspection/testing
•	 Process (conditions):  Tools, Equipment, Materials & Products:  Inadequate/defective tools/equipment/materials/

products
The following 5 causal factors appear consistently in the top ten for both fatal incidents and high potential events for 2013, 
2012, 2011 and 2010.

•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate training/competence 
•	 People (acts):  Inattention/Lack of Awareness:  Improper decision making or lack of judgment
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate work standards/procedures 
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate supervision
•	 Process (conditions):  Organisational:  Inadequate hazard identification or risk assessment

The 6th most common causal factor for fatal incidents, which did not show in the top 10 for high potential events was:
•	 People (acts):  Following procedures:  Improper position (line of fire)

© OGP 2-23



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

2.12  OGP Life-Saving Rules
OGP has released a set of  life-saving rules (OGP Life-Saving Fig 2.12.1: OGP Life-Saving Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents
Rules, OGP report № 459, released Feb 2012), intended for per cent of total 2013 incidents

use by the oil & gas industry to mitigate risk and reduce 
fatalities. Each OGP Life-Saving Rule consists of a simple Insufficient information 

to assign a rule 14% Core rules 16%

icon and descriptive text, providing clear, simple and 
consistent communication about risks in the workplace.
These Rules were developed by using the fatal incident and 
high potential event data from the 1991 to 2010 Safety 
Performance Indicators reports to identify the events and No appropriate 

activities that are the highest risk and therefore provide rule 19%

clear instructions on how to avoid them. The Life-Saving 
Rules are split into 8 ‘core rules’ and 10 ‘supplemental rules’.
Assessment of the applicability of the OGP Life-Saving 
Rules to fatal incident descriptions for 2013 data has shown Supplementary 
that at least 67% of the fatal incidents reported are covered rules 51%

by the OGP Life-Saving Rules and may have been prevented 
by the adoption of this system. Insufficient information was Fig 2.12.2: OGP Life-Saving Rules applicable to 2013 fatal incidents
provided to be able to assign a rule for 6 of the incidents. per cent of total 2013 incidents

Dropped objects 2.3% Gas test 2.3%

Line of fire – Journey management 2.3%
safe area 32.6%

Overhead power lines 2.3%

Suspended load 2.3%

Seat belt 4.7%

Work at 
height 7.0%

Flotation 
device 11.6%

No appropriate Insufficient information 
rule 18.6% to assign a rule 14.0%

2-24 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

3.  Results by region

In this section the safety performance of the contributing 
OGP members is presented for regions and individual 
countries within those regions.
A list of countries from which companies have reported 
information and the division of countries into regions is 
provided in Appendix D. 

 

Former Soviet Union

North 
America Europe

Asia/
Middle East Australasia

Africa

South & 
Central 
America

 

3.1	 Fatalities by region

Fatalities FAR Fatal incidents The table shows the number of fatal incidents and fatalities 
2013 (2012) 2013 (2012) 2013 (2012) in each of the 7 regions into which the data are partitioned. 

Africa 27 (17) 4.53 (2.83) 9 (13) Further analysis of the fatality statistics is presented in 
Asia/Australasia 8 (10) 0.87 (1.35) 7 (10) Section 3.5, where 5-year rolling averages of FAR are 
Europe 9 (2) 2.26 (0.52) 5 (2) presented for each of the regions.
FSU 3 (2) 1.25 (0.55) 3 (2)

Middle East 4 (13) 0.63 (1.95) 4 (11)

North America 12 (42) 2.03 (7.50) 10 (12)

South & Central 17 (2) 4.37 (0.54) 5 (2)
America

Overall 80 (88) 2.12 (2.38) 43 (52)

© OGP 3-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

3.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR) by region

Fig 3.2.1: Fatal accident rate 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-7]

Africa 4.53 2.83 1.25 3.38 2.21
8

2013 Asia/Australasia 0.87 1.35 3.28 4.14 1.58
2012

Europe 2.26 0.52 0.87 0.97 6.58
2011
2010 FSU 1.25 0.55 1.59 2.17 3.14
2009

6 Middle East 0.63 1.95 1.74 1.63 2.16

North America 2.03 7.50 1.50 5.08 4.37

South & Central 4.37 0.54 2.42 1.57 2.37
America

4 Overall 2.12 2.38 1.88 2.76 2.76

2
Further Fatal Accident Rate analysis is presented in Section 
3.5, where 5-year rolling averages of FAR are presented for 
each of the regions.

0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Overall

Australasia East America Central 
America

Fatal accident rate (FAR)
The number of company/contractor fatalities per 
100 000 000 (100 million) hours worked.

3.3	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by region

Fig 3.3.1: Total recordable injury rate 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
per million hours worked [Data page B-7]

Africa 1.05 1.14 1.22 1.40 1.65
4 2013 Asia/Australasia 0.97 1.37 1.46 1.30 1.22

2012
2011 Europe 2.58 2.64 2.81 3.05 3.48
2010 FSU 0.81 0.99 0.99 1.08 1.21
2009

3 Middle East 0.90 1.02 0.78 0.98 0.92

North America 2.58 2.82 3.19 2.89 3.08

South & Central 3.13 3.05 3.17 2.76 3.17
America

2 Overall 1.60 1.74 1.77 1.68 1.75

1 Submissions without information on medical treatment 
cases were filtered out, leaving a database of 3665 million 
hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A). 

0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Overall

Australasia East America Central
America

Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)
The number of recordable injuries (fatalities + lost 
work day cases + restricted work day cases + medical 
treatment cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked.

3-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

3.4	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) by region

LTIF 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Fig 3.4.1: Lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-7]

Africa 0.31 0.33 0.30 0.36 0.42

Asia/Australasia 0.15 0.26 0.30 0.29 0.29 1.4

Europe 1.02 0.91 1.08 1.06 1.31 2013
2012

FSU 0.33 0.28 0.31 0.31 0.35 1.2 2011
2010

Middle East 0.21 0.24 0.18 0.25 0.26 2009

North America 0.74 0.94 0.59 0.48 0.51 1.0

South & Central 0.85 0.69 0.64 0.61 0.69
America 0.8
Overall 0.45 0.48 0.43 0.42 0.45

0.6

0.4
Further analysis of the lost time injuries is presented in 
Section 3.5, where 5-year rolling averages of LTIF are 

0.2
presented for each of the regions, 100% of the database (see 
Appendix A).

0.0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South Overall

Australasia East America America

Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)
The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work 
day cases) per 1 000 000 hours worked.

© OGP 3-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

3.5	 FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages by region

The five year rolling average is calculated by summing the total number of incidents of the five previous years, 
and dividing by the sum of the work hours for these years. For example, the five year rolling average for 2013 is 
calculated by:

(Number of injuries in 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013)
(Total work hours in 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013)

The number series involved in the calculation is frame shifted along by one each year, e.g. 2011 will calculate 
from 2007-2011.

Fig 3.5.1: FAR 5-year rolling average In order to smooth out variability in the annual values for 
per 100 million hours worked [Data from B-8]

the regional TRIR, FAR and LTIF, 5-year rolling averages 
6

all regions FSU are computed which should provide a more reliable indicator 
Africa Middle East of performance trends.
Asia/Australasia North America

5 Europe South & Central The figures show TRIR, FAR and LTIF 5-year rolling 
America

averages for each of the seven regions, and includes the  all 
regions curve. 

4
The increase in the North America 5-year rolling average 
FAR for 2012 can be attributed to the effect of a gas leak 

3 and explosion following the loss of mechanical integrity of 
a pipeline in Mexico (onshore) in which 31 individuals lost 

2 their lives.

1

0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Fig 3.5.2: TRIR 5-year rolling average Fig 3.5.3: LTIF 5-year rolling average
per million hours worked [Data from B-9] per million hours worked [Data from B-9]

6
all regions FSU 2.0
Africa Middle East all regions FSU
Asia/Australasia North America Africa Middle East

5 Europe South & Central Asia/Australasia North America
America Europe South & Central

America
1.5

4

3 1.0

2

0.5

1

0 0.0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

3-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

3.6	 Severity of lost work day cases by region

LWDC severity 2013 Relative to 2008-2012 LWDC Fig 3.6.1: Severity of LWDC
severity Average days lost per LWDC [Data from B-9]

Africa 29.20 11% higher
80

Asia/Australasia 30.36 10% higher 2008-2012 Average
2013

Europe 42.28 5% higher 70
FSU 50.98 35% higher

Middle East 13.64 26% lower 60

North America 49.60 34% higher
50

South & Central 60.30 16% lower 2013 Average 42.98
America

40
All regions 42.98 9% higher

30

20
The number of days lost was reported for 65% of lost work 
day cases. 10

The severity of lost work day cases is the highest in the South 0
& Central America region compared with the other regions Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central 
(60 days lost per LWDC in 2013). This represents a 16% America

reduction compared to the average for the previous 5-year 
period.

Lost work day case (LWDC)
Appendix A provides further information on the proportion A Lost work day case is an incident resulting in at least 
of the database which can be used for lost work day case one day off work. Fatal incidents are not included.
severity, 94% of the data submitted for South & Central 
America was usable for this metric, in comparison with only Severity of lost work day cases
37% of equivalent data for the North America region. Severity is defined as the average number of days 

lost (where reported) for each lost work day case.

3.7	 Individual country performance
The safety performance reported by participating OGP LTIF equal to or lower than the overall average LTIF (0.45). 
member companies of individual countries is presented in The majority of countries in Europe and North America 
terms of the lost time injury frequency of companies jointly show an LTIF higher than the global average. 
with contractors. To preserve the anonymity of companies, The chart of relative TRIR performance compares the 
performance is only published for those countries for which 2013 performance with that of 2012 and 2011 for all 81 
at least 2 companies have reported statistics. Countries countries. TRIR calculations exclude data where medical 
with less than 50 000 reported hours worked are excluded, treatment cases are not reported.
since results for such small populations of hours would be 
unrepresentative. Overall averages and regional averages The majority of countries in Asia/Australasia, FSU and 
include data from all countries regardless of work hours or Middle East achieved a TRIR equal to or lower than the 
number of contributing companies. overall average TRIR (1.60). The majority of countries 

in Africa, Europe, North America and South & Central 
Of the 110 countries from which data have been reported, America show a TRIR higher than the global average. 
29 are excluded by these constraints.

For comparison, the 5-year rolling average FAR is shown 
The chart of relative LTIF performance for the remaining for each of the regions. There appears to be little if any 
81 countries compares the 2013 performance with that of correlation between these values and the regional average 
2012 and 2011. LTIF and TRIR values.
The majority of countries in Africa, Asia/Australasia, FSU, 
Middle East and South & Central America achieved an 

© OGP 3-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Fig 3.7.1: Total recordable injury rate – companies with contractors
per million hours worked [Data page B-10]

By region
5-year rolling average FAR (0.0) 2013
2013 average TRIR [Data page B-10] 2012
2013 Global average TRIR = 1.60 2011

Africa (2.9)
Morocco

South africa
Kenya
Tunisia

Mauritania
Ivory coast

Gabon
DR Congo 

Tanzania
Ghana
Algeria

Cameroun
Uganda

Mozambique
Equatorial Guinea

Angola
Libya

Congo
Egypt

Nigeria
Sudan

Madagascar
Namibia

Asia-Australasia (2.1) 11.06
New Zealand

Australia 10.87
Singapore 14.46
Myanmar

Papua New Guinea
Thailand
Malaysia

China
India

South korea
Indonesia

Japan
Bangladesh

Pakistan
Vietnam

Philippines
Brunei

Europe (2.2)
Denmark
Germany

Ireland
Croatia
Poland

Norway
Netherlands

UK
Hungary

Italy
France
Spain

Romania
Greenland

FSU (1.8)
Ukraine

Azerbaijan 12.50
Kazakhstan

Russia
Turkmenistan

Middle East (1.7)
Iraq

Yemen
Qatar

UAE
Turkey
Oman
Kuwait

Iran

North America (4.1)
Canada

USA
Mexico

South & Central America (2.3) 17.90
Uruguay
Guyana 

Peru 17.39
Brazil

Bolivia
Trinidad & tobago

Argentina
Ecuador

Venezuela
Colombia 11.43

Surinam

0 1 (1.60) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

3-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Fig 3.7.2: Lost time injury frequency – companies with contractors
per million hours worked [Data page B-11]

By region
5-year rolling average FAR (0.0) 2013 One or more fatalities (2013) listed in orange
2013 average LTIF [Data page B-11] 2012
2013 Global average LTIF = 0.45 2011

Africa (2.9)
Morocco

Tunisia
Tanzania

Algeria
DR Congo

Kenya
Mauritania

Ghana
Gabon

Cameroun
Uganda

Equatorial Guinea
Mozambique

Libya
Egypt

Angola
Congo

Nigeria
South africa

Sudan
Ivory coast

Madagascar
Namibia

Asia-Australasia (2.1)
New Zealand

Japan
Singapore
Myanmar
Australia

China
Malaysia

South korea
Vietnam

India
Indonesia

Bangladesh
Thailand

Papua New Guinea
Pakistan

Brunei
Philippines

Europe (2.2)
Croatia

Germany
Norway

UK
Ireland

Italy
Netherlands

Hungary
France
Spain

Romania
Denmark

Poland
Greenland

FSU (1.8)
Russia

Kazakhstan
Azerbaijan

Turkmenistan 12.50
Ukraine

Middle East (1.7)
Yemen

Iraq
Qatar

UAE
Kuwait
Oman
Turkey

Iran

North America (4.1) 6.98
Mexico

USA
Canada

South & Central America (2.3) 15.35
Uruguay

Peru
Brazil

Venezuela
Trinidad & Tobago

Ecuador
Argentina

Bolivia
Colombia
Guyana 
Surinam

0 (0.45) 1 2 3 4 5

© OGP 3-7



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

3.8	 Incident triangles by region

In this section the relative numbers of types of occupational Lost time injuries
injury are shown in the form of ‘incident triangles’. The 
ratios have been corrected to account for the absence, in Fatalities and lost work day cases.
some data submissions, of medical treatment cases. Recordable injuries

Fatalities, lost work day cases, restricted work day 
cases and medical treatment cases where medical 
treatment cases are reported for the data set. 
Ratio of lost time injuries to fatalities
The number of lost time injuries divided by the total 
number of fatalities (LTI / fatalities).
Ratio of total recordable injuries to fatalities
The number of recordable injuries divided by the total 
number of fatalities (recordable injuries/fatalities).

Fig 3.8.1: 2013 incident triangles – Africa Fig 3.8.2: 2013 incident triangles – Asia/Australasia

Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable 
to fatalities injuries to fatalities to fatalities injuries to fatalities

2013 7:1 23:1 2013 17:1 107:1
2012 12:1 40:1 2012 19:1 101:1
2011 24:1 97:1 2011 9:1 43:1
2010 11:1 41:1 2010 7:1 31:1

1 
7  17

23 107

1 n/a
2 fatalities=0
6

1 
16

9 99
32

1 fatality
lost time injuries
recordable injuries

Overall       Company    Contractor

3-8 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Fig 3.8.3: 2013 incident triangles – Europe Fig 3.8.4: 2013 incident triangles – FSU  

Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable 
to fatalities injuries to fatalities to fatalities injuries to fatalities

2013 45:1 113:1 2013 27:1 65:1
2012 175:1 507:1 2012 52:1 180:1
2011 124:1 316:1 2011 19:1 62:1
2010 109:1 309:1 2010 14:1 50:1

45 27
113 65

48 13
102 32

44 34
117 82

Fig 3.8.5: 2013 incident triangles – Middle East Fig 3.8.6: 2013 incident triangles – North America

Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable 
to fatalities injuries to fatalities to fatalities injuries to fatalitiess

2013 34:1 141:1 2013 36:1 116:1
2012 12:1 52:1 2012 13:1 35:1
2011 10:1 45:1 2011 40:1 213:1
2010 16:1 60:1 2010 9:1 57:1

34 36
141 116

n/a 40
fatalities=0 59

27 35
119 135

Fig 3.8.7: 2013 incident triangles – South & Central America

Year Ratio of lost time injuries Ratio of total recordable 
to fatalities injuries to fatalities

2013 19:1 72:1
2012 129:1 570:1
2011 26:1 131:1
2010 39:1 175:1

19
72

n/a
fatalities=0

1 fatality
lost time injuries

17 recordable injuries
65

Overall       Company    Contractor

© OGP 3-9



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

3-10 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.  Results by function

In this section the safety performance within different 
functions performed in the E&P industry is presented. 
Functions are defined as ‘exploration’, ‘drilling’, 
‘production’, ‘construction’ and ‘unspecified’. The 
category ‘other’ is no longer in use. See the Glossary 
of Terms at Appendix E for definitions.

4.1	 Fatalities by function

The distribution of company and contractor fatal incidents 
and fatalities between the functions is shown for both 2013 
and 2012. 

2013 2012
Fatal  Fatalities Fatal  Fatalities
incidents incidents

Exploration 3 3 4 4
Drilling 15 15 11 12
Production 17 33 12 15
Construction 6 18 17 19
Unspecified 2 11 8 38
Total 43 80 52 88

© OGP 4-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.2	 Fatal accident rate (FAR) – 5-year rolling average

The five year rolling average is calculated by summing the total number of incidents of the five previous years, and 
dividing by the sum of the work hours for these years. For example, the five year rolling average for drilling FAR 
for 2013 is calculated by:

(Number of fatalities in drilling function 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013)
(Total work hours in drilling 2009+2010+2011+2012+2013)

The number series involved in the calculation is frame shifted along by one each year, e.g. 2011 will calculate from 
2007-2011, inclusive. 

% of 2013 work hours % of 2012 work hours % of 2011 work hours % of 2010 work hours % of 2009 work hours
Exploration 3 2 2 2 2
Drilling 15 18 19 15 10
Production 35 33 35 28 26
Construction 25 25 24 25 30
Unspecified 23 22 20 29 32

Fig 4.2.1: Fatal accident rate 5-year rolling average
per 100 million hours worked [Data from B-12] In order to smooth out variability in the annual fatal accident 

rate values 5-year rolling averages are presented. These 
7 Overall Construction should provide a more reliable indicator of performance 

Exploration Unspecified
Drilling trends. 

6
Production The percentage of the total work hours reported under 

each function has been detailed below. See Appendix B for 
5

further data.

4 The increase in the 2010 Drilling FAR can be attributed 
to the effect of a fire and explosion offshore in the USA in 
which 11 individuals lost their lives.

3

2

1

0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Note: The function ‘other’ was replaced by 
‘construction’ for the first time in 2006, thus the 
2009 5-year average figure for ‘construction’ is 
not available. 

4-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.3	 Total recordable injury rate (TRIR) by function

2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 Fig 4.3.1: Total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data from B-13]

TRIR TRIR TRIR TRIR TRIR 

Exploration 1.87 2.14 2.70 2.30 2.31 5
Drilling 3.05 2.59 2.84 2.94 3.81 2013

2012
Production 1.75 1.92 2.05 2.14 2.32

2011
Construction 1.13 1.32 1.13 0.99 0.78 4 2010
Unspecified 0.90 1.21 0.95 1.13 1.53 2009

Overall 1.60 1.74 1.76 1.68 1.75
3

2

Submissions without information on medical treatment 
cases were filtered out, leaving a database of 3 665 million 1

hours, 97% of the database (see Appendix A).

0
Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified

4.4	 Lost time injury frequency (LTIF) – 5-year rolling average by function

Fig 4.4.1:  Lost time injury frequency5-year rolling average
per million hours worked [Data from B-13]
2.0

Overall Construction
Exploration Unspecified
Drilling
Production

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Note: The function ‘other’ was replaced by 
‘construction’ for the first time in 2006, thus the 
2009 5-year average figure for ‘construction’ is 
not available.  

© OGP 4-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.5	 Severity of lost work day cases by function

Fig 4.5.1: Severity of LWDC The overall average number of days lost per lost work day 
average lost days per LWDC [Data from B-13] case (LWDC) is 43.0 in 2013 (40.7 in 2012). Offshore the 
60 LWDC severity is 51.2 days lost per LWDC compared with 

2008-2012 Average 35.8 days for onshore activities (46.0 and 36.8 respectively 
2013 for 2012). See Section 2.8 for additional information and 

50 Section 3.6 for LWDC severity by region.
2013 Average 43.0

40

30

20

10

0
Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified

4-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.6	 Exploration performance

4.6.1 Exploration total recordable injury rate

The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors 2.27 respectively; the overall average TRIR for exploration 
for exploration related activities, in different regions of the activities is 1.87.  
world.  The total recordable injury rates for companies operating 
88 million work hours (92% of reported exploration in the FSU and South & Central America show a strong 
work hours) were used in this analysis, of which company increase, this is against a relatively small number of work 
activities represent 22% and contractor activities represent hours (0.3 million and 0.8 million work hours respectively). 
78%. This is an increase of 6 million work hours compared 
with 2012 (82 million work hours in 2012; 27% company, 
73% contractor).
In 2013 the overall TRIR values for companies and 
contractors engaged in exploration activities are 0.46 and 

Fig 4.6.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – exploration
per million hours worked [Data from B-14]

6 6
8.68

Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.46 Contractor 2013 Average 2.27

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

Exploration
Geophysical, seismographic and geological 
operations, including their administrative and 
engineering aspects, construction, maintenance, 
materials supply and transportation of personnel 
and equipment; excludes drilling

© OGP 4-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.6.2 Exploration lost time injury frequency

The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors Company LTIF values associated with exploration show a 
for exploration related activities, in different regions of the reduction in LTIF in all regions compared with the previous 
world.  The 2013 result is compared with average LTIF 5-year average.
results in the previous 5-year period. Note: In many instances where the LTIF or 
95 million work hours (100% of reported exploration work TRIR is reported as 0.00, the number of work 
hours) were used in this analysis of which company activities hours reported for the specific function and region 
represent 24% and contractor activities represent 76%. This are relatively low.  A detailed breakdown of 
is an increase of 10 million work hours compared with 2012 the hours by region and function is presented in 
(27% company, 73% contractor in 2012). Appendix B.
In 2013 the overall LTIF values for companies and 
contractors engaged in exploration activities are 0.09 and 
0.95 respectively; the overall average LTIF for exploration 
activities is 0.74.  

Fig 4.6.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – exploration
per million hours worked [Data from B-14]

6 6
7.77

Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.09 Contractor 2013 Average 0.95

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

4-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.7	 Drilling performance

4.7.1 Drilling total recordable injury rate

The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors In 2013 the overall TRIR values for companies and 
for drilling related activities in different regions of the contractors engaged in drilling activities are 1.17 and 3.29 
world. respectively; the overall TRIR for drilling activities is 3.05. 

553 million work hours (95% of reported drilling work 
hours) were used in this analysis of which company activities 
represent 12% and contractor activities represent 88%. This 
represents a decrease of 110 million work hours compared 
with 2012, with a similar ratio of company to contractor 
activities (13% to 87% respectively).

Fig 4.7.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – drilling
per million hours worked [Data from B-14]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013 Contractor 2013 Average 3.29
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 1.17

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

Drilling
All exploration, appraisal and production drilling 
and workover as well as their administrative, 
engineering, construction, materials supply and 
transportation aspects. It includes site preparation, 
rigging up and down and restoration of the drilling 
site upon work completion. Drilling includes ALL 
exploration, appraisal and production drilling.

© OGP 4-7



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.7.2 Drilling lost time injury frequency

580 million work hours (100% of reported drilling work 
hours) were used in this analysis, of which company 
activities represent 13% and contractor activities represent 
87%. This represents a reduction of 93 million work hours 
compared with 2012, with the same ratio of company to 
contractor activities.
The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors in 
drilling related activities in different regions of the world. In 
2013 the overall LTIF for both companies and contractors 
engaged in drilling activities is 0.94.  
In 2013 the overall LTIF values for companies and 
contractors engaged in drilling activities are 0.96 and 0.93 
respectively.

Fig 4.7.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – drilling
per million hours worked [Data from B-14]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.96 Contractor 2013 Average 0.93

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

4-8 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.8	 Production performance

4.8.1 Production total recordable injury rate

The figures show the TRIR for companies and contractors In 2013 the overall TRIR values for companies and 
for production related activities in different regions of the contractors engaged in production activities are 1.39 and 
world. 1.88 respectively; the overall average TRIR for production 
1279 million work hours (97% of reported production activities is 1.75.  
work hours) were used in this analysis, of which company 
activities represent 27% and contractor activities represent 
73%. This represents an increase of 34 million work hours 
compared with 2012, with a similar ratio of company to 
contractor activities (27% to 73% respectively).

Fig 4.8.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – production
per million hours worked [Data from B-15]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 

2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 1.39 Contractor 2013 

Average 1.88

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

Production
Petroleum and natural gas producing operations, 
including their administrative and engineering 
aspects, minor construction, repairs, maintenance 
and servicing, materials supply, and transportation 
of personnel and equipment. It covers all mainstream 
production operations including wireline. It does 
not cover production drilling and workover. See the 
Appendix E: Glossary of Terms for details

© OGP 4-9



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.8.2 Production lost time injury frequency

The figures show the LTIF for companies and contractors 0.52 respectively; the overall average LTIF for production 
for production related activities in different regions of the activities is 0.53.  
world.  
1313 million work hours (100% of reported production 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company 
activities represent 27% and contractor activities represent 
73%. This is an increase of 93 million work hours over 2012, 
with the same ratio of company to contractor activities.
In 2013 the overall LTIF values for companies and 
contractors engaged in production activities are 0.55 and 

Fig 4.8.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – production
per million hours worked [Data from B-15]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.55 Contractor 2013 Average 0.52

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

4-10 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.9	 Construction performance

The company and contractor results for 2013 construction are much greater than those reported for company employees. 
performance are presented below. Refer to Appendix B for detailed information.
Construction activities are predominately conducted by 
contractors therefore the work hours reported for contractors 

4.9.1 Company total recordable injury rate

923 million work hours (99% of reported construction In 2013 the overall TRIR values for companies and 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company contractors engaged in construction activities are 0.35 and 
activities represent 8% and contractor activities represent 1.19 respectively; the overall average TRIR for construction 
92%. This represents an increase of 16 million work hours activities is 1.13.  
compared with 2012, with a similar ratio of company to 
contractor activities (6% to 94% respectively).

Fig 4.9.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – construction
per million hours worked [Data from B-15]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.35 Contractor 2013 Average 1.19

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

Construction
All major construction, fabrication activities and also 
disassembly, removal and disposal (decommissioning) 
at the end of the facility life. Includes construction 
of process plant, yard construction of structures, 
offshore installation, hook-up and commissioning, 
and removal of redundant process facilities.

© OGP 4-11



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.9.2 Construction lost time injury frequency

930 million work hours (100% of reported construction In 2013 the overall LTIF values for companies and 
work hours) were used in this analysis of which company contractors engaged in construction activities are 0.03 and 
activities represent 8% and contractor activities represent 0.22 respectively; the overall average LTIF for construction 
92%. This represents an increase of 19 million work hours activities is 0.21.  
compared with 2012, with a similar ratio of company to 
contractor activities (6% to 94% respectively).

Fig 4.9.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – construction
per million hours worked [Data from B-15]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.03 Contractor 2013 Average 0.22

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

4-12 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

4.10	 Unspecifed performance

4.10.1 Unspecified total recordable injury rate

822 million work hours (97% of work hours reported as compared with 2012, with a similar ratio company to 
unspecified) were used in this analysis, of which company contractor activities (32% to 68% respectively in 2012).
activities represent 33% and contractor activities represent In 2013 the overall TRIR values for companies and 
67%. This represents an increase of 33 million work hours contractors engaged in activities where the work function 

was not specified are 0.53 and 1.08 respectively; the overall 
average TRIR for unspecified activities is 0.90.  

Fig 4.10.1.1: Total recordable injury rate – unspecified
per million hours worked [Data from B-16]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.53 Contractor 2013 Average 1.08

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & 

Australasia East America Central Australasia  East America Central 
America America

Unspecified
Unspecified is used for the entry of data associated 
with office personnel who’s work hours and 
incident data cannot be reasonably assigned to 
the administrative support of one of the function 
groupings of exploration, drilling, production or 
construction. Corporate overhead support function 
personnel such as finance or human resources staff 
may be examples where work hours cannot be 
specifically assigned to a particular function.

© OGP 4-13



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

4.10.2 Unspecified lost time injury frequency

852 million work hours (100% of work hours reported as Reported under the ‘unspecified’ function in 2013 were:
unspecified) were used in this analysis of which company •	 5 company and 6 contractor fatalities 
activities represent 34% and contractor activities represent •	 53 company and 141 contractor lost work day cases
66%. This represents an increase of 50 million work hours 
over 2012, with a similar ratio of company to contractor Reported under the ‘unspecified’ function from 2008 to 
activities (32% to 68% respectively). 2012 were:
In 2013 the overall LTIF values for companies and •	 39 company and 83 contractor fatalities 
contractors engaged in activities where the work function •	 420 company and 1060 contractor lost work day cases
was not specified are 0.20 and 0.26 respectively; the overall 
average LTIF for unspecified activities is 0.24.  

Fig 4.10.2.1: Lost time injury frequency – unspecified
per million hours worked [Data from B-16]

6 6
Company 2013 Contractor 2013
Company 2008–2012 Contractor 2008–2012
Company 2013 Average 0.20 Contractor 2013 Average 0.26

4 4

2 2

0 0
Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South & Africa Asia/ Europe FSU Middle North South &

Australasia East America Central Australasia East America Central 
America America

4-14 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

5.  Results by company

This section compares the safety performance of 
individual companies with each other and with their 
performance in previous years.

5.1	 Overall company results

For reasons of anonymity each of the 50 companies that treatment cases so their data could not be included in 
has contributed relevant data and is to be included in the TRIR analysis.  Results for all of the 50 participating 
this analysis has been allocated a unique code letter (A companies are therefore shown in this section.
to XX). These codes change every year in line with LTIF 
performance. All companies reported both company and 
contractor data. One company did not report medical 

5.1.1 Fatal accident rate by company
In 2013 OGP member companies reported 65 contractor •	 8 of the 20 companies with their contractors 
and 15 company employee fatalities. In the figure below performed below the overall average for companies 
the FAR is presented for those companies that, with their with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours 
contractors, reported more than 50 million hours worked. worked (0.98).
20 companies met this criterion in 2013, compared with the •	 The range in 2013 was between 0.00 and 4.94 fatalities 
same number in 2012. Companies are shown in rank order per 100 million hours worked.
of company-with-contractor FAR. •	 15 of the 20 companies suffered one or more fatalities.

Fig 5.1.1.1: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors, joint hours >50 million – fatal accident rate
per 100 million hours worked [Data page B-17]

6 Company with contractors Top quartile

5

4

3

2

Average companies with contractors 0.98
1

0
W E JJ J EE UU DD S QQ KK FF Z Y LL L II OO RR TT VV

© OGP 5-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

5.1.2 Total recordable injury rate by company fatality in either company or contractor operations is also 
indicated*. Details of results are tabulated in Appendix B. 

The TRIR for companies together with their contractors 
is presented below. Data are only included where Medical •	 18 of the 49 companies presented below suffered one 
Treatment Cases (MTC) are reported. One company or more company or contractor fatality, of which 16 
did not report MTC therefore 49 of the 50 participating companies suffered one or more contractor fatality. 
companies qualified for inclusion. •	 In 6 instances, contractors achieved a lower TRIR than 

the companies they were employed by. 
The TRIR for company alone is plotted alongside the TRIR 
for company and contractors jointly. The incidence of a 

Fig 5.1.2.1: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined – total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

6

Company only Company with contractors Top quartile
*    Fatality in 2013

5

4

3

2
Average companies with contractors 1.60

1

0

B X E C D J Q H M I O L F K GG N BB G R U AA T V CC Z HH S DD LL EE KK Y XX NN FF OO MM UU P V V SS II RR W TT PP JJ QQWW

5-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

In the figure below the TRIR for contractors alone is plotted 
alongside the TRIR for company and contractors jointly. 
One company did not report MTC for its contractors and 
so is excluded from the graph which reduces the number of 
companies shown to 48 of the 50.

Fig 5.1.2.2: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined – total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

10

Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile
9

*    Fatality in 2013
8

7

6

5

4

3

2 Average companies with contractors 1.60

1

0
B X E C D J Q H M I O L F GG N BB G R U AA T V CC Z HH S DD LL EE KK Y XX NN FF OO MM UU P V V SS II RR W TT PP JJ QQWW

© OGP 5-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

In the figures below the TRIR is presented for those •	 The range for companies jointly with contractors in 
companies that, with their contractors, reported more than 2013 was between 0.27 and 4.18 injuries per million 
50 million hours worked. 20 companies met this criterion in hours worked. 
2013, compared with the same number in 2012. Companies •	 The range for companies only was between 0.84 and 
are shown in rank order of the company-with-contractor 2.70. 
TRIR for companies alone vs. company-with-contractor •	 The range for contractors only was between 0.22 and 
TRIR and for contractors alone vs. company-with- 4.77.
contractor TRIR.

•	 14 of the 20 companies with their contractors •	 14 of the 20 companies suffered one or more company 
performed below the overall average for companies or contractor fatality, of which 12 companies suffered 
with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours one or more contractor fatality. 
worked (1.56).

Fig 5.1.2.3: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours >50 million  
– total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

4.5 Company only Company with contractors Top quartile

4.0
*    Fatality in 2013

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0
Average companies with contractors 1.56

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0 E J L Z S DD LL EE KK Y FF OO UU V V II RR W TT JJ QQ

Fig 5.1.2.4: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours >50 million  
– total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

6
Contractor only *    Fatality in 2013 Top quartile
Company with contractors

5

4

3

2
Average companies with contractors 1.56

1

0 E J L Z S DD LL EE KK Y FF OO UU V V II RR W TT JJ QQ

5-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

The remaining 28 companies which, with their contractors, •	 The range for companies jointly with contractors in 
reported less than 50 million hours worked are presented 2013 was between 0.00 and 5.29 injuries per million 
below in rank order of the company-with-contractor TRIR hours worked. 
for companies alone vs. company-with-contractor TRIR •	 The range for companies only was between 0.00 and 2.76. 
and for contractors alone vs. company-with-contractor •	 The range for contractors only was between 0.00 and 9.37.
TRIR.

•	 21 of the 28 companies with their contractors performed •	 4 of the 28 smaller companies suffered one or more 
above the overall average for smaller companies with company or contractor fatality, all of which suffered 
contractors (1.67). one or more contractor fatality. 

Fig 5.1.2.5: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours <50 million  
– total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

6
Company only *    Fatality in 2013 Top quartile
Company with contractors

5

4

3

2 Average companies with contractors 1.64

1

0
B X C D Q H M I O F N GG BB G R U AA T V CC HH XX NN MM P SS PP WW

Fig 5.1.2.6: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours <50 million  
– total recordable injury rate
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

10 Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile

9 *    Fatality in 2013

8

7

6

5

4

3
Average companies with contractors 1.64

2

1

0 B X C D Q H M I O F N GG BB G R U AA T V CC HH XX NN MM P SS PP WW

© OGP 5-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

5.1.3	 Lost time injury frequency •	 38 companies with their contractors delivered a LTIF 
of less than 1.

The figure shows the LTIF in rank order for companies 
together with their contractors. All of the 50 participating •	 22 of the 50 companies presented below suffered one 
companies (A to WW) contributed both company and or more fatality. 
contractor data, although not always for every country in •	 In 6 instances, contractors achieved a lower LTIF than 
which operations were conducted. the companies they were employed by.
The LTIF for the company alone and contractors alone is 
plotted alongside the LTIF for company and contractors 
jointly. The incidence of a fatality in either company or 
contractor operations is also indicated*. Details of results 
are tabulated in Appendix B.

Fig 5.1.3.1: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

3.5
Company only Company with contractors Top quartile

*    Fatality in 2013
3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0
Average companies with contractors 0.45

0.5

0.0
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA BB CC DD EE FF GG HH II JJ KK LL MMNN OO PP QQ RR SS TT UU V V WW XX

Fig 5.1.3.2: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

7
Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile

*    Fatality in 2013
6

5

4

3

2

1
Average companies with contractors 0.45

0
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA BB CC DD EE FF GG HH II JJ KK LL MMNN OO PP QQ RR SS TT UU VVWW XX

5-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

•	 In the figures below the LTIF is presented for those •	 The range for companies jointly with their contractors 
companies that, with their contractors, reported more in 2013 was between 0.03 and 1.51 lost time injuries 
than 50 million hours worked. 20 companies met this per million hours worked. 
criterion in 2013, compared with the same number •	 The range for companies only was between 0.13 and 
in 2012. Companies are shown in rank order of the 1.37. 
company-with-contractor LTIF. •	 The range for contractors only was between 0.03 and 

•	 13 of the 20 companies with their contractors 1.57.
performed below the overall average for companies •	 15 of the 20 companies suffered one or more fatalities.
with contractors reporting more than 50 million hours 
worked (0.38).

Fig 5.1.3.3: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours>50 million – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

2.0
Company only Company with contractors Top quartile

1.8
*    Fatality in 2013

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6
Average companies with contractors 0.38

0.4

0.2

0.0
E J L S W Y Z DD EE FF II JJ KK LL OO QQ RR TT UU V V

Fig 5.1.3.4: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours>50 million  – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

2.0
Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile

1.8
*    Fatality in 2013

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

Average companies with contractors 0.38
0.4

0.2

0.0
E J L S W Y Z DD EE FF II JJ KK LL OO QQ RR TT UU V V

© OGP 5-7



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

The remaining 30 companies which, with their contractors, •	 The range for companies jointly with contractors in 
reported less than 50 million hours worked are presented 2013 was between 0.00 and 3.16 lost time injuries per 
below in rank order of the company-with-contractor LTIF. million hours worked. 

•	 16 of the 30 companies with their contractors performed •	 The range for companies only was between 0.00 and 1.94. 
below the overall average for smaller companies with •	 The range for contractors only was between 0.00 and 6.09.
contractors (0.71).

•	 5 of the 29 smaller companies presented below suffered 
one or more fatalities.

Fig 5.1.3.5: Performance ranking of companies vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours≤50 million – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

3.5
Company only Company with contractors Top quartile

*    Fatality in 2013
3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0
Average companies with contractors 0.71

0.5

0.0
A B C D F G H I K M N O P Q R T U V X AA BB CC GG HH MM NN PP SS WW XX

Fig 5.1.3.6: Performance ranking of contractors vs. companies with contractors combined, joint hours≤50 million  – lost time injury frequency
per million hours worked [Data page B-17]

7
Contractor only Company with contractors Top quartile

*    Fatality in 2013
6

5

4

3

2

1 Average companies with contractors 0.71

0
A B C D E F G H I K M N O P Q R T U V X AA BB CC GG HH MM NN PP SS WW XX

5-8 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

5.2	 Company results by function

Results of companies together with their contractors against smaller numbers of hours would not have statistical 
have been analysed by function to allow more in-depth significance. The company code letters are the same as used 
benchmarking between companies.  The TRIR indicator elsewhere in this section. 
has been selected, and the ranked results are shown in the Exploration was the only function where the top quartile 
following charts. Only companies that provided data by company with contractors shows a TRIR of zero. It is 
function are included, and then only those companies also the function with the smallest number of work hours 
that reported more than 100,000 hours worked. Results reported (2% of the total in 2013, see Appendix A).

Fig 5.2.1: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – exploration
per million hours worked [Data page B-18]

12
Company with contractors

Top quartile

10

8

6

4

Overall 1.87 (all companies with contractors)
2

0
L      J      C C    F       R       T       X      E E   G G    Z         Q     N      L L     S      E      F F    Q Q  M M   U U    T T   N N   W        I I    A A    B      B B    H         I      J J      K     M    O     O O    P         R R    V        X X        

Fig 5.2.2: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – drilling
per million hours worked [Data page B-18]

12
Company with contractors Top quartile

10

8

6

4
Overall 3.05 (all companies with contractors)

2

0
W    B    G    O     E    N       U        H     Q    F    C     J     T     L      K     I     V       Y     S    G G  R          L L   N N   R R   D D   X    H H    Z     C C   F F   V V      II        X X    E E    M   A A   T T  O O U U Q Q    B B    J J    P         

© OGP 5-9

119.05

12.46



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Fig 5.2.3: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – production
per million hours worked  [Data page B-18]

12 Company with contractors Top quartile

10

8

6

4

Overall 1.75 (all companies with contractors)
2

0
X    Q   M    A A  O        E    B B   J     G      C C  C    L     I         Y   G G   R         U     F         L L    V    K    O O  N     E E      P    D D     Z     S     F F   M M H H  U U   N N  P P      R R     II    V V    T T  Q Q  S S    J J    W     T   W W        

Fig 5.2.4: Performance ranking of companies jointly with contractors – Total recordable injury rate – construction
per million hours worked [Data page B-18]

12 Company with contractors Top quartile

10

8

6

4

2
Overall 1.13 (all companies with contractors)

0
C     U        B B     I      A A    F         N     V    G G    J      O       P     G     E     Z      T        C C    D D    N N   E E      U U   H H     L L       V V     S      I I     F F     T T      Y       O O    R R      W   Q Q   J J     M       P P    Q      X         

5-10 ©OGP

17.44 119.05

13.42 12.46



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Appendix A 
Database dimensions

Fig A-1: Work hours reported
millions [Data page B-19]

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500 work hours contractor
1000

500
work hours company

0 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2013

The database for the year 2013 covers 3 770 546 000 hours Work hours reported (‘000s)
worked in the exploration and production sector of the oil Onshore Offshore Overall
and gas industry. The database is 2% larger than it was in 
2012. Company 637 277 (16.9%) 1 83 579 (4.9%) 820 856

•	 73% of the hours reported were associated with onshore Contractor 2 123 159 (56.3%) 826 531 (21.9%) 2 949 690

activities, 27% with offshore activities. Overall 2 760 436 1 010 110 3 770 546

•	 110 countries are represented in the database, 3 more 
than in the 2012 database. Countries are listed in 
Appendix D.  

•	 50 companies contributed data, of which 49 companies 
contributed contractor statistics, though not in every 
case for each country of operation. 

•	 Of the 50 companies, 47 had contributed data in 2012 
which accounted for 95% of the database in 2012 and 
96% of the database in 2013. 43 of the companies 
submitting 2013 data had also provided data in 2011.

•	 23 of the companies contributed 90% of the hours. 7 
companies between them covered 51% of the hours, 
and the largest contributor accounted for 12%. 

•	 22% of the reported work hours were related to company 
personnel and 78% were related to contractors.

A summary of the key elements of the database is shown in 
the table at the end of this section.

© OGP A-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Fig A-2: Exposure hours – by region, 2013 [Data page B-19] Fig A-3: Exposure hours – by region, 2012 [Data page B-19]

FSU 6% FSU 10% Asia/Australasia 20%
Asia/Australasia 24%

South & South & Central
Central America 10% America 10%

Europe 11%
Europe 11%

Middle Middle 
East 17% East 18%

North America 15%
North America 16%

Africa 16% 
Africa 16%

Fig A-4: Exposure hours – by function, 2013 [Data page B-19] Fig A-5: Exposure hours – by function, 2012 [Data page B-19]

Exploration 2% Exploration 2%
Production 35% Production 33%

Drilling 15% Drilling 18%

Unspecified 23%
Unspecified 22%

Construction 25% Construction 25%

‘Unspecified (as a work function)’ is used for the entry of 
data associated with office personnel whose work hours 
and incident data cannot be reasonably assigned to the 
administrative support of one of the function groupings 
of exploration, drilling, production or construction. 
Corporate overhead support function personnel such as 
finance or human resources staff may be examples where 
work hours cannot be specifically assigned to a particular 
function. All other data that are not separated out by 
function are reported as ‘unspecified’.

A-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Proportion of database used in analysis

For calculations of FAR, fatal incidents per 100 •	 In 2011, this database was 2876 million hours, 78% of 
million work hours, and LTIF: the total database.

•	 All hours in the database were used. •	 North America and Europe have only 37% and 57% 
severity information respectively, whereas 94% of the 

For calculations of TRIR: South & Central America database was useable.
•	 Submissions without information on medical 

treatment cases were filtered out, leaving a database of For calculations of restricted work day severity:
3665 million hours, 97% of the database. •	 Submissions without information on days assigned to 

•	 In 2012, the TRIR database was 3651 million hours, restricted activities were filtered out, leaving a database 
99% of the total database. of 2088 million hours, 55% of the total database.

•	 The region where the smallest proportion of the •	 In 2012 this database was 2183 million hours, 59% of 
database could be used was North America (92%). the total database.

For calculations of lost work day severity: More detailed information is shown in the tables below.

•	 Submissions without information on days off work 
were filtered out, leaving a database of 2625 million 
hours, 70% of the total database.

Percent. of useable data  –  regions Percent. of useable data  –  functions

TRIR Lost work Restricted work TRIR Lost work Restricted work 
analyses day case day case severity analyses day case day case severity 

severity analyses severity analyses
analyses analyses

Africa 99% 85% 64% Exploration 93% 75% 60%

Asia/ 96% 67% 56% Drilling 95% 74% 60%
Australasia Production 97% 70% 58%
Europe 99% 58% 42% Construction 99% 64% 49%
FSU 100% 77% 62%
Middle East 98% 76% 51%
North America 92% 38% 34%
South & Central 100% 96% 89%
America

Percent. of useable data  –  overall

TRIR Lost work day case Restricted work day case 
analyses severity analyses severity analyses
97% 70% 55%

© OGP A-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

A-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Appendix B 
Data tables

Summary of 2013 data

Hours worked No. No. No. No. 
(‘000s) fatalities LWDCs RWDCs MTCs FAR LTIF TRIR

Africa Company Onshore  91 322 9 10 8 20 9.86 0.21 0.48

Company Offshore  17 739 0 3 8 2 0.00 0.17 0.73

Contractor Onshore  357 858 4 95 73 155 1.12 0.28 0.92

Contractor Offshore  128 718 14 52 88 99 10.88 0.51 1.89

Sub Total  595 637 27 160 177 276 4.53 0.31 1.05

Asia/Australasia Company Onshore  111 895 0 5 13 21 0.00 0.04 0.37

Company Offshore  41 884 0 5 4 12 0.00 0.12 0.53

Contractor Onshore  564 950 4 66 147 320 0.71 0.12 0.97

Contractor Offshore  200 334 4 51 105 108 2.00 0.27 1.37

Sub Total  919 063 8 127 269 461 0.87 0.15 0.97

Europe Company Onshore  111 701 2 60 5 54 1.79 0.56 1.08

Company Offshore  33 553 0 34 11 37 0.00 1.01 2.49

Contractor Onshore  112 789 1 89 42 91 0.89 0.80 2.02

Contractor Offshore  140 777 6 213 108 269 4.26 1.56 4.24

Sub Total  398 820 9 396 166 451 2.26 1.02 2.58

FSU Company Onshore  49 280 1 10 4 10 2.03 0.22 0.51

Company Offshore  10 897 0 2 3 2 0.00 0.18 0.64

Contractor Onshore  139 775 2 51 15 37 1.43 0.38 0.75

Contractor Offshore  40 644 0 14 15 29 0.00 0.34 1.43

Sub Total  240 596 3 77 37 78 1.25 0.33 0.81

Middle East Company Onshore  84 911 0 25 12 36 0.00 0.29 0.88

Company Offshore  10 511 0 3 5 7 0.00 0.29 1.80

Contractor Onshore  479 241 4 86 114 183 0.83 0.19 0.81

Contractor Offshore  62 581 0 17 21 50 0.00 0.27 1.41

Sub Total  637 244 4 131 152 276 0.63 0.21 0.90

North America Company Onshore  149 948 1 57 31 78 0.67 0.39 1.14

Company Offshore  33 728 2 59 7 10 5.93 1.81 1.67

Contractor Onshore  326 000 5 223 290 589 1.53 0.70 3.37

Contractor Offshore  80 413 4 83 40 73 4.97 1.08 1.96

Sub Total  590 089 12 422 368 750 2.03 0.74 2.58

South & Central Company Onshore  38 220 0 14 9 21 0.00 0.37 1.16
America

Company Offshore  35 267 0 28 6 34 0.00 0.79 1.93

Contractor Onshore  142 546 14 88 135 219 9.82 0.72 3.20

Contractor Offshore  173 064 3 184 97 366 1.73 1.08 3.76

Sub Total  389 097 17 314 247 640 4.37 0.85 3.13

Total Company Onshore  637 277 13 181 82 240 2.04 0.30 0.82

Company Offshore  183 579 2 134 44 104 1.09 0.74 1.44

Contractor Onshore  2 123 159 34 698 816 1594 1.60 0.34 1.48

Contractor Offshore  826 531 31 614 474 994 3.75 0.78 2.52

Grand Total  3 770 546 80 1627 1416 2932 2.12 0.45 1.60

© OGP B-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

The following data are presented in relation to the sections of the report where the data have been used. 

Section 1	 Summary
Section 1 Summary intentionally excluded
Section 2	 Overall results
Total recordable injury rate

Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

2004 3.71 4.00 3.94 3.17 6.36

2005 1.76 3.50 3.05 2.82 3.87

2006 1.85 3.24 2.92 2.68 3.66

2007 2.41 2.76 2.68 2.51 3.26

2008 1.49 2.23 2.08 1.75 3.09

2009 1.28 1.89 1.75 1.45 2.79

2010 1.19 1.81 1.68 1.41 2.45

2011 1.32 1.88 1.76 1.45 2.84

2012 1.12 1.90 1.74 1.49 2.53

2013 0.95 1.77 1.60 1.33 2.34

Hours 2013 766 874 2 898 602 3 665 476 2 698 156 967 320 
(‘000s)

Fatal accident rate
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

2004 2.82 6.18 5.24 5.00 6.02

2005 1.25 4.36 3.53 3.94 1.99

2006 2.04 4.54 3.92 4.64 1.58

2007 1.65 3.39 2.99 3.01 2.92

2008 2.81 3.20 3.12 3.38 2.25

2009 1.58 3.11 2.76 2.75 2.78

2010 3.17 2.64 2.76 2.62 3.16

2011 1.33 2.03 1.88 1.94 1.67

2012 1.58 2.59 2.38 2.87 0.89

2013 1.83 2.20 2.12 1.70 3.27

Hours 2013 820 856 2 949 690 3 770 546 2 760 436 1 010 110
(‘000s)

Fatal incidents per 100 million work hours
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

2004 3.29 5.15 4.63 4.95 3.58

2005 1.72 3.96 3.36 3.62 2.38

2006 1.91 4.04 3.51 4.10 1.58

2007 1.35 2.85 2.51 2.74 1.69

2008 2.53 2.47 2.48 2.71 1.72

2009 1.22 2.06 1.87 1.86 1.90

2010 1.10 1.86 1.70 1.70 1.69

2011 0.80 1.63 1.45 1.57 1.03

2012 0.79 1.57 1.41 1.58 0.89

2013 0.85 1.22 1.14 0.94 1.68

Hours 2013 820 856 2 949 690 3 770 546 2 760 436 1 010 110
(‘000s)

B-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost time injury frequency
Year Onshore Offshore Overall Company Contractor 

2004 1.04 1.26 1.09 0.87 1.17

2005 0.92 1.12 0.97 0.83 1.02

2006 0.95 1.13 0.99 0.89 1.03

2007 0.62 0.82 0.66 0.54 0.70

2008 0.47 0.81 0.55 0.52 0.56

2009 0.38 0.70 0.45 0.44 0.46

2010 0.35 0.62 0.42 0.41 0.42

2011 0.34 0.74 0.43 0.42 0.43

2012 0.38 0.81 0.48 0.47 0.49

2013 0.34 0.77 0.45 0.40 0.47

Hours 2013 2 760 436 1 010 110 3 770 546 820 856 2 949 690
(‘000s)

Fatalities by category, 2013 Fatalities by activity, 2013
Category No. % Activity No. %

Assault or violent act 9 11.3 Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 6 7.5

Caught in, under or between 7 8.8 Diving, subsea, ROV 0 N/A

Confined space 0 N/A Drilling, workover, well services 13 16.3

Cut, puncture, scrape 0 N/A Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 2 2.5

Explosions or burns 4 5.0 Maintenance, inspection, testing 10 12.5

Exposure electrical 1 1.3 Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 0 N/A

Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 1 1.3 Production operations 9 11.3

Falls from height 3 3.8 Seismic/survey operations 2 2.5

Overexertion, strain 1 1.3 Transport – air 17 21.3

Pressure release 6 7.5 Transport – land 6 7.5

Slips and rrips (at same height) 0 N/A Transport – water, including marine activity 12 15.0

Struck by 10 12.5 Unspecified – other 3 3.8

Water related, drowning 17 21.3

Other 21 26.3

Fatalities by category, 2013
Cause Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

Assault or violent act 9 0 9 9 0

Caught in, under or between 1 6 7 7 0

Confined space 0 0 0 0 0

Cut, puncture, scrape 0 0 0 0 0

Explosions or burns 0 4 4 1 3

Exposure electrical 1 0 1 0 1

Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 1 0 1 1 0

Falls from height 1 2 3 0 3

Overexertion, strain 0 1 1 1 0

Pressure release 1 5 6 1 5

Slips and trips (at same height) 0 0 0 0 0

Struck by 1 9 10 9 1

Water related, drowning 0 17 17 1 16

Other 0 21 21 17 4

15 65 80 47 33

© OGP B-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Fatalities by activity, 2013
Activity Company Contractors Overall Onshore Offshore

Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 0 6 6 6 0

Diving, subsea, ROV 0 0 0 0 0

Drilling, workover, well services 2 11 13 6 7

Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 1 1 2 1 1

Maintenance, inspection, testing 1 9 10 2 8

Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 0 0 0 0 0

Production operations 9 0 9 9 0

Seismic/survey operations 0 2 2 1 1

Transport – air 0 17 17 13 4

Transport – land 1 5 6 6 0

Transport – water, including marine activity 1 11 12 0 12

Unspecified – other 0 3 3 3 0

15 65 80 47 33

Lost work day cases by category, 2013 Lost work day cases by activity, 2013
Category Number % Activity Number %

Assault or violent act 10 0.6 Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 146 9

Caught in, under or between 341 21 Diving, subsea, ROV 9 0.6

Confined space 4 0.2 Drilling, workover, well services 326 20

Cut, puncture, scrape 99 6.1 Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 189 11.6

Explosions or burns 60 3.7 Maintenance, inspection, testing 241 14.8

Exposure electrical 14 0.9 Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 136 8.4

Exposure noise, chemical, biological, vibration 20 1.2 Production operations 223 13.7

Falls from height 176 10.8 Seismic/survey operations 14 0.9

Overexertion, strain 138 8.5 Transport – air 27 1.7

Pressure release 11 0.7 Transport – land 91 5.6

Slips and trips (at same height) 279 17.1 Transport – water, including marine activity 106 6.5

Struck by 367 22.6 Unspecified – other 119 7.3

Water related, drowning 21 1.3

Other 87 5.3

B-4 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost work day cases by category, 2013
Category Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

Assault or violent act 2 8 10 7 3

Caught in, under or between 64 277 341 142 199

Confined space 0 4 4 3 1

Cut, puncture, scrape 29 70 99 42 57

Explosions or burns 8 52 60 38 22

Exposure electrical 2 12 14 4 10

Exposure noise, pressure, chemical, biological, vibration 3 17 20 14 6

Falls from height 33 143 176 105 71

Overexertion, strain 35 103 138 65 73

Pressure release 2 9 11 8 3

Slips and trips (at same height) 79 200 279 176 103

Struck by 40 327 367 208 159

Water related, drowning 2 19 21 3 18

Other 16 71 87 64 23

315 1312 1627 879 748

Lost work day cases by activity, 2013
Activity Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

Construction, commissioning, decommissioning 9 137 146 108 38

Diving, subsea, ROV 0 9 9 1 8

Drilling, workover, well services 28 298 326 177 149

Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations 26 163 189 84 105

Maintenance, inspection, testing 54 187 241 97 144

Office, warehouse, accommodation, catering 48 88 136 91 45

Production operations 91 132 223 124 99

Seismic/survey operations 0 14 14 12 2

Transport – air 6 21 27 7 20

Transport – land 13 78 91 89 2

Transport – water, including marine activity 2 104 106 13 93

Unspecified – other 38 81 119 76 43

315 1312 1627 879 748

Lost work day case severity
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

2004 21.01 24.85 23.79 23.42 25.10

2005 25.59 23.74 24.18 24.46 23.11

2006 20.59 26.22 24.85 24.66 25.48

2007 32.73 35.55 35.00 33.04 42.02

2008 35.21 34.58 34.72 32.05 41.01

2009 35.30 38.25 37.53 34.77 44.40

2010 35.43 46.02 43.90 39.39 52.56

2011 41.06 42.58 42.26 39.84 46.42

2012 38.81 41.28 40.74 36.83 45.99

2013 43.52 42.88 42.98 35.76 51.21

Hours 2013 (‘000s) 551 063 2 074 235 2 625 298 1 974 117 651 181 

© OGP B-5



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Restricted work day case severity
Year Company Contractor Overall Onshore Offshore

2004 13.75 11.20 11.44 10.98 12.90

2005 12.45 13.77 13.66 14.74 9.55

2006 11.78 11.07 11.15 10.33 13.01

2007 15.28 10.46 10.93 8.90 15.95

2008 16.08 13.39 13.72 13.34 14.35

2009 15.26 13.80 13.94 12.42 15.75

2010 14.72 13.78 13.88 13.59 14.35

2011 12.92 10.17 10.40 11.67 8.55

2012 13.84 12.05 12.21 11.48 13.41

2013 17.17 14.24 14.51 15.42 13.03

Hours 2013 (‘000s)  443 753  1 644 019  2 087 772  1 548 970  538 802 

Life Saving Rules
Rule Fatal incidents Core rule?

Dropped objects 1 No

Gas test 1 No

Journey management 1 Yes

Overhead power lines 1 No

Suspended load 1 Yes

Seat belt 2 Yes

Work at height 3 Yes

Flotation device 5 No

Line of fire - safe area 14 No

No appropriate rule 8 n/a

Insufficient information to assign a rule 6 n/a 

B-6 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Section 3	 Results by region
Fatalities

Region Fatalities FAR Fatal incidents 
2013 (2012) 2013 (2012) 2013 (2012)

Africa 27 (17) 4.53 (2.83) 9 (13)

Asia/Australasia 8 (10) 0.87 (1.35) 7 (10)

Europe 9 (2) 2.26 (0.52) 5 (2)

FSU 3 (2) 1.25 (0.55) 3 (2)

Middle East 4 (13) 0.63 (1.95) 4 (11)

North America 12 (42) 2.03 (7.5) 10 (12)

South & Central America 17 (2) 4.37 (0.54) 5 (2)

Fatal accident rate
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009

Africa 4.53 2.83 1.25 3.38 2.21

Asia/Australasia 0.87 1.35 3.28 4.14 1.58

Europe 2.26 0.52 0.87 0.97 6.58

FSU 1.25 0.55 1.59 2.17 3.14

Middle East 0.63 1.95 1.74 1.63 2.16

North America 2.03 7.50 1.50 5.08 4.37

South & Central America 4.37 0.54 2.42 1.57 2.37

All regions 2.12 2.38 1.88 2.76 2.76

Total recordable injury rate

South & 
Asia/ Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2008 2.18 1.34 3.89 1.22 0.83 4.25 3.15 2.09

2009 1.65 1.22 3.48 1.21 0.92 3.08 3.17 1.75

2010 1.40 1.30 3.05 1.08 0.98 2.89 2.76 1.68

2011 1.22 1.46 2.81 0.99 0.78 3.19 3.17 1.77

2012 1.14 1.37 2.64 0.99 1.02 2.82 3.05 1.74

Ave 2008-2012 1.50 1.33 3.14 1.08 0.90 3.19 3.06 1.80

2013 1.05 0.97 2.58 0.81 0.90 2.58 3.13 1.60

Hours 2013 591 850 883 067 394 926 239 681 627 269 540 224 388 459 3 665 476

Lost time injury frequency

South & 
Asia/ Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2008 0.61 0.29 1.38 0.45 0.29 0.55 0.90 0.55

2009 0.42 0.29 1.31 0.35 0.26 0.51 0.69 0.45

2010 0.36 0.29 1.06 0.31 0.25 0.48 0.61 0.42

2011 0.30 0.30 1.08 0.31 0.18 0.59 0.64 0.43

2012 0.33 0.26 0.91 0.28 0.24 0.94 0.69 0.48

Ave 2008-2012 1.76 0.96 4.80 1.25 1.21 3.09 2.60 2.28

2013 0.31 0.15 1.02 0.33 0.21 0.74 0.85 0.45

Hours 2013 595 637 919 063 398 820 240 596 637 244 590 089 389 097 3 770 546

© OGP B-7



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Hours worked (‘000s)
Year Asia/ South & Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2002 387 675 391 368 180 858 173 002 294 692 465 426 227 808 2 120 829 

2003 443 101 377 806 187 209 201 375 368 936 458 471 210 128 2 247 026 

2004 453 714 364 929 191 992 364 741 370 625 242 906 301 546 2 290 453 

2005 472 879 348 806 191 127 443 782 383 968 224 603 315 505 2 380 670 

2006 473 646 473 100 282 856 451 036 447 657 302 632 506 047 2 936 974 

2007 496 830 540 809 296 407 418 534 553 424 285 769 321 028 2 912 801 

2008 499 818 562 677 310 258 444 115 835 031 304 046 348 223 3 304 168 

2009 542 110 697 524 319 176 350 794 1 018 682 320 541 337 015 3 585 842 

2010 562 121 725 171 308 870 461 827 676 337 295 339 381 479 3 411 144 

2011 558 573 609 466 344 762 439 420 690 171 400 902 412 784 3 456 078 

2012 600 478 741 523 384 668 363 944 666 915 560 027 373 485 3 691 040 

2013 595 637 919 063 398 820 240 596 637 244 590 089 389 097 3 770 546 

FAR, TRIR and LTIF – 5-year rolling averages

Fatal accident rate – 5-year rolling average
Year Asia/ South & Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2003 8.9 2.8 4.3 6.3 5.9 4.7 5.0 5.4

2004 8.3 2.6 3.5 6.8 6.1 5.0 4.6 5.4

2005 7.0 2.1 3.5 6.6 4.9 4.5 3.8 4.7

2006 6.6 1.8 3.5 6.3 4.3 4.0 3.9 4.4

2007 6.0 1.5 3.0 5.5 4.2 3.6 3.8 4.1

2008 5.1 1.4 3.5 5.2 3.6 2.8 3.9 3.7

2009 4.1 1.4 4.6 4.4 2.8 2.4 3.7 3.2

2010 3.8 2.1 4.0 3.7 2.5 3.1 3.3 3.1

2011 2.9 2.3 3.4 2.9 2.3 2.7 2.9 2.7

2012 2.8 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.0 4.4 2.4 2.6

2013 2.9 2.1 2.2 1.8 1.7 4.1 2.3 2.4

B-8 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Total recordable injury rate – 5-year rolling average
Year Asia/ South & Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2003 2.5 2.3 7.9 2.0 4.3 7.7 5.9 4.4

2004 3.1 2.3 7.5 2.1 3.8 7.3 5.7 4.3

2005 3.0 2.1 6.4 1.9 3.6 6.5 5.2 3.8

2006 3.0 1.9 6.0 1.9 3.3 5.7 4.5 3.4

2007 2.9 1.7 5.3 2.2 3.0 5.2 4.1 3.2

2008 2.8 1.6 4.7 2.1 1.9 4.9 3.8 2.8

2009 2.2 1.4 4.3 1.9 1.5 4.4 3.5 2.4

2010 2.0 1.4 3.9 1.8 1.3 4.0 3.2 2.2

2011 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.6 1.1 3.6 3.1 2.0

2012 1.5 1.3 3.1 1.1 0.9 3.2 3.1 1.8

2013 1.3 1.2 2.9 1.0 0.9 2.9 3.1 1.7

Lost time injury frequency – 5-year rolling average
Year Asia/ South & Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2003 1.0 0.6 2.3 0.8 1.6 1.4 2.5 1.4

2004 1.0 0.6 2.2 0.9 1.4 1.4 2.5 1.3

2005 0.8 0.5 2.0 0.8 1.2 1.2 2.3 1.2

2006 0.7 0.4 1.8 0.8 1.0 1.0 2.2 1.1

2007 0.7 0.4 1.7 0.8 0.9 0.9 2.0 1.0

2008 0.7 0.3 1.5 0.7 0.6 0.8 1.7 0.8

2009 0.6 0.3 1.5 0.6 0.4 0.7 1.4 0.7

2010 0.5 0.3 1.4 0.5 0.4 0.6 1.2 0.6

2011 0.5 0.3 1.2 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.8 0.5

2012 0.4 0.3 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.5

2013 0.3 0.3 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.5

Severity of lost work day cases
Year Asia/ South & Central 

Africa Australasia Europe FSU Middle East North America America All regions

2008 21.63 27.32 43.47 29.85 16.01 37.16 56.66 34.72

2009 23.08 31.77 42.26 32.55 20.37 38.92 68.87 37.53

2010 27.22 27.61 32.83 42.23 14.68 46.63 98.54 43.90

2011 27.63 26.74 44.50 46.44 12.31 31.29 71.60 42.26

2012 35.94 24.23 38.06 41.42 26.21 36.67 69.53 40.74

Ave 2008-2012 26.31 27.53 40.37 37.87 18.33 37.01 71.89 39.56

2013 29.20 30.36 42.28 50.98 13.64 49.60 60.30 42.98

Hours 2013 508 116 616 518 231 685 184 628 484 572 225 406 374 373 2 625 298

© OGP B-9



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Total recordable injury rate by country
Region Country TRIR One or Region Country TRIR One or 

2013 2012 2011 more 
fatalities in 2013 2012 2011 more 

fatalities in 
2013 2013

Norway 3.05 2.99 3.76 no
Africa Morocco 9.62 4.67 0.00 no Netherlands 2.71 2.48 3.34 yes

South Africa 4.43 2.51 0.00 no Europe average 2.58
Kenya 4.29 2.59 5.17 no UK 2.54 2.83 2.40 yes
Tunisia 3.38 3.38 3.04 no Hungary 1.28 3.12 3.87 no
Mauritania 3.10 1.25 7.06 no Italy 1.01 1.62 1.79 no
Ivory coast 2.74 8.33 0.00 no France 0.99 0.49 1.11 no
Gabon 2.35 2.29 2.76 yes Spain 0.98 1.29 2.00 no
Congo - Democratic Romania 0.83 1.08 0.86 yes
Republic of the 
Congo  Greenland 0.00 0.00 8.54 no
(formerly Zaire) 2.33 2.54 2.14 no
Tanzania 2.03 3.47 7.56 yes FSU Ukraine 2.62 3.55 12.50 no
Ghana 1.95 1.91 2.62 no Azerbaijan 1.24 0.81 0.96 no
Algeria 1.81 1.27 1.19 yes FSU average 0.81
Cameroun 1.75 2.59 2.62 yes Kazakhstan 0.80 0.84 0.77 no
Uganda 1.71 2.43 2.42 no Russia 0.72 1.14 1.12 yes
Mozambique 1.52 2.75 2.34 no Turkmenistan 0.11 0.64 1.28 no
Equatorial Guinea 1.34 1.50 1.21 no
Angola 1.10 1.48 1.56 yes Iraq 2.11 2.52 2.06 no

Africa average 1.05 Middle East Yemen 1.05 1.28 1.23 no

Libya 0.97 0.91 1.14 no Qatar 1.04 1.17 1.01 yes

Congo 0.82 1.38 1.98 no UAE 1.00 0.74 0.33 no

Egypt 0.77 0.71 1.27 no Middle East average 0.90

Nigeria 0.31 0.51 0.63 yes Turkey 0.86 3.48 1.84 no

Sudan 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Oman 0.73 2.17 1.61 no

Madagascar 0.00 4.10 1.58 no Kuwait 0.32 0.83 0.84 yes

Namibia 0.00 n/a 0.00 no Iran 0.00 0.00 1.45 no

Canada 2.63 2.91 3.31 yes
Asia/ New Zealand 11.06 10.87 14.46 no
Australasia Australia 2.64 4.45 4.25 no North America 

North America average 2.58
Singapore 2.43 0.00 3.46 no

USA 2.57 2.80 3.15 yes
Myanmar 1.01 1.81 1.17 yes

Mexico 0.00 0.00 2.18 no
Asia-Australasia 
average 0.97
Papua New Guinea 0.91 1.61 2.26 yes South & Central Uruguay 17.90 0.00 n/a yes

Thailand 0.89 1.11 1.34 no America Guyana 17.39 0.00 0.00 no

Malaysia 0.72 0.88 0.90 yes Peru 4.70 4.32 4.43 yes

China 0.66 0.51 0.93 yes Brazil 3.35 3.21 3.82 yes
India 0.63 1.51 1.96 no South & Central 

America average 3.13
South Korea 0.59 0.85 0.45 no
Indonesia 0.49 0.59 0.74 no Bolivia 2.27 3.24 0.76 no

Japan 0.44 1.47 3.76 no Trinidad & Tobago 2.08 2.25 1.80 no

Bangladesh 0.41 0.60 0.61 no Argentina 1.74 1.91 1.50 no

Pakistan 0.35 1.05 0.78 no Ecuador 1.61 2.13 3.30 no

Vietnam 0.35 2.08 0.92 no Venezuela 1.27 0.84 1.03 no
Colombia 1.24 2.23 3.11 no

Philippines 0.19 0.93 0.99 no
Surinam 0.00 11.43 1.86 no

Brunei 0.00 1.37 1.24 no

Europe Denmark 6.07 5.04 6.09 no
Germany 4.17 4.51 3.21 no
Ireland 3.95 2.11 2.13 yes
Croatia 3.55 1.59 3.47 no
Poland 3.47 6.11 2.62 no

B-10 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Lost time injury frequency by country
Region Country LTIF One or Region Country LTIF One or 

2013 2012 2011 more 
fatalities in 2013 2012 2011 more 

fatalities in 
2013 2013

Italy 1.01 1.55 1.55 no
Africa Morocco 4.81 4.67 0.00 no Netherlands 0.75 0.65 0.88 yes

Tunisia 1.47 1.61 1.89 no Hungary 0.64 1.76 2.44 no
Tanzania 1.27 0.87 3.24 yes France 0.56 0.27 0.43 no
Algeria 1.00 0.24 0.19 yes Spain 0.49 0.64 2.00 no
Congo - Democratic Romania 0.47 0.60 0.53 yes
Republic of the 
Congo  Denmark 0.39 1.04 1.93 no
(formerly Zaire) 0.97 0.63 0.64 no Poland 0.00 3.66 0.00 no
Kenya 0.83 0.43 1.29 no Greenland 0.00 0.00 4.27 no
Mauritania 0.77 0.63 1.57 no
Ghana 0.60 1.43 0.52 no FSU Russia 0.50 0.27 0.32 yes
Gabon 0.57 0.70 0.72 yes FSU average 0.33
Cameroun 0.55 0.59 0.62 yes Kazakhstan 0.29 0.33 0.29 no
Uganda 0.50 0.37 0.40 no Azerbaijan 0.21 0.11 0.17 no
Equatorial Guinea 0.45 0.32 0.11 no Turkmenistan 0.00 0.32 0.46 no
Mozambique 0.35 0.78 1.11 no Ukraine 0.00 3.55 12.50 no
Libya 0.31 0.54 0.52 no
Africa average 0.31 Yemen 0.36 0.43 0.34 no

Egypt 0.26 0.27 0.29 no Middle East Iraq 0.27 1.15 1.00 no

Angola 0.16 0.23 0.28 yes Qatar 0.25 0.26 0.22 yes

Congo 0.15 0.34 0.37 no Middle East average 0.21
Nigeria 0.10 0.15 0.16 yes UAE 0.19 0.16 0.06 no
South Africa 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Kuwait 0.14 0.12 0.14 yes
Sudan 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Oman 0.00 0.00 0.00 no
Ivory coast 0.00 3.33 0.00 no Turkey 0.00 2.61 0.92 no
Madagascar 0.00 0.00 0.00 no Iran 0.00 0.00 0.00 no
Namibia 0.00 0.00 0.00 no

Mexico 3.14 6.98 2.18 yes

Asia/ New Zealand 2.07 3.11 2.07 no North America 
Australasia Japan 0.44 0.00 1.50 no North America average 0.74

Singapore 0.35 0.00 0.00 no USA 0.58 0.56 0.65 yes

Myanmar 0.27 0.46 0.86 yes Canada 0.25 0.35 0.39 yes

Australia 0.27 0.64 0.60 no
South & Central Uruguay 15.35 0.00 n/a yes

China 0.23 0.26 0.48 yes
America Peru 2.03 0.62 1.53 yes

Malaysia 0.17 0.27 0.25 yes
Brazil 0.90 0.78 0.66 yes

South Korea 0.17 0.34 0.00 no
South & Central 

Vietnam 0.17 0.52 0.38 no America average 0.85
India 0.15 0.43 0.74 no Venezuela 0.84 0.21 0.69 no
Asia-Australasia 
average 0.15 Trinidad & Tobago 0.43 0.63 0.50 no

Indonesia 0.09 0.16 0.17 yes Ecuador 0.36 0.16 0.63 no

Bangladesh 0.07 0.00 0.00 no Argentina 0.29 0.15 0.46 no

Thailand 0.04 0.11 0.25 no Bolivia 0.22 0.76 0.19 no

Papua New Guinea 0.04 0.13 0.25 yes Colombia 0.15 0.35 1.61 no

Pakistan 0.03 0.05 0.28 yes Guyana 0.00 0.00 0.00 no
Surinam 0.00 0.00 0.00 no

Brunei 0.00 0.00 0.00 no
Philippines 0.00 0.37 0.40 no

Europe Croatia 1.75 1.38 1.78 no
Germany 1.68 0.92 0.92 no
Norway 1.13 0.98 1.27 no
UK 1.11 0.82 0.95 yes
Ireland 1.08 0.00 0.53 yes
Europe average 1.02

© OGP B-11



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Section 4	 Results by function

Fatal incidents and fatalities by function (‘000s)
2013 2012

Fatal incidents Fatalities Fatal incidents Fatalities

Exploration 2 3 4 4

Drilling 15 15 11 12

Production 17 33 12 15

Construction 6 18 17 19

Unspecified 2 11 8 38

All functions 43 80 52 88

Exposure hours by function (‘000s)
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009

Exploration 95 197 84 947  74 306  83 397  61 435 

Drilling 579 757 672 728  642 462  518 505  348 515 

Production 1 313 488 1 220 365  1 208 473  965 145  948 771 

Construction 930 481 911 045  839 178  869 540  1 076 322 

Unspecified 851 623 801 955  691 659  974 557  1 150 799 

All functions 3 770 546 3 691 040  3 456 078  3 411 144  3 585 842 

Fatal accident rate – 5-year rolling average
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall

2008 6.16 4.11 3.81 3.57 3.68

2009 6.15 4.24 3.76 2.76 3.23

2010 4.54 5.06 3.54 1.87 2.80 3.08

2011 1.91 3.82 3.35 1.80 2.35 2.69

2012 2.42 3.43 2.90 1.69 2.62 2.57

2013 2.50 3.19 2.58 1.71 2.30 2.38

Note: the method of calculating rolling averages changed with the publication of 2010 data. Historic figures presented above have been recalculated accordingly.

Fatal accident rate
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified

2008  6.16  4.11  3.81  3.57 

2009  6.15  4.24  3.76  2.76 

2010  4.54  5.06  3.54  1.87  2.80 

2011  1.91  3.82  3.35  1.80  2.35 

2012  2.42  3.43  2.90  1.69  2.62 

2013  2.50  3.19  2.58  1.71  2.30 

Note: the method of calculating FAR on a functional basis has changed with the publication of 2010 data to use the incident function instead of the function of 
the victim.Historic figures presented above have been recalculated acordingly.

B-12 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Total recordable injury rate
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall

2008 3.81 4.63 2.64 1.00 1.72 2.08

2009 2.31 3.81 2.32 0.78 1.53 1.75

2010 2.30 2.94 2.14 0.99 1.13 1.68

2011 2.70 2.84 2.05 1.13 0.95 1.76

2012 2.14 2.59 1.92 1.32 1.21 1.74

Ave 2008-2012 2.63 3.14 2.18 1.04 1.34 1.80

2013 1.87 3.05 1.75 1.13 0.90 1.60

Hours 2013 (‘000s) 88 319 552 984 1 279 428 922 610 822 135 366 5476 

Lost time injury frequency – 5-year rolling average
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall

2008 0.83 1.52 1.00 0.66 0.83

2009 0.81 1.37 0.89 0.55 0.70

2010 0.68 1.19 0.77 0.29 0.48 0.60

2011 0.60 0.96 0.64 0.25 0.35 0.50

2012 0.56 0.88 0.58 0.23 0.34 0.47

2013 0.56 0.84 0.55 0.22 0.31 0.45

Note: the method of calculating rolling averages changed with the publication of 2010 data. Historic figures presented above have been recalculated accordingly.

Lost time injury frequency
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Other Unspecified Overall

2004 0.61 1.71 1.23 0.77 1.12 1.09

2005 1.12 1.53 1.22 0.76 0.69 0.97

2006 0.91 1.73 1.16 0.50 0.84 0.99

2007 0.79 1.31 0.82 0.38 0.49 0.66

2008 0.78 1.33 0.70 0.26 0.41 0.55

2009 0.47 1.02 0.64 0.21 0.36 0.45

2010 0.42 0.82 0.54 0.24 0.25 0.42

2011 0.53 0.70 0.55 0.21 0.22 0.43

2012 0.60 0.81 0.49 0.24 0.46 0.48

2013 0.74 0.94 0.53 0.21 0.24 0.45

Hours 2013 (‘000s)  95 197 579 757  1 313 488 930 481  - 851 623 3 770 546 

Severity of lost work day cases
Year Exploration Drilling Production Construction Unspecified Overall 

2008 37.6 42.2 30.2 26.9 37.6 34.7

2009 45.5 44.3 38.4 34.7 29.9 37.5

2010 28.7 55.8 49.8 27.3 22.6 43.9

2011 42.4 51.8 40.4 36.4 22.8 42.3

2012 37.6 50.3 39.6 36.8 26.2 40.7

Ave 2008-2012 37.8 49.1 39.1 32.4 29.7 39.6

2013 27.0 51.4 47.5 23.7 27.9 43.0

Hours 2013 (‘000s) 66 784 415 548 885 366 591 557 538 219 2 497 474

© OGP B-13



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Exploration – TRIR for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.31 1.35 2.02 2.44 3250 20 338

Asia/Australasia 0.36 0.45 1.21 2.80 5530 23 167

Europe 0.46 0.92 1.25 2.56 4339 3990

FSU 3.91 0.93 1.76 0.87 256 5108

Middle East 0.00 0.75 2.81 2.76 901 9616

North America 0.43 0.85 4.85 4.73 4635 2475

South & Central America 1.26 0.70 8.68 5.38 796 3918

All regions 0.46 0.81 2.27 3.29 19 707 68 612

Exploration – LTIF for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.00 0.45 0.53 0.47 3250 20 692 

Asia/Australasia 0.17 0.27 0.08 0.45 6025 23 533 

Europe 0.23 0.55 0.50 1.38 4339 4020 

FSU 0.00 0.86 1.15 0.17 256 5212 

Middle East 0.00 0.60 0.47 0.77 1086 10 648 

North America 0.00 0.14 7.77 0.49 7460 3859 

South & Central America 0.00 0.30 3.04 0.85 874 3943 

All regions 0.09 0.37 0.95 0.62 23 290 71 907 

Drilling – TRIR for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.95 1.37 2.48 3.59 6309 86 191

Asia/Australasia 0.51 0.90 1.68 2.65 9828 97 734

Europe 2.62 1.98 5.87 5.17 17 146 38 135

FSU 0.61 1.76 2.82 1.31 1647 14 552

Middle East 0.36 1.59 1.79 3.12 5497 51 879

North America 0.08 0.48 4.07 5.01 13 137 106 073

South & Central America 1.43 1.47 4.70 4.46 11 211 93 645

All regions 1.17 1.51 3.29 3.39 64 775 488 209

Drilling – LTIF for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.30 0.28 0.79 1.13 6572 87 622 

Asia/Australasia 0.00 0.30 0.32 0.75 10 510 101 745 

Europe 1.28 1.19 2.41 2.01 17 182 39 790 

FSU 0.61 0.51 1.23 0.33 1647 14 594 

Middle East 0.17 0.84 0.34 0.78 5774 53 198 

North America 1.84 1.29 0.98 0.92 22 783 113 365 

South & Central America 0.44 0.50 1.33 1.12 11 256 93 719 

All regions 0.96 0.72 0.93 0.90 75 724 504 033 

B-14 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Production – TRIR for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.78 1.53 0.86 1.42 44 811 186 056

Asia/Australasia 0.47 1.40 0.80 1.23 64 509 181 415

Europe 1.80 2.09 3.89 4.93 66 147 89 820

FSU 0.55 0.73 0.58 0.73 31 192 55 028

Middle East 1.45 1.59 1.02 1.36 38 629 112 759

North America 2.68 2.75 3.22 4.12 46 586 127 437

South & Central America 1.89 1.99 2.97 2.92 49 178 185 861

All regions 1.39 1.76 1.88 2.36 341 052 938 376

Production – LTIF for company & contractor by region
Company work  Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.29 0.43 0.26 0.39 45 120 187 136 

Asia/Australasia 0.07 0.40 0.22 0.31 67 674 189 715 

Europe 0.81 0.87 1.41 1.56 66 324 91 364 

FSU 0.25 0.40 0.18 0.30 31 440 55 549 

Middle East 0.46 0.66 0.24 0.36 40 904 115 351 

North America 1.09 0.65 0.93 0.76 54 377 133 495 

South & Central America 0.75 0.55 0.65 0.59 49 178 185 861 

All regions 0.55 0.59 0.52 0.57 355 017 958 471 

Construction – TRIR for company & contractor by region
Company work  Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.26 0.43 1.39 1.59 7831 66 130

Asia/Australasia 0.48 0.46 1.20 1.70 16 587 292 580

Europe 0.60 0.49 2.26 3.60 8366 65 075

FSU 1.00 0.57 0.80 0.94 2994 44 795

Middle East 0.07 0.58 0.52 0.45 14 042 298 007

North America 0.22 0.67 2.58 3.34 17 812 68 650

South & Central America 0.57 1.12 3.34 2.78 1755 17 986

All regions 0.35 0.53 1.19 1.07 69 387 853 223

Construction – LTIF for company & contractor by region
Company work Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.00 0.07 0.27 0.36 7831 66 130 

Asia/Australasia 0.00 0.13 0.12 0.24 17 569 296 361 

Europe 0.12 0.10 0.74 1.20 8366 65 075 

FSU 0.00 0.26 0.20 0.34 2994 44 795 

Middle East 0.00 0.16 0.10 0.11 14 310 298 197 

North America 0.05 0.08 0.29 0.44 20 462 68 650 

South & Central America 0.00 0.56 1.56 0.91 1755 17 986 

All regions 0.03 0.14 0.22 0.24 73 287 857 194 

© OGP B-15



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Unspecified – TRIR for company & contractor by region
Company work  Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa 0.26 0.64 0.48 1.02 46 016 124 918

Asia/Australasia 0.31 0.65 0.73 0.80 44 974 146 743

Europe 0.66 1.20 1.73 2.64 48 607 53 301

FSU 0.42 0.99 0.75 1.15 23 840 60 269

Middle East 0.91 0.74 1.30 1.80 31 981 63 958

North America 0.68 1.04 2.15 3.24 66 378 87 041

South & Central America 0.10 0.41 1.36 1.46 10 157 13 952

All regions 0.53 0.88 1.08 1.55 271 953 550 182

Unspecified – LTIF for company & contractor by region
Company work  Contractor work 

Company Contractor hours (‘000s) hours (‘000s)

Region 2013 2008-2012 2013 2008-2012 2013 2013

Africa  0.15  0.16  0.15  0.23 46 288 124 996 

Asia/Australasia  0.08  0.22  0.08  0.15 52 001 153 930 

Europe  0.37  0.56  0.64  0.85 49 043 53 317 

FSU  0.17  0.34  0.40  0.31 23 840 60 269 

Middle East  0.24  0.22  0.39  0.42 33 348 64 428 

North America  0.22  0.34  0.34  0.70 78 594 87 044 

South & Central America  -  0.11  0.21  0.32 10 424 14 101 

All regions  0.20  0.31  0.26  0.36 293 538 558 085 

B-16 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Section 5	 Results by company
Company & Company & Company & 

Company Contractor Contractor Company only Contractor only Contractor Company only Contractor only 
code  FAR TRIR TRIR TRIR LTIF LTIF LTIF
A 12.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.16 1.94 6.09
B 0.00 5.29 0.00 9.37 2.65 0.00 4.68
C 0.00 4.13 1.31 6.66 2.27 0.44 3.92
D 27.66 4.01 1.45 5.59 1.66 0.72 2.24
E 4.91 4.18 2.70 4.77 1.51 1.37 1.57
F 34.18 3.42 2.43 3.66 1.41 0.69 1.59
G 0.00 2.81 0.24 3.95 1.37 0.00 1.97
H 0.00 3.82 0.00 4.56 1.27 0.00 1.52
I 0.00 3.54 1.40 4.28 1.19 0.56 1.41
J 3.91 3.95 1.32 4.40 1.08 0.53 1.18
K 4.13 3.32 3.32 0.99 1.58 0.34
L 0.70 3.42 1.86 3.75 0.89 0.78 0.92
M 0.00 3.68 1.76 4.61 0.89 0.75 0.95
N 0.00 3.18 1.35 3.57 0.81 0.27 0.92
O 0.00 3.47 2.11 3.85 0.80 0.56 0.86
P 0.00 0.79 0.49 0.94 0.80 0.49 0.94
Q 0.00 3.93 1.60 5.82 0.72 0.80 0.65
R 0.00 2.64 1.08 2.98 0.69 0.24 0.79
S 2.36 1.65 0.91 2.18 0.66 0.46 0.81
T 0.00 2.39 0.34 2.98 0.60 0.34 0.67
U 0.00 2.58 0.00 4.43 0.59 0.00 1.02
V 6.83 2.32 0.71 2.71 0.55 0.00 0.68
W 4.94 0.64 0.24 0.85 0.54 0.19 0.73
X 0.00 4.56 2.76 6.76 0.51 0.00 1.13
Y 0.90 1.28 1.71 1.17 0.48 0.61 0.45
Z 1.05 1.81 0.57 2.12 0.46 0.42 0.47
OVERALL 2.12 1.60 0.95 1.77 0.45 0.40 0.47
AA 0.00 2.57 1.29 3.22 0.43 0.64 0.32
BB 0.00 3.00 0.95 5.27 0.43 0.27 0.60
CC 0.00 2.25 0.61 2.80 0.42 0.00 0.56
DD 2.53 1.58 0.71 1.96 0.37 0.35 0.37
EE 2.82 1.41 0.53 1.67 0.37 0.12 0.44
FF 1.27 1.11 0.67 1.20 0.34 0.22 0.37
GG 0.00 3.18 2.62 3.24 0.31 0.00 0.38
HH 0.00 1.76 0.27 2.07 0.28 0.27 0.28
II 0.00 0.69 0.27 0.82 0.24 0.09 0.28
JJ 4.30 0.38 0.31 0.40 0.24 0.07 0.30
KK 1.27 1.32 0.40 1.53 0.23 0.13 0.25
LL 0.73 1.55 1.41 1.58 0.20 0.28 0.18
MM 0.00 0.93 1.43 0.76 0.19 0.71 0.00
NN 2.55 1.12 0.59 1.27 0.18 0.12 0.20
OO 0.00 0.97 0.72 1.02 0.17 0.13 0.18
PP 0.00 0.44 0.89 0.22 0.15 0.45 0.00
QQ 1.31 0.27 0.84 0.22 0.15 0.38 0.13
RR 0.00 0.66 0.84 0.64 0.15 0.00 0.16
SS 0.00 0.69 1.10 0.59 0.12 0.00 0.15
TT 0.00 0.60 0.22 0.68 0.11 0.06 0.13
UU 2.81 0.90 0.53 0.99 0.11 0.06 0.13
VV 0.00 0.77 0.40 0.80 0.04 0.13 0.03
WW 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
XX 0.00 1.16 0.00 1.47 0.00 0.00 0.00

© OGP B-17



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Total recordable injury rate by function

Exploration Drilling Production Construction

Company code Company & Company code Company & Company code Company & Company code Company & 
Contractor Contractor Contractor Contractor

L         10.98 W         119.05 X         9.45 C         17.44

J         7.47 B         12.46 Q         8.05 U         13.42

CC        6.65 G         8.95 M         5.53 BB        10.01

F         5.75 O         8.34 AA        5.41 I         8.51

R         5.62 E         8.10 O         5.17 AA        5.56

T         5.10 N         7.61 E         4.34 F         4.87

X         3.53 U         7.09 BB        3.94 N         4.55

EE        3.40 H         6.74 J         3.88 V         4.23

GG        2.98 Q         6.23 G         3.63 GG        3.57

Z         2.78 F         6.17 CC        3.42 J         3.07

Q         2.53 C         6.04 C         3.21 O         2.96

N         2.39 J         5.64 L         2.88 P         2.86

Overall 1.87 T         5.06 I         2.73 G         2.76

LL        1.84 L         4.72 Y         2.55 E         2.50

S         1.80 K         4.70 GG        2.49 Z         2.50

E         1.76 I         4.69 R         2.41 T         2.08

FF        1.37 V         4.23 U         2.35 CC        1.88

QQ        1.27 Y         3.89 F         2.32 DD        1.66

MM        0.81 S         3.74 LL        2.17 NN        1.46

UU        0.52 GG        3.53 V         2.06 EE        1.42

TT        0.47 R         3.20 K         2.00 UU        1.41

NN        0.40 LL        3.19 OO        1.91 Overall 1.13

W         0.27 NN        3.11 Overall 1.75 HH        0.89

II        0.23 Overall 3.05 N         1.73 LL        0.86

AA        0.00 RR        3.01 EE        1.60 VV        0.84

B         0.00 DD        2.99 P         1.43 S         0.79

BB        0.00 X         2.87 DD        1.31 II        0.76

H         0.00 HH        2.64 Z         1.00 FF        0.66

I         0.00 Z         2.53 S         0.99 TT        0.59

JJ        0.00 CC        2.44 FF        0.97 Y         0.56

K         0.00 FF        2.28 MM        0.89 OO        0.54

M         0.00 VV        1.99 HH        0.84 RR        0.33

O         0.00 II        1.87 UU        0.82 W         0.23

OO        0.00 XX        1.85 NN        0.73 QQ        0.05

P         0.00 EE        1.84 PP        0.58 JJ        0.00

RR        0.00 M         1.63 RR        0.57 M         0.00

V         0.00 AA        1.39 II        0.53 PP        0.00

XX        0.00 TT        1.30 VV        0.44 Q         0.00

OO        1.26 TT        0.42 X         0.00

UU        0.97 QQ        0.41

QQ        0.89 SS        0.40

BB        0.78 JJ        0.35

JJ        0.64 W         0.24

P         0.00 T         0.00

WW        0.00

B-18 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Database dimensions (Appendix A)
Total exposure hours Exposure hours by region (‘000s)

2013 2012
Hours worked (millions)

Year Overall Company Contractor Africa 595 637 600 478

1985 656 410 245 Asia/Australasia 919 063 741 523

1986 544 306 238 Europe 398 820 384 668

1987 602 356 247 FSU 240 596 363 944

1988 616 364 253 Middle East 637 244 666 915

1989 656 331 325 North America 590 089 560 027

1990 721 332 389 South & Central America 389 097 373 485

1991 941 441 499 All regions 3 770 546 3 691 040

1992 944 431 513
Exposure hours by function (‘000s)

1993 919 410 509
2013 2012

1994 872 397 475
Exploration 95 197 84 947

1995 841 356 485
Drilling 579 757 672 728

1996 912 360 551
Production 1 313 488 1 220 365

1997 1161 389 772
Construction 930 481 911 045

1998 1131 386 746
Unspecified 851 623 801 955

1999 1197 395 802
All functions 3 770 546 3 691 040

2000 1634 572 1062

2001 1977 633 1344

2002 2121 636 1484

2003 2247 664 1583

2004 2290 639 1652

2005 2381 639 1741

2006 2937 734 2203

2007 2913 668 2245

2008 3304 712 2592

2009 3586 822 2764

2010 3411 726 2685

2011 3456 753 2703

2012 3691 760 2931

2013 3771 821 2950

© OGP B-19



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

B-20 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Appendix C 
Contributing companies

The table below shows the size of the database in thousands of hours worked for each contributing company and 
whether reported data include information on contractor statistics, breakdown by function, medical treatment 
cases, restricted work day cases, days lost following lost work day and restricted work day cases. All company 
submissions include data on numbers of fatalities and lost work day cases.

COMPANY Hours Contractor Data by RWDCs LWDC days RWDC days
(‘000s) data function

Addax Petroleum Limited 14 638 yes yes yes yes yes
ADNOC 116 965 yes yes yes yes yes
Anadarko 76 766 yes yes yes partly partly
Bashneft 60 766 yes yes yes yes yes
BG Group 95 670 yes yes yes yes yes
BHP 10 096 yes yes yes yes yes
BP 158 162 yes yes mostly no no
Cairn Energy 756 yes yes yes yes yes
Cairn India 54 618 yes yes yes yes yes
Chevron 462 348 yes yes mostly mostly mostly
CNOOC 93 059 yes yes partly partly partly
ConocoPhillips 157 910 yes no yes no no
Dolphin Energy 6 754 yes yes yes yes yes
Dong E&P 1 975 yes yes yes yes yes
E.ON 2 356 yes yes mostly no no
Eni 229 713 yes yes yes yes no
ExxonMobil 274 351 yes yes yes no no
Galp 265 yes yes yes yes yes
GDF Suez E&P International 7231 yes no yes yes partly
Hess Corporation 46 532 yes yes yes yes yes
Inpex 6293 yes yes yes yes yes
Kosmos 1731 yes yes yes yes yes
Kuwait Oil Company 152 354 yes yes yes yes no
Maersk Oil 24 809 yes yes yes no no
Marathon Oil Company 27 686 yes yes yes no no
MOL 24 232 yes yes no partly no
Nexen Inc 32 573 yes yes yes yes no
Oil Search 13 363 yes yes yes yes mostly
OMV 84 640 yes yes yes yes yes
Pan American Energy 21 540 yes yes yes yes no
Pemex 49 747 yes yes partly partly partly
Perenco 43 887 yes yes yes yes yes
Petrobras 285 504 yes yes yes yes yes
Petronas Carigali Sdn Bhd 97 345 yes yes yes no no
Premier Oil 13 856 yes yes mostly no no
PTTEP 39 255 yes yes yes yes yes
Qatar Petroleum 111 618 yes yes mostly mostly mostly
Rasgas 114 325 yes yes yes no no
Repsol 26 191 yes yes yes yes mostly
RWE DEA AG 4841 yes yes yes yes no
Sasol 5357 yes yes no yes no
Shell Companies 314 802 yes yes mostly mostly mostly
Statoil 101 780 yes yes yes no no
Suncor 4662 yes yes yes yes yes
Talisman Energy 32 042 yes yes partly no no
Total 213 077 yes yes yes yes yes
Tullow Oil 21 061 yes yes yes yes yes
Wintershall 8397 yes yes yes yes yes
Woodside 13 993 yes yes yes yes yes
Yemen LNG 8654 yes yes yes yes yes

Note:	 a data row is a single entry for a company for one country and yes = reported for all data rows
location (one of company onshore, company offshore, contractor mostly = reported for more than 50% of data rows
onshore, contractor offshore), e.g. Acompany, UK, company partly = reported for less than 50% of data rows
offshore. no - not reported at all

© OGP C-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

C-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Appendix D 
Countries represented

The tabulation shows the breakdown of reported hours worked in regions and countries. Also shown is the number 
of companies reporting data in each country. The table does not necessarily show all hours worked in the exploration 
& production sectors of the oil & gas industry in each country.

	 No. reporting	 Hours 	 No. reporting	 Hours
Country	 companies	 (‘000s) Country	 companies	 (‘000s)
Africa Europe (continued)

Algeria	 10	 30 908 Greenland	 2	 73
Angola	 9	 89 240 Hungary	 2	 4670
Benin	 1	 342 Ireland	 3	 2782
Botswana	 1	 260 Italy	 5	 15 884
Cameroun	 3	 9131 Monaco	 1	 297
Chad	 1	 13 436 Netherlands	 8	 21 368
Congo	 3	 39 186 Norway	 22	 130 811
Congo (Democratic Republic of)	 2	 5140 Poland	 5	 1153
Egypt	 8	 57 117 Romania	 3	 53 002
Equatorial Guinea	 3	 8943 Spain	 3	 2043
Ethiopia	 1	 1902 Sweden	 1	 11
Gabon	 6	 36 611 Switzerland	 1	 527
Ghana	 5	 6676 UK	 27	 116 090
Ivory Coast	 3	 731

FSU
Kenya	 3	 7234
Liberia	 3	 46 Azerbaijan	 4	 33 908
Libya	 12	 22 625 Kazakhstan	 9	 118 228
Madagascar	 3	 62 Russia	 14	 78 678
Mauritiana	 5	 3874 Turkmenistan	 4	 8834
Morocco	 4	 416 Ukraine	 3	 764
Mozambique	 5	 14 490 Uzbekistan	 1	 184
Namibia	 2	 82 Middle East
Nigeria	 9	 218 356
Senegal	 2	 18 Iran	 3	 226
Sierra Leone	 2	 25 Iraq	 16	 44 803
South Africa	 4	 451 Israel	 1	 9
Sudan	 2	 79 Jordan	 1	 514
Tanzania	 2	 3950 Kuwait	 5	 172 444
Togo	 1	 662 Oman	 4	 5485
Tunisia	 8	 13 599 Qatar	 10	 256 361
Uganda	 3	 10 045 Saudi Arabia	 1	 816

Syria	 2	 47
Asia/Australasia Turkey	 2	 2322
Australia	 16	 131 665 UAE	 12	 129 513
Bangladesh	 2	 14  700 Yemen	 5	 24  704
Brunei	 3	 1519 North America
Cambodia	 1	 22
China	 13	 110 769 Canada	 12	 114 842
India	 4	 59 989 Cuba	 1	 1
Indonesia	 17	 247 218 Mexico	 5	 50 067
Japan	 4	 2249 USA	 20	 425 179
Malaysia	 10	 127 615 South America
Myanmar	 4	 18 824
Nepal	 1	 3 Argentina	 6	 31 552
New Zealand	 3	 1447 Aruba	 1	 45
Pakistan	 6	 31 240 Belize	 1	 461
Papua New Guinea	 3	 89 405 Bolivia	 3	 9243
Philippines	 2	 5244 Brazil	 13	 303 526
Singapore	 7	 2878 Chile	 1	 76
South Korea	 5	 11 912 Colombia	 9	 6737
Taiwan	 1	 9 Ecuador	 2	 5596
Thailand	 7	 56 400 Falklands Islands	 1	 4
Timor Leste	 1	 6 French Guiana	 1	 1619
Vietnam	 6	 5949 Guatamala	 1	 2352

Guyana	 2	 115
Europe Peru	 4	 10 838
Austria	 1	 3260 Surinam	 4	 216
Croatia	 2	 10 842 Trinidad & Tobago	 7	 11 583
Cyprus	 1	 135 Uruguay	 3	 391
Denmark	 5	 10 385 Venezuela	 7	 4743
France	 6	 14 206
Germany	 5	 11 281

© OGP D-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

D-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Appendix E: Glossary of terms

Assault and violent act (as an incident/ Contractor(s) who is directly involved in execution of 
event category) prescribed work under a contract with the reporting Company.

Intentional attempt, threat or act of bodily injury by a person Cut, puncture, scrape (as an incident/ 
or person(s) or by violent harmful actions of unknown intent, event category)
includes intentional acts of damage to property.

Abrasions, scratches and wounds that penetrate the skin.
Caught in, under or between (as an 
incident/event category) Diving operations

The personnel, equipment and management systems to support 
Injury where injured person is crushed or similarly injured a person who dives. A person ‘Dives’ if he enters water or any 
between machinery moving parts or other objects, caught other liquid, or a chamber in which he is subject to pressure 
between rolling tubulars or objects being moved, crushed greater than 100 millibars above atmospheric pressure: and in 
between a ship and a dock, or similar incidents. Also includes order to survive in such an environment he breathes air or other 
vehicle incidents involving a rollover. gas at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. Or for such 
Causal factors a purpose uses a vehicle, capsule or suit where a sealed internal 

atmospheric pressure is maintained and where the external 
See User Guide, OGP report 2013su pressure differential is greater than 100 millibars.

Company employee Diving, subsea, ROV (as a type of activity)
Any person employed by and on the payroll of the reporting Operations involving diving (see definition for diving 
Company, including corporate and management personnel operations), subsea equipment or activities and/or operations 
specifically involved in E&P. Persons employed under short- involving underwater remotely operated vehicles (ROV).
service contracts are included as Company employees provided 
they are paid directly by the Company. Drilling (as a work function)
Confined space (as an incident/ All exploration, appraisal and production drilling and workover 

event category) as well as their administrative, engineering, construction, 
materials supply and transportation aspects. It includes site 

Spaces that are considered “confined” because their preparation, rigging up and down and restoration of the 
configurations hinder the activities of employee who must drilling site upon work completion. Drilling includes ALL 
enter, work in, and exit them. Confined spaces include, but are exploration, appraisal and production drilling.
not limited to underground vaults, tanks, storage bins, 
manholes, pits, silos, process vessels and pipelines. Drilling/workover/well services (as a type 

of activity)
Construction (as a work function)

Activities involving the development, maintenance work or 
Major construction, fabrication activities and also disassembly, remedial treatments related to an oil or gas well.
removal and disposal (decommissioning) at the end of the 
facility life. Includes construction of process plant, yard Event
construction of structures, offshore installation, hook-up and An unplanned or uncontrolled outcome of a business operation 
commissioning, and removal of redundant process facilities. or activity that has or could have contributed to an injury, 
Construction, commissioning, illness, physical or environmental damage.

decommissioning (as a type of activity) Exploration (as a work function)
Activities involving the construction, fabrication and Geophysical, seismographic and geological operations, 
installation of equipment, facilities or plant, testing activities to including their administrative and engineering aspects, 
verify design objectives or specification, and also disassembly, construction, maintenance, materials supply, and 
removal and disposal (decommissioning) at the end of the transportation of personnel and equipment; excludes drilling.
facility life.

Explosion or burn (as an incident/event 
Contractor category)
A ‘Contractor’ is defined as an individual or organisation Burns or other effects of fires, explosions and extremes of 
performing work for the reporting company, following  temperature. ‘Explosion’ means a rapid combustion, not an 
verbal or written agreement. ‘Sub-contractor’ is synonymous overpressure.
with ‘Contractor’.

Contractor employee
Any person employed by a Contractor or Contractor’s Sub-

© OGP E-1



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Exposure: electrical (as an incident/event Key performance indicators (KPI)
category) In this report, these include: number of fatalities, fatal  
Exposure to electrical shock or electrical burns etc. accident and incident rates, lost time injury frequency, and total 

recordable injury rate.
Exposure: noise, chemical, biological, 
vibration (as an incident/event category) Lost time injury (LTI)

Exposure to noise, chemical substances (including asphyxiation A fatality or lost work day case. The number of LTIs is the sum 
due to lack of oxygen not associated with a confined space), of fatalities and lost work day cases.
hazardous biological material, vibration or radiation. Lost time injury frequency (LTIF)
Falls from height (as an incident/event The number of lost time injuries (fatalities + lost work day 
category) cases) incidents per 1,000,000 hours worked.

A person falls from one level to another. Lost work day case (LWDC)
Fatal accident rate (FAR) Any work related injury other than a fatal injury which results 

in a person being unfit for work on any day after the day of 
The number of company/contractor fatalities per 100,000,000 occurrence of the occupational injury. “Any day” includes rest 
(100 million) hours worked. days, weekend days, leave days, public holidays or days after 
Fatality ceasing employment.

Cases that involve one or more people who died as a result of a LWDC severity
work-related incident or occupational illness. The average number of lost days per lost work day case.
First aid case Maintenance, inspection and testing (as a 
Cases that are not sufficiently serious to be reported as  type of activity)
medical treatment or more serious cases but nevertheless 
require minor first aid treatment, e.g. dressing on a minor cut, Activities related to preserving, repairing, examining and 
removal of a splinter from a finger. First aid cases are not function testing assets, equipment, plant or facilities.
recordable incidents. Medical cause of death
High potential event This is the cause of death given on the death certificate. Where 
Any incident or near miss that could have realistically resulted two types of causes are provided, such as “pulmonary oedema” 
in one or more fatalities. caused by “inhalation of hot gases from a fire”, both are 

recorded.
Hours worked Medical treatment case (MTC)
The actual ‘hours worked’, including overtime hours, are 
recorded in the case of onshore operations. The hours worked Cases that are not severe enough to be reported as fatalities or 
by an individual will generally be about 2,000 per year. For lost work day cases or restricted work day cases but are more 
offshore workers, the ‘hours worked’ are calculated on a 12 severe than requiring simple first aid treatment.
hour work day. Consequently, average hours worked per year Near miss
will vary from 1,600 to 2,300 hours per person depending 
upon the on/off shift ratio. Vacations and leaves are excluded. An unplanned or uncontrolled event or chain of events that has 

not resulted in recordable injury, illness, physical or 
Hours worked in year (000’s) environmental damage but had the potential to do so in other 
Hours are rounded to the nearest thousand. circumstances.

Incident Number of days unfit for work

An unplanned or uncontrolled Event or chain of Events that The sum total of calendar days (consecutive or otherwise) after 
has resulted in at least one fatality, recordable injury or illness, the days of the occupational injuries on which the employees 
or physical or environmental damage. involved were unfit for work and did not work.

Lifting, crane, rigging, deck operations Number of employees
(as a type of activity) Average number of full-time and part-time employees involved 

in exploration & production, calculated on a full-time basis, 
Activities related to the use of mechanical lifting and hoisting during the reporting year.
equipment, assembling and dis-assembling drilling rig 
equipment and drill pipe handling on the rig floor.

E-2 ©OGP



Safety performance indicators – 2013 data

Number of fatalities Process safety event (PSE)
The total number of Company’s employees and or Contractor’s A process safety event, which can also be referred to as an asset 
employees who died as a result of an incident. ‘Delayed’ deaths integrity event, is a Loss of Primary Containment (LOPC) and 
that occur after the incident are included if the deaths were a is recordable if:
direct result of the incident. For example, if a fire killed one •	 the consequence was a reportable employee or contractor 
person outright, and a second died three weeks later from lung injury or fatality, a third party hospital admission or fatality, 
damage caused by the fire, both are reported. a community or site evacuation or a fire / explosion; or

•	 a pressure relief device discharge or material release occurs 
Occupational injury which exceeded defined thresholds (even if none of the 
Any injury such as a cut, fracture, sprain, amputation, etc., or consequences above occurred)
any fatality, which results from a work-related activity or from as specified within OGP report № 456, Process safety – 
an exposure involving a single incident in the work recommended practice on key performance indicators which 
environment, such as deafness from explosion, one-time provides consequence and threshold definitions consistent 
chemical exposure, back disorder from a slip / trip, insect or with API Recommended Practice No.754 http://www.ogp.
snake bite. org.uk/pubs/456.pdf, the supplement to this report provides 

Process Safety Upstream PSE examples http://www.ogp.org.uk/
Office, warehouse, accommodation, pubs/456supp.pdf.
catering (as a type of activity) Process safety related
Activities related to work conducted in offices, warehouses, 
workshops, accommodation and catering facilities. Process safety related events are those which do not meet the 

specific criteria to be classified as Tier 1 or 2 Process Safety 
Offshore work Events but which have learning potential in the prevention of 

Process Safety Events.
All activities and operations that take place at sea, including 
activities in bays, in major inland seas such as the Caspian Sea, Production (as a work function)
or in other inland seas directly connected to oceans. Incidents 
including transportation of people and equipment from shore Petroleum and natural gas producing operations, including 
to the offshore location, either by vessel or helicopter, should be their administrative and engineering aspects, minor 
recorded as ‘offshore’. construction, repairs, maintenance and servicing, materials 

supply, and transportation of personnel and equipment. It 
Onshore work covers all mainstream production operations including 

wireline. Gas processing activities with the primary intent of 
All activities and operations that take place within a landmass, producing gas liquids for sale including;
including those on swamps, rivers and lakes. Land-to-land •	 work on production wells under pressure
aircraft operations are counted as onshore, even though flights •	 oil (including condensates) and gas extraction and 
are over water. separation (primary production)
Other (as an incident/event category) •	 heavy oil production where it is inseparable from upstream 

(i.e. stream assisted gravity drainage) production
Used to specify where an incident cannot be logically classed •	 primary oil processing (water separation, stabilisation)
under any other category. In the case of incident activities, •	 primary gas processing (dehydration, liquids separation, 
includes air transport incidents. sweetening, CO2 removal)

•	 Floating Storage Units (FSUs) and sub-sea storage units
Note: the work function ‘Other’ was replaced by ‘construction’ for •	 gas processing activities with the primary intent of 
the first time in 2006. producing gas liquids for sale
Overexertion or strain (as an incident/ êê secondary liquid separation (i.e. Natural Gas Liquids 

event category) [NGL] extraction using refrigeration processing)
êê Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) and Gas to Liquids 

Physical overexertion e.g. muscle strain (GTL) operations
•	 flow-lines between wells and pipelines between facilities 

Pressure release (as an incident/ associated with field production operations
event category) •	 oil and gas loading facilities including land or marine 

vessels (trucks and ships) when connected to an oil or gas 
Failure of or release of gas, liquid or object from a  production process 
pressurised system. •	 pipeline operations (including booster stations) operated by 

company E&P business

© OGP E-3



International Association of Oil & Gas Producers

Production excludes: Total recordable injury rate (TRIR)
•	 production drilling or workover
•	 mining processes associated with the extraction of heavy oil The number of recordable injuries (fatalities + lost work day 

tar sands cases + restricted work day cases + medical treatment cases) per 
•	 heavy oil when separable from upstream operations 1,000,000 hours worked.
•	 secondary heavy oil processing (upgrader) Transport – air (as a type of activity)
•	 refineries

Involving aircraft, either fixed wing or helicopters. Injuries 
Production operations (as a type  caused by accidents on the ground at airports are classified in 
of activity) one of the other categories.

Activities related to the extraction of hydrocarbons from source Transport – land (as a type of activity)
such as an oil or gas well or hydrocarbon bearing geological 
structure, including primary processing, storage and transport Involving motorised vehicles designed for transporting people 
operations. Includes normal, start-up or shut-down operations. and goods over land, e.g. cars, buses, trucks. Pedestrians struck 

by a vehicle are classified as land transport incidents. Incidents 
Recordable from a mobile crane would only be land transport incidents if 

the crane were being moved between locations.
A type of event, incident, injury, illness, release or other 
outcome which has been determined to meet or exceed Transport – water, including Marine 
definitions, criteria or thresholds for inclusion and classification Activity (as a type of activity)
in reported data.

Involving vessels, equipment or boats designed for transporting 
Restricted work day case (RWDC) people and goods over water (including inland, marine, ice 
Any work-related injury other than a fatality or lost work day roads and marsh/swamp) e.g. supply vessels, crew boats.
case which results in a person being unfit for full performance Unspecified – other (as a type of activity)
of the regular job on any day after the occupational injury. 
Work performed might be: Incidents that cannot be logically classed under other headings 

•	 an assignment to a temporary job; or where the activity is unknown.
•	 part-time work at the regular job;
•	 working full-time in the regular job but not performing all Unspecified (as a work function)

the usual duties of the job Unspecified is used for the entry of data associated with office 
Where no meaningful restricted work is being performed, the personnel whose work hours and incident data cannot be 
incident is recorded as a lost work day case (LWDC). reasonably assigned to the administrative support of one of the 

Seismic/survey operations (as a type  function groupings of exploration, drilling, production or 
construction. Corporate overhead support function personnel 

of activity) such as finance or human resources staff may be examples where 
Activities relating to the determination of sub-surface work hours cannot be specifically assigned to a particular 
structures for the purpose of locating oil and gas deposits function. All other data that are not separated out by function 
including geophysical and seismic data acquisition. are reported as ‘unspecified’.

Slips and trips (at the same height) (as an Water related/drowning (as an incident/
incident/event category) event category)
Slips, trips and falls caused by falling over or onto something at Incidents/events in which water played a significant role 
the same height. including drowning.

Struck by (as an incident/event category) Work-related injury
Incidents/events where injury results from being hit by moving See occupational injury.
equipment and machinery, or by flying or falling objects. Also 
includes vehicle incidents where the vehicle is struck by or 
struck against another object.

Third party
A person with no business relationship with the company 
or contractor.

E-4 ©OGP



For further information and publications, 
please visit our website at

www.ogp.org.uk



209-215 Blackfriars Road
London SE1 8NL
United Kingdom
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7633 0272
Fax: +44 (0)20 7633 2350

165 Bd du Souverain
4th Floor
B-1160 Brussels, Belgium
Telephone: +32 (0)2 566 9150

International Fax: +32 (0)2 566 9159
Association 
of Oil & Gas Internet site: www.ogp.org.uk
P r o d u c e r s e-mail: reception@ogp.org.uk



Journal .I Occupational and Organiptional Ps_vchology (1998), 71, 289-304 Printed in Great Britain 289 
0 1998 The British Psychological Society Reference Copy 

only 
Organizational controls and safety: The 

varieties of rule-related behaviour 

James Reason, Dianne Parker* and Rebecca Lawton 
Department of Psychology, Universio o jMancbester, Mancbester M 13 9PI,, UK 

Companies operating in hazardous environments employ a variety of organiz- 
ational controls both to  manage the enterprise as a whole and to minimize their 
risks. This paper critically reviews the use of procedures, rules and regulations to 
restrict individual behaviour to those courses o f  action considered safc and 
productive. In particular, it discusses the psychological, situational and organiz- 
ational factors influencing compliant and non-compliant behaviour (i.e. violations 
and circumventions of safe operating procedures). Ten kinds of rule-related 
behaviour are identified. The paper concludes by arguing for the extended usc 
of  social and self-controls to compensate for the inevitable limitations o f  
prescriptive procedures in guiding safe behaviour. 

In  almost every organization, there is a tension bctween the natural variability of 
human behaviour and the needs of the system to ensure a high degree of 
predictability and regularity in the activities of its members. So fundamental is this 
conflict that it has been argued by many theorists that the manner of its resolution 
is the major influence in shaping the character of the organization as a whole (see 
Katz & Kahn, 1978). 

For those systems that operate under hazardous conditions, thcre is the 
additional requirement t o  limit human action to pathways that are not only efficient 
and productivc, but also safc. The most obvious difficulty in thc traditional pursuit 
o f  organizational safety is that success is counted b y  the absence of something- 
fatalitics, lost time injuries, damage to assets and other negative outcomes. Thc 
feedback necessary to  attain safety goals is thus discontinuous and indirect: 
discontinuous bccause recordcd accidents, incidents and near misses are compar- 
atively rare events; indirect because these data only rcflect moments o f  unsafety 
rather than the system’s intrinsic resistance to its operational hazards. Moreover, 
since thcre is a large chance component in accident causation, these nega- 
tive outcome data yield unrcliable information regarding the true state o f  an 
organization’s safety. 

This paper cxamincs the issue of organizational control in relation t o  safcty, 
focusing o n  the use of rules and proccdures as one means by which an organization 
seeks t o  produce predictability and regularity in the txhaviour of its members. This 
*Request\ f o r  reprints. 



290 ldn1e.r Reason et al. 
is an arca that has received relatively little attention in the literature, and the 
empirical basis is still weak. Problems with the use of prescriptive procedures are 
discussed and a classification o f  rule-rclated behaviour is proposed as a means of 
understanding the ways in which rule quality, the potential outcomes of behaviour 
and the motives of individuals intcract in relation to the rules. In conclusion, it is 
argued that simply providing and enforcing prescriptive rules and procedures is n o t  
suficient to foster safe behaviour in the workplace, and supplementary methods o f  
organizational control are discussed. 

Organizational controls 
I lopwood (1 974) identified three types of organizational controls: administrative, 
social and self-controls. To these, advances in technology require that we add 
a further control: technical controls that include engineered safety features. 
Administrative controls have becn defined as '. . . those mechanisms, techniques 
and proccsscs that have been consciously and purposefully designed in order t o  try 
t o  control the organisational behaviour(s) of  other individuals, groups and 
organisations' (Johnson 8( Gill, 1993, p. 21). Administrative controls may involve 
control o f  process o r  of output. Process controls are attempts to standardize the 
work process using prescriptive rules and procedures, often backed up by the 
monitoring of bchaviour and by sanctions for non-compliance. In contrast, output 
controls entail a feedback control process based upon comparing output measures, 
including performance, with organizational objectives, and adjusting outputs 
whenever nccessary. This type o f  control (e.g. job appraisal) is often necessary 
when tasks are complex and unpredictable. While process controls such as rules 
and procedures are the focus of this paper, the other types o f  control suggestcd by 
Hopwood will be examined in greater detail later. 

On the nature and proliferation of safety rules and procedures 
Employee surveys, interviews, group discussions and observations carried out in a 
variety of industries (oil production and exploration, rail transport, commercial 
aviation and medicine) havc shown the ubiquity o f  violations of organizational 
safety rules (c.g. Chapman, 1982; Cushing, 1994; Ilorning & Smith, 1991). 
Moreover, Free (1 994) showed that, in the railway industry at Icast, safety rules 
differ from othcr kinds of procedural guidance in at least two important respects. 
First, in the manner of their creation and development and, second, in the way 
that they are perceived by the workforce. Each o f  thcse aspccts is considered 
I,elow. 

Safe operating procedures are continually being amended to prohibit actions that 
havc been implicated in some recent accident or  incident. Over time, these 
additions become increasingly restrictive, often reducing the range of permitted 
actions to far less than those necessary t o  get the job done under anything but 
optimal conditions. However, the combination o f  latent conditions, local triggers 
and othcr active failures (Reason, 1990; Reason, Parker & Free, 1994) which leads 



O p n i ~ a t i o n oclontrols and sufijty 29 1 

to  an  accident rarely rccurs in precisely the same form. Thus the workforce quickly 
lcarns that thc violation (deviation from written rules o r  procedures) of individual 
rules in isolation generally carries n o  penalty. Furthermore, the separation in 
time and space of the individual violation from its consequent failures might 
sewe to reinforce a bclief in the innocuous nature o f  violations. Indeed, workcrs 
often discover that such violations lead to an easier and more efficient way of 
working. 

Ironically, then, one of the effects of continually tightening up safe working 
practices is to  increasc the likelihood o f  deliberate deviations from thcse practices: 
in other words, encourage violations. ’The scope of allowable action shrinks to such 
an cxtent that procedures are either violated routinely o r  on those occasions when 
operational nccessity demands it. Whereas crrors, being unintentional deviations 
from a planned course of action o r  in the case of mistakcs incorrect plans, arise 
from various kinds of informational underspecification (Reason, 1990), many 
violations are created by procedural overspecification. 

Ncverthelcss, although the commission of these isolated proscribed acts may be 
mostly inconscqucntial, the fact that they were implicated in some past cvent 
indicates that thcy cun increasc thc risks for thcir perpetrators, cven though they do  
not usually result in a bad outcome. 

One  of the morc obvious ways in which such violations incrcase risk is in thcir 
effccts upon thc subsequent likelihood of committing an error, often because thc 
perpetrator is less familiar with the physical regime. Driving a car at a 100 mph on  
the motorway is not in itself sufficient to cause an accident. However, since this 
specd will almost certainly be highcr than the driver’s norm, therc is a greater 
likelihood o f  misjudging the braking distance o r  the handling characteristics of the 
vehiclc. If a driver always travcls at 100 mph o n  the motorway, i.e. the violation is 
routine, increascd accidcnt risk may nevertheless arise not necessarily from higher 
error rates, but from the fact that the margins for tolerating an error are now 
considerably rcduced. By violating the safe speed limit the conscqucnces o f  a 
misjudgment are likely to be morc damaging than if the mistake had been 
committed whilst obeying the traffic laws. Thus, violations can havc two important 
consequcnccs: they can incrcase the probability of a subsequent error, and they can 
also incrcase the likelihood that it will have a bad outcomc (Free, 1994; Parkcr, 
Reason, Manstead & Stradling, 1995). 

In many hazardous technologies, the important issue is not whether to violate, but 
when to  violatc. Nearly all hazardous operations routinely involve thc commission 
of  actions that lie outside the prescribed boundaries, yet are regardcd as acceptable 
practice within the work-group. Most experienced workers think they know 
approximately whcre the ‘cdgc’ bctwecn safety and disastcr lics and d o  not excecd 
it, except in cxtrcme circumstances. 

Violations of safety rules gain considcrable significance for a company in the 
aftermath o f  a serious accidcnt. Faced with issues of lcgal liability, the organization 
may seeks ways of distancing thc actions of involvcd employees from the stated 
aims and practices of the company. This is readily done when thc implicated unsafe 
acts are clearly in violation of some safety rule or  procedure, allowing the company 
to  argue that the responsibility for the accident lay with the pcrson o r  people who 



292 James Reason et  al. 
committed these proximal violations. This approach may further compound the 
cynicism of workers who view safety procedures more as a means of protecting 
the company in the event of an accident than as a workable way of preserving the 
health and safety of those in direct contact with hazards (Free, 1994). 

Should safety rules permit the achievement of personal as well as organizational 
goals, there would be little need for external enforcement. However, there is often 
a conflict between individual and organizational goals (as embodied in rules and 
procedures) making enforcement necessary. For example, employees may cut safety 
corners in attempting to achieve a bonus, although the organization requires that 
safety be the first consideration. Alternatively an organization may wish to meet a 
deadline, but may only be able to do so with less than strict adherence to the safety 
rules. Furthermore, in some situations there may be a conflict between two 
simultaneously held organizational goals, only one of which is specified in the rules 
(e.g. a conflict between adhering to  safety rules and achieving productivity goals). 
Thus a meaningful evaluation of rule-related behaviours requires an assessment of 
the interaction between individual and organizational safety goals. 

The bases for a behavioural taxonomy 
In seeking to clarify the varieties of rule-related behaviours that occur in 
organizations, four distinctions may be identified: (u) between psychologically 
rewarding and unrewarding behaviour; (b) between violations and compliant 
behaviour; (c) between correct and incorrect actions; and (d ) between ‘good’ and 
‘bad’ rules. 

I+ychological(y rewurdzny and unrewurding behaviour 
Error has been defined as ‘the failure of planned actions to achieve their desired 
ends’ (Reason, 1990). There are three elements to this definition: a plan or intention 
that incorporates both the goal and the means to achieve it, a sequence o f  actions 
initiated by that plan, and the extent to which these actions are successful in 
achieving their purpose. I.ogically, actions may bc unsuccessful in achieving their 
purpose because the actions failed to go as planned, or  because the plan itself was 
inadequate to achieve the intended outcome. For our present purposes, i t  is 
sufficient t o  define psychologically rewarding behaviour as that which achieves the 
personal goals of the actor, which may or  may not be consistent with the goals of 
the organization. So,  for example, for one individual deviating from a rule may be 
psychologically rewarding as it gives rise to a scnse of excitement o r  thrill; for a 
fellow worker this samc deviation may produce psychologically unrewarding 
feelings of guilt and worry. 

Ll’iolalions and compliant behaviour 
Violations arc deviations from safe operating procedures, standards o r  rules. Such 
deviations can be either intentional o r  unintentional (i.e. speeding without being 



O~qani~ationucol  ntrols and safety 293 
aware o f  cither the speed o r  the local restriction). The latter arc caws in which 
ignorance of the procedure exists or  the individual is unaware that they are violating 
the procedure and, thereforc, for all intents and purposes thesc may bc defined as 
errors rather than violations. Three major categories o f  deliberate safety violation 
have been distinguished: routine, optimizing and situational violations (Reason, 
Parkcr & Free, 1994). In each casc, the decision not to  abide by safc operating 
procedures is shaped by both organizational and individual factors, though the 
balance of these influences varies from one type o f  violation to  anothcr (Free, 
1994). 

Routine violations typically involve corner-cutting-taking the path of least 
effort between two task-related points. Eventually, these short cuts can become an 
habitual part o f  the person’s bchavioural repertoire, particularly when the work 
environmcnt is one that rarely sanctions violations o r  rewards compliance. Such 
routine violations are also promoted by ‘clumsy’ procedures that take little account 
of behavioural economics (Rattmann & Klumb, 1993). 

Optimizing violations reflect the fact that human actions serve a variety o f  goals, 
and that some o f  these are quite unrelated to thc functional aspects of the task. 
Thus, a drivcr’s functional goal is to get from A to B, but in the process he or  she 
can optimize the j o y  of speed or  indulge aggressive instincts. ’Tcndencics to 
optimize non-functional goals can bccomc a part of an individual’s performance 
style. They are also characteristic of  particular dcmographic groups such as young 
malc drivers (Meadows, 1994). 

Whereas routine and optimizing violations are clearly linked to the attainment of 
personal goals, situational violations have their primary origins in particular work 
situations. Here, non-compliance is secn as essential in order to get the job done. 
These violations arc commonly provokcd by organizational failings with regard t o  
the site, tools or  cquipmcnt. In  addition, they can also providc an easier way of 
working. In this way these violations can become routinized. 

In terms o f  the taxonomy, compliant behaviour is behaviour that involves the 
following of formal rules and procedures, irrespective of whethcr o r  not the rule is 
a good one, o r  applicable in the circumstances. Compliance will not always achieve 
the organization’s safety goals. When the rule is bad, or  inappropriate, compliance 
is not desirablc. 

(,orreci umd incorrect uctiom 
The terms correct and incorrcct relate to how closely an individual’s appraisal of 
the local dangers approximates to  the reality. In  other words, the distinction relates 
to the accuracy of hazard perception. Recognizing a situation as hazardous and/or 
a rule as inappropriate is likely to lead to the adoption of self-protective behaviour. 
A correct action, therefore, is one taken on the basis of an adequate hazard 
evaluation. Psychologically rewarding actions need not necessarily be correct 
actions with rcgard to the accuracy of the hazard assessmcnt. Driving at 100 mph 
could achieve the personal goals of arriving sooner and of expcricncing the thrill of 
speed, but it is clcarly not correct given the increased risks associatcd with a 
relatively unknown physical regime and its reduced error margins. Similarly, 



294 James Reason et al. 

- 
Figure 1. Classifying the categories of rule-related behaviour. 

compliance is not automatically correct, nor a violation incorrect. When a safety 
procedure is appropriate, then the safety goals o f  an organization are assumed to be 
achieved when employees are correct in their choice of actions. 

Appropriate and inappropriate rules 
A fourth distinction relates to the appropriateness o f  the rules to  particular local 
circumstances. For any given situation, there may be good rules, bad rules or  no 
rules. A good rule is one that is appropriate to the circumstances, and a bad rule is 
one which is inappropriate. A 'no rule' situation is one for which no procedures are 
available. 

A 10-way classification of rule-related behaviour 
O n  the basis of these four distinctions, it is possible to describe the varieties of 
rulc-related behaviour in the form of a flow diagram. Figure 1 shows the 10 forms 
of rule-related behaviour which are possible given the four distinctions outlined 
above. Looking at the left-hand side of the diagram, the first two are concerned 
with situations where there are no  rules and where the individual must improvise in 
order to perform a task. In this situation, if the improvisation works out it is said 
to be correct. Alternatively, if the improvisation does not work out, the behaviour 
is defined as a mistake. In the case of the former, the behaviour is correct in terms 
of hazard appraisal and psychologically rewarding in terms of achieving personal 
goals. 

Where a rule or procedure is available, the right-hand path is followed. The  first 
question concerns the appropriateness of the rule for the situation. Having 



O~p’n i~a t ioncaoln trols und sufety 295 
determined whether the rule is appropriatc for the situation, the next decision point 
concerns whether compliance with or deviation from the rule occurs. Whether the 
ensuing bchaviour is classified as correct in terms of hazard appraisal is a function 
o f  both the appropriateness of the rule and whcther or  not i t  is followed. Whcre the 
rulc is inappropriate, compliance is assumed t o  be incorrect in terms of hazard 
appraisal and deviations are held to be correct. O n  the other hand, when a rule is 
appropriate for the situation, then compliance with the rule is correct and deviance 
incorrect. Finally, the question of personal goals is addressed. While for most 
individuals complying with an appropriate rule and getting the job done safely may 
accord with their need for non-threatening situations, for some, whose personal 
goals might bc thrill and excitement, this coursc of bchaviour would not bc 
psychologically rewarding. Thus, achieving pcrsonal goals is not necessarily 
associated with thc ‘correct’ form o f  behaviour o r  the behaviour favoured by the 
organization, 

liach o f  the 10 forms o f  rule-related behaviour highlighted in Fig. 1 is discussed 
in morc detail below. 

The 10 types of rule-related behaviour 
Those categories of rule-related behaviour that achieve the goals of both thc 
organization and thc individual will be considered first as thc aim of any 
organization should be to encourage these forms of bchaviour. Correct compliance 
(type 10) occurs when bchaviour is both correct (i.c. the actions were based upon 
an adequate hazard appraisal) and psychologically rcwarding (i.c. the actions 
fulfilled personal goals). In this case, performance conforms t o  appropriate safety 
rulcs (e.g. a train driver bringing the train to a stop at a rcd signal). Correct 
violations (typc 4) are correct and psychologically rewarding behaviour achieved by 
deliberately deviating from inappropriate rules o r  procedures (e.g. a surgeon who 
chooses not t o  put on  a mask for an operation wherc research evidence suggests 
there is minimal risk of cross-infection). Correct improvisations (type 2) involve a 
correct and psychologically rewarding course of action taken in the absence o f  
appropriatc procedures. 

The nest three categories o f  Ixhaviour to  be considered, misvcntions, 
rnispliances and mistakes, occur when neither the goals of thc organization nor 
thc individual are achieved. Misventions (type 7, a blcnd of ‘mistake’ and 
‘circumvcntion’) are behaviours that arc neither correct nor psychologically 
rcwarding and that involved a deviation from appropriate safety rules (c.g. a 
wclder using oxyacetylene welding equipment next to  a furnacc with an incrcased 
risk of cxplosion). Mispliances (type 5, a blend of ‘mistake’ and ‘compliance’) are 
bchaviours that are neither correct nor psychologically rewarding and that 
involve mistaken compliance with inappropriate or  inaccurdtc operating rules 
(c.g. a doctor who prescribes analgesics strictly according to the protocol, 
causing some patients unneccssary suffering, when in fact some flcxibility in 
dosage is permissible). Mistakes (type 1) occur when an unsuccessful outcome 
results from an incorrect plan o f  action carried out in the  absence of suitable 



296 /umes Reason et al. 
procedures. It should also be noted that Fig. 1 deliberately blurs the sharp 
distinctions hitherto maintained between errors and violations (Reason et ui., 
1994). This modification of our earlier theorizing acknowledges in part the 
validity of Dougherty’s (1 995) criticisms of the error-violation distinction. 
Although i t  is meaningful to make a distinction between errors and violations in 
terms of intentionality, there are some circumstances in which the individual 
intends to violate a rule, but does so on the basis of erroneous judgments of the 
likely consequences. Thus, while misventions, mispliances and mistakes all 
involve errors of judgment, the first of these, misvention, also involves 
intentional violation of the rules. Therefore it is clearly not possible to treat 
mistakes and violations as mutually exclusive. 

The four remaining types of behaviour occur when the goals of the 
organization and the individual are at odds. These are the incorrect but p!ycho- 
logicakj reuwding violution (type 8)  of good rules (i.e. routine and optimizing 
violations); the correct but ps_ychologicul~unrewarding compliance (type 9) with good 
rules; the correct but psycholoRical~yu nrewarding viobtion (type 3) of bad rules; and the 
incorrect but psychologiculb rewurdinx compliance (type 6) with bad rules. In the first 
case (type S), which we refer to previously in the discussion as routine or  
optimizing violations, personal goals are successfully achieved despite faulty 
hazard assessments. The individual succeeds in saving time or  reducing boredom 
by deliberately ignoring a rule designed to maximize safety (e.g. a machine 
operator wiring open a safety device such as the ‘dead man’s handle’, rather than 
holding it down for long periods of time). lncorrect but psychologically 
rewarding violations are the breed stock from which occasional misventions 
emerge. Though often inconsequential in themselves, they create the conditions 
that promote dangerous misventions, particularly overconfidence in personal 
skills and an underestimation of the hazards. 

Correct but psychologically unrewarding compliances (type 9) are unlikely to be 
long lived because one of the primary motives of individuals is to save time and 
minimize effort (Battman & Klumb, 1994; Schonpflug, 1986). An example o f  this 
sort o f  compliance might be when a steel erector wears an uncomfortable hard hat 
in hot weather. In cases such as this, where following the rules leads t o  boredom, 
requires greater effort, or  leads to psychological dissatisfaction, violating may 
become too tempting a prospect. 

The correct but psychologically unrewarding violations (type 3) of inappropriate 
rules occur when an individual recognizes that the accepted procedure is not 
appropriate for the current situation, and s o  elects not to follow it, but feels 
uncomfortable violating a company rulc. This person prefers the security of 
compliance and may become anxious when he or  she finds that a violation is 
necessary (e.g. an operator in the chemical industry who feels uncomfortable starting 
a centrifugal pump in the way informally approved o f  by his colleagues which, 
although successful, neverthcless deviates from the method stated in the procedure). 

Finally, incorrect but psychologically rewarding compliance (type 6) arises when 
the individual chooses the easy option and avoids stress by deciding to comply with 
a rule in spite o f  judging it to be inappropriate in the current situation (c.g. when 
it is ‘more than my job’s worth’ not to  comply). 



Oqanixational controls und safe9 297 

Factors influencing rule-related behaviours 
Figure 1 indicates that the fivc main factors shaping the occurrence of these ten 
kinds of rule-related behaviour are the availability of a procedure, the appropriate- 
ness of the procedure, whether o r  not it was followed, the correctncss of the 
chosen course of action and the outcome of the action in terms of thc achicvernent 
of personal goals. Each of these factors will be considered below. 

1. Wus u procedure available? The problem of requisite vuriety 

As detailed earlier, the generally additive way in which safety rules are accumulated 
and the associatcd conflicts that arise between their enforcement and getting the 
job done affect the utility of thc rules. In addition, there is the basic control 
problem of rcquisitc variety noted by Ashby (1956). This relates to the fact that in 
virtually all productive activities carried out in potentially hazardous circumstances, 
the variety of possible unsafe behaviours is very much grcater than that of the 
required productive behaviours. While it is feasible, though not necessarily 
desirable, to devise rules to cover all aspects of production, it is not feasible to  
cover all aspects of safe production. The variety of rules developed to govern safe 
behaviour will always be less than the possible variety of unsafe situations. I t  is 
impossible to  anticipate all combinations of dangers and their related accident 
scenarios. Wholly safe behaviour can never be controlled entirely by prescriptive 
controls. There will always be situations that are either not covered by the rules o r  
in which thc rules are locally inapplicable. In short, there will always be ‘bad rule’ 
situations and ‘no rule’ situations. 

This docs not imply that organizations should give up the attempt to  formulate 
safety rules. No t  only are such rules important for guiding safe behaviour in 
relation to  identified and understood hazards, they also constitute an important 
record o f  an organization’s lcarning about its opcrational dangers. Howevcr, thc 
rcyuisite variety problcm mcans that this compendium of safe opcrating procedures 
will nevcr be wholly comprehensive nor universally applicable. 

rhrlier, four kinds of organizational control were identified: administrative 
controls, technical controls, social controls and self-controls. It is now clear that 
administrative process controls are both a flawed and a restricted means of 
rcgulating safe behaviour-though, for many organizations, thcy rcmain thc 
instrument of choice. In order to achieve improvcd regulation of safe behaviour, it 
is necessary to consider the possibilities offcred by other kinds of organizational 
control. Such considerations are especially important when it comcs to identifying 
and controlling the factors that dctermine the correctness and success o f  
performance. 

2. Wu.c the procedure uppropriute for the situution? 
It is not uncommon for organizations to develop and formalize procedures with 
littlc considcration for thc practicalities o f  working with thcm in evcryday 



298 James Reason et al. 
situations. Organizations are often reluctant to introduce alternative methods o f  
control becausc they find the formal nature of rules reassuring-they allow the 
responsibility for safety to be delegated to  the people who d o  the job. Summarizing 
a number of studies examining managers’ and workers’ perceptions of their 
responsibilities in relation to safety, Glendon (1 987) notes that managers and 
supervisors feel that they are responsible for safety, while workers are responsible 
for accidcnt prevention. So, for example, while it is the rcsponsibility o f  managers 
to  provide rules and safety equipment, the role of the workers in accident 
prevention is to follow the rules and wear the safety equipment. Procedures may 
also be a popular form o f  organizational control becausc they can be written and 
issued and therefore closure seems possible, but with other forms of organizational 
control, e.g.  disciplinary systems, training, supervision, the process is ongoing. In 
summary, organizations like rules. 

A further problem leading to inappropriate procedures is that they are often 
written for the ideal situation, yet work situations are rarely ideal. ‘Time pressures, 
equipment failures o r  unavailability of equipment, poor planning, etc. mean that 
sometimes following the rulc becomes problematic or  simply impossible. When 
rules are inappropriate, alternative courscs of action tend to be used to  achieve the 
same ends. The employee in this situation needs to be aware of the organizational 
goals implicit in the rules, and to choose a course of action that meets these 
objectives. Thc skills and initiative required to solve problems is very different from 
the qualities required to follow the procedures methodically, and therefore an 
over-reliance on rules and procedures can cause problems for organizations whcn 
inappropriate rules surface or  unusual situations arise. As Perrow (1 967) has 
suggested, certain activities readily lend themselves t o  being proceduralized, while 
others d o  not. Tasks which are routine, repetitive and easy to perform lend 
themselves to rules, while tasks that are non-routine, poorly structured and 
unpredictable d o  not lend themselves to proceduralization as there are too many 
exceptional cases. 

3. Wus ~ k puro cpclurt. follonwd? 
If all rules were good and if what the organization rcquircd was blind obedience to  
the rules, compliance should be almost always guaranteed given strict discipline, 
supervision and training. Matters are rarely that simple. First, employees must know 
all of the rules and procedures o r  at least know of their cxistence so that they can 
refer t o  them when necessary. Where large numbers of rules have accumulated this 
may require initial training, refresher training, testing and retesting. The rules must 
be understood by all and therefore writing them requires careful consideration of 
the cnd-users. Thought must also be given t o  the way in which the information is 
t o  be presented, e.g. pictorially or  in the form o f  a checklist. 

Sccond, therc will always be a few individuals who enjoy doing the wrong thing 
or  taking risks and therefore givcn a set of perfect rulcs, compliance is not assured. 
In a laboratory experiment Zeitlin (1 994) explorcd the distinction betwecn faulty 
communication and risky decisions in the failure to follow safety instructions. He 
concludes that ‘if a worker places high value o n  his or  her time, convenicnce, 



Otpnixational controls and s a j t y  299 

self-imagc, status among peers, and other factors and if he or  she estimates thc 
probability of being injured by disregarding an instruction as sufficiently low, then 
it is likely that the instruction will be ignorcd despite its clarity of presentation’ 
(p. 179). Thus even good rules may bc violated, and not only by risk takers and 
sensation seekers. 

4 .  Was peforntunce correct? 
Whereas the factors affecting the effectiveness and scope of prescriptive rulcs are 
primarily systemic in origin, those relating to  correct and incorrect performance 
may also he influenced by the belicfs, attitudes and abilities of the individual and 
the work-group. 

Several factors are likely to promotc correct performance. ’Thcse include accurate 
hazard perception, appropriate task training and the ability to lcarn from experi- 
cncc. At the group levcl, many factors, including leadcrship, work overload, 
role conflict and pcrson-cnvironment fit, appropriate supervisory example and 
guidance, adequate safety briefings, planning for non-routine contingencies, effec- 
tive resource management, the sharing of an appropriate situational awareness, 
open and unambiguous communications and coordinated teamwork, play a role in 
achieving correct and safe outcomcs (see Harrell, 1990; Helmreich, Butler, Taggart 
C(c Wilhem, 1994; Sherry, 1991). 

Rules that combine safety with an appropriate economy of productive effort, a 
justified faith in the system on  the part of individuals, high morale and a personal 
satisfaction in performing tasks ‘the right way’ are likely to promote correct 
compliance. Correct violations, on  the other hand, will demand many of  the 
features identified by Westrum (1993) as characterizing generative organizations. In 
such contexts individuals arc trained and empowered to  respond to  local con- 
ditions, contexts, having what Westrum calls a ‘licence to think’. The system is open 
to ncw ideas, with information flowing freely and openly. Errors and incidents are 
widely rcported, analysed and acted upon. Responsibility is shared, as the system 
frecly admits and profits from its mistakes. The system rates substance higher than 
form, and can reconfigure itself to cope with new situations. This lcads to  a 
‘reform’ rather than a ‘repair’ culture. The key attribute of such organizations is 
requisite imagination. According to Westrum (1993), an organization with such 
imagination is ‘able to make use of information, observations or  ideas wherever 
they exist within thc system, without regard for thc location of the person o r  group 
having such information, observations or  ideas’ (p. 402). In large part, both correct 
violations and correct improvisations cmcrgc from an enabling organizational 
culture. As Wcstrum (1993) elegantly expressed it: ‘Culture is to an organisation 
what personality is t o  an individual, and every organisation dcvelops a charactcristic 
way of doing things’ (p. 401). 

Just as there are many common factors shaping correct performance, so there are 
several factors common to  the production of incorrect performance in the shape of 
misventions, mispliances and mistakes. The relative effects of various error 
producing factors have been mapped most precisely by Williams (1988), and may be 
reduced to seven broad categories: high workload, inadequate knowledge, ability o r  



300 James Reason et  al. 
experience, poor interface design, inadequate supervision or  instruction, stressful 
environment, mental state (fatigue, preoccupation, distraction, anxiety, etc.) and 
change. Departures from routine and changes in the circumstances in which actions 
are normally performed constitute a major factor in the making of absent-minded 
slips of action (Reason, 1990). 

Misventions arc the occasional by-product of what are usually psychologically 
rewarding hut incorrect violations of sensible safety rules. As indicated earlier, the 
mere act o f  violating good rules increases the probability of subsequent errors by 
taking people into regions where the physical characteristics of the task are often 
less well understood, and it is often these consequential errors rather than the 
violation itself that result in bad outcomes. 

Several recent studies have examined the personal and situational factors 
promoting violations, and summaries of this work can be found elsewhere (Free, 
1994; Reason e t  a/., 1994). There is also a large literature examining individual 
differences in accident liability which is certainly relevant (see Hansen, 1988, 1989 
for a review), but beyond the scope of the current discussion (which is concerned 
with an organizational rather than an individual level of explanation). Whereas error 
producing conditions adversely affect information processing, violation promoting 
factors exert their main influence on  attitudes, beliefs and group norms (Parker, 
Manstead, Stradling, Reason & Aaxter, 1992). Tendencies to violate are also 
markedly affected by age and gender: the young violate more than older people, and 
males of all ages violate more than females (Reason, Manstead, Stradling, Baxter eCr 
Campbell, 1990). N o  such patterns are found for error tendencies. In  addition, 
many operators see bending the rules as the hallmark of skill and experience (Free, 
1994). The same clearly does not apply to  errors. 

Mispliances are likely to  be associated with the personal characteristics o f  rigid 
compliance (‘rules must be obeyed at all times’), mature age and female gender, 
inexperience, low morale and fear of sanctions. Other factors are group norms that 
stress unthinking obedience and not ‘rocking the boat‘, and an authoritarian system 
that is intolerant of non-compliance under any circumstances. 

Finally, improvisations in the absence of applicable rules will be prey to all the 
many error producing factors associated with knowledge-based processing (Reason, 
1990). Since trial-and-error learning is one of the principal ways of coping with 
novel situations, i t  is to be expected that a large number of mistakes will occur 
under these conditions. Whether o r  not these improvisations result in a safe 
outcome is often a matter of good luck as well as sound judgment (Haynes, 
1992). 

5. Was the behaviour p!ychological!y rewardiq? 

What is deemed psychologically rewarding txhaviour for one individual may not be 
regarded as so by another. For some employees achieving maximum pay for 
minimum effort may be the ultimate goal of work. For others work is more of a 
social event and the norms of the group may be a strong influencing factor. For yet 
others, security and safety may be perceived as the reward for working methodically 
and blindly following the rules. Given the variety of factors that motivate 



Orgunixational controls and sajety 30 1 

individuals at work, it is likely that all the forms of rule-related behaviour will result 
in the achievement of personal goals for some individuals. The  organization can 
affect individual motivations by various means, thus encouraging those behaviours, 
e.g. correct compliance and correct violations, that assure the achievemcnt of the 
organizational objectives. The organization might foster group norms that accord 
with organizational goals. An organization can also influence individual motivations 
by rewarding desired behaviour. Providing a stimulating work environment that 
meets individual needs for interest and excitement at work may also prevent 
potcntially dangerous behaviours, such as incorrect but psychologically rewarding 
violations. In general, thereforc, organizations should strive to maximize the 
concordance of individual and organizational goals. 

Summary and remedial implications 
A number of  problems associated with the use of safety rules have been idcntified, 
including the additive way in which they accumulate leading to a range o f  
perrnissiblc actions that are often less than that neccssary to get the job done. 
Difficulty can also arise when rules are not enforced because they conflict with local 
production goals. It has been shown that prescriptive process controls will always 
lack the requisite variety neccssary to guarantee safe behaviour, even if the 
workforce were scrupulously compliant. Moreover, safcty rules and procedures can 
never be wholly comprehensive nor universally appropriate. Thcre will always be 
situations in which no rules are available o r  in which variations in thc local 
circumstances negate thc applicability of the available rules. 

In terms o f  remediation, the above analyses suggcst that the burden o f  directing 
safe hehaviour must be distributcd morc evenly over the available control 
mechanisms. ‘The way in which this might be achieved can be illustrated by a 
reconsideration o f  the issue o f  administrative controls. The distinction between 
process and output controls suggested by Johnson & Gill (1993) does not tell the 
whole story. These two types of control actually characterize the extremes of a 
continuum, with process control relying wholly upon direct guidance from 
centralized management (via rules and procedures), and output control from which 
thesc detailcd directives are effectively absent, at least at the local level. Output 
control-the continuous adjustment of outputs to match the system’s 
goals-depends primarily on two other modes of organizational control: social (or 
group) controls and sclf- (or individual) controls. It is within these areas that thc 
main remedial implications of the present analysis lie. 

The immcnse variety of potentially hazardous situations requircs that much o f  
the tine control of safe behaviour is delivered at thc level of the individual work- 
group. This doctrinc was applied successfully in a military context through the 
Gcrman systcm of Az$rqpysten/,  which allowed, indeed relied on, low-lcvel 
commanders to fulfil organizational goals, with o r  without specific orders. 
Translatcd from military to industrial safety terms, this means selecting and training 
supervisors to provide on-the-spot action control when safcty proccdures are either 
not applicable or  not availablc. Supervisors need to bc ‘sitewise’ both t o  the local 



302 jumes Reason et al. 
production demands and to  the range of obvious and less obvious hazards. Equally 
important is a personal authority derived both from the respect of the workforce 
and the support of management. The latter, in turn, demands that safety ranks high 
in the list of corporate goals. Top-level commitment to safety is the sine qua non of 
effective behavioural control. 

The adoption of this approach would be beneficial in bringing the goals of the 
supervisor into line with those of the organization, thus reducing the occurrence 
of behaviours in which the individual chooses a course of action that is psycho- 
logically rewarding in terms of his or  her own point o f  view, but does not 
accord with organizational objectives (e.g. types 3 and 9). It would be nai’ve to 
think that supervisors arc any less prone to deviate from rules than other 
workers. In  fact, given that production pressures may be most salient to this 
group, the tcmptation to violate safety rulcs in order t o  save time and effort may 
be evcn greater. 

Not  all hazardous activities are carried out in supervised groups. When 
individuals are relatively isolated, the onus shifts from social to self-controls. 
Crucial among these are techniques designed to enhance hazard awareness and 
risk perception. These are measures that seek to promote correct rather than 
merely psychologically rewarding behaviour. A number of hazard evaluation 
programmes are being developed o r  are already in place (see Glendon & 
McKenna, 1995). The importance of such programmes should be strongly 
endorsed, and their wider application encouraged. Whereas an understanding 
of the limitations of administrative process controls is a necessary step forward 
at the organizational level, improved hazard evaluation holds the key to 
safer-more ‘correct’-performance at the level of self-control. In  addition, 
technical controls may be used to eliminate the opportunity for workers to  
behave in ways which may be unsafe. 

However, as Wagenaar (1 992) has pointed out, risk appraisal training is of little 
value once the incorrect actions have become habitual. When this happens, people 
are not taking risks deliberately, they are running them in a largely automatic and 
thoughtless fashion. To be effective, such training must occur in the initial phase of 
employment and then be consolidated and extended by on-the-spot supervisory 
guidance. By the same token, it is mainly through local supervisory interventions 
that long-established patterns of incorrect behaviour can be modified. 

The idcas presented in this paper arc the result of a mixture of theory and 
field study observations. The usefulness of the suggested typology is currently 
being tested in a study of thc use of procedures in the health service, a context 
in which a population o f  highly trained professionals carry out routine jobs, as 
well as deal with the unexpected, in a demanding work environment. This study 
will provide the opportunity to assess the types of administrative controls 
employed, as well as the situations in which social, self- and technical controls 
are used to greater effect. 

The task o f  the human factors specialist is not to reduce violations of safe 
operating procedures willy nilly. Rather, it is to aid organizations to develop a 
customized portfolio of controls that is best suited to guiding safe and productive 
behaviour in their particular sphere of operations. 



OrgSaniTationaI coritrols and st!fity 303 
References 

Ashhy. W. K. (1956). :ln In/roduc/ion to CyLernrtics. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Ih t tmann.  W. & Klumh,  P. (1903). Bchavioural economics and compliance with safety regulations. 

.Sh /Pp .Sciriicr, 16, 3 5-46. 
(;hapman, J .  (19x2). After the Inspector's visit. I h .S hfify /~(hr~.rr i i f~ / /Mi r~acr,c h, 5. 
(:ushing, s. (1994). /.blu/ k'/ords: C.onirtiuniculioir (.ksbes und .,lircru/i L r d t r s .  Chicago: llniversity o f  

Chicago Press. 
I>oughcrty, E, M. Jr .  (1995). A note on H R A  at I'SAhl-11.. lWih/~i/i//y:q inrrri!!q .!jts/c~/ . h / i , / Y ,  46, 

29 1-294. 
l;rec, R. (1094). T h c  role o f  priiccdural violations in railway accidents. Llnpuhlishcd I'hD thesis. 

Llnivcrsity o f  Manchcster. 
Glcndon, A.  I .  (19x7). Risk cognition. In W'. '1'. Singlcton & J, I lovdcn (I-Cds), Hi.rks ond /ki .r ioi i .r .  

Chichestcr: Wilcy. 
(;lendon, A .  I .  & Mctictina, li.  I:. (1995). / I w t w i i  .S+/Y ( i d  Ni.rk M a n q r m r r t / .  I.oncli)n: (;hapman ecC 

I lall. 
l ianscn,  (:. P. (1 OXX) .  Personality characteristics of the  accident involved employcc. . /o iwi /d  u/'Bu.rit/p.r.r 

atid /'.y JVho/c<y, 2, 3 4 0- 3 0 5. 
I lanscn, (:. 1'. (1WI) .  A cau~alm otlcl o f  the relationship among accidents, Iiodata, personality a n d  

cognitive factors. jo i i r i id  v/'..Ip/)/ipd I'sycldq<,: 74. 81-00. 
tlarrcll, W. A. ( I O O O ) .  I'crccivcd risk of  occupational injury: ( h i t r o l  over pace of work and hluc collar 

versus white collar work. /'rri~cpluo/ und ibfolor .(%i//.r7. 0, 1351-1 350. 
I laynes, A.  (:. (1992). IJtiitrcl 232: Coping with the loss o f  all flight controls. I;/iqht l h k , 3, 5-21. 
t Iclmreich, R. I.., Butler, R. A , ,  'I'aggart, W. R. & Wilhcm, J. A. (1004). Rr/iattiurd Mdw:r iir , , l d r i / l . r  

ond li/cidri//.r: /t+rrim /,i.rl, 'l'cchnical Kcport 94-3. NASA/l!nivcrsity o f  Tcxas FAA Aerospace Crew 
Research I'rojcct. Austin, T X :  Ilniversity o f  'I'cxas. 

I Iopwood. A. (;. (1974). .,lc.coui/tii!q .\)~.r/mn/.r ~ i i dM oii[!qriiid Holiatfioir,Nr. Hampshirc, l l K :  Saxon t louse. 
I Iorning, 1.. A. & Smith. 1'. W. (1091). Infection control violations. /t//i,ction <.bn/ro/ c~rnd //o.pi/[i/ 

/:pidottiiotogy. 12, 672-67 5. 
J o h n s o n .  1'. Cuc ( ; i l l ,  J .  (1093). iCl,r~ia,qycwr~nC/ ,iiu/rol mid Or,y i / i . r~ / t io t /dj' dw/h/r. I .ondon: I'aul (:hapman. 
Katz, I). Cuc t i a h n ,  K. I.. (197X). 7 %.S~or id  /'.yhfJ//IQ q/ Or,ymi~~iIl l ion.Nr. ew York: Wilcy. 
hlcatlows, hl. (1994). Psychological correlatcs o f  road crash types. llnpublishcd I'hll thcsis. Ilnivcrsity 

o f  hlatichcstrr. 
h r k c r ,  11.. Manstcad, A. S. R., Stradling, S. C;,, Rcason, J. T. eCC Ihs tc r ,  J. S. (1002). Intention t o  

commit  driving violaticms: An application o f  the theory of  plannctl bch:iviour. ./oitraol f ! / . , lp/) l id 
/'.r~l'hlJ/(JQl, 77, ')4.-101. 

Parker, I)., Rcason, J., hlanstcad, A .  Cuc Straclling, S. (1WS). Ilriving errors, driving vio1;itiotis a n d  
accident involvement. /:q:onnwia,38, 1036-1 048. 

I'crrc )w,  (1. ( 1067). A fra m ew()  rk fc )r t hc c i  )mpara t i  vc analysis o f  ( )rga t i  i  s:i t i (  ) tis . . . l t tmic~iu. So(~io/aqicx/ 
Hrtticw, 32. 104-2OX. 

Rcason, J. (1990). I I N ~ ~1I:nI Ivr . New \'ark: (:ambridge University I'rcss. 
Reason, J. (1905). A systcnis approach to  c)rganizational error. /~qoi iot t / ic . r ,38, 1708-1 721. 
Rc:ison, J., Manstead, I\. Str:idling, S., Ihxtcr ,  J. LY: (:amphell, K. (1000). Ilrrors and violations on th r  

r o d s :  /\ rcal distinction? I:qoiiw/icr, 33, I3 IS- 1332. 
Rc:lson, J ., Parker, D. & 1;rcc. K. (1004). Rciidiq /h / tit/r.r: I h  I i/rir/ir,r, Ori,qii/.r ( i d i \l[/i/,qytt/(,t//o / ' . S ~ r / ; ~ / y  

I X / t i o i / . r .  I.cidcn: Kijks 1 Inivcrsitcit I.eiclcn. 
Schiinpflug, W. (1086). Ikhavior  cconoinics a s  an approach to stress thcory. In hi. Applcy Clr R. 

Truiiil>ull (Ilds), l?yi/,zit/ic.r q/ .S/rrss, pp. XI-OX.  Ncw York: I'lenitm I'rcss. 
Sherry, 1'. (1 00 I ) .  I'crson-cnviroilnient tit and accidcnt prediction. jo / i r i / , i /  o/' /hrii/(,.r.r ,i//d I!rjv/io/oqy. 5.  

4 1 1-446. 
Wagcnaar, W. A. (1092). Risk-taking and accident causation. In J .  I;. Yatcs ( I ~ i l , ) .  /<i.d-Gkiiiql Mi [ i / io i i r .  

(:hichcstcr: Wilcy. 
Wcstruni, B. (1993). Cultures with reqitisitc imagination. In J. Wise, V. I Iopkin Cuc 1'. Stagcr (lids), 

I k-i/icdoii dtid I XAilirm q /  C.ntt/p/cx .\~~.rlmm.r: Il/m/m/ F h o r s  1.r.ruc.r. N A T (  ) AS1 Series. Ikrlin: 
Springcr-Vcrlag. 



304 James Reason et al. 
Williams, J .  C. (1988). A data-based method for assessing and reducing human error t o  improve 

operational performance. In W. Hagen (Ed.), IEEE Fourth Conference on Iluman Factors and Power 
Pfants. New York: Institute o f  Electrical and Electronic Engineers. 

Zeitlin, R. (1 994). Failure to follow safety instructions: Faulty communication or risky decisions? 
lluman Factors, 36, 172-181. 

Received 7 Februaly 1996; revired version received 29 May 1997 



Panorama da Segurança Operacional na
Operação Offshore

José L. Roque
jlroque@petrobras.com.br

Rio de Janeiro, 16/4/13
1



Transporte Aéreo de 
Passageiros - 2012

Bases de Operação 
Aérea do E&P

2



Sondas de Perfuração e Unidades de Produção (Mar/13)

Vitória/ES

Bacia do Espírito Santo

Bacia de Cam3 pos



Sondas de Perfuração e Unidades de Produção (Mar/13)

Campos

Farol de São Tomé

Macaé

Bacia de Campos

Cabo Frio

4



Sondas de Perfuração e Unidades de Produção (Mar/13)

Jacarépaguá Cabo Frio

Itanhaém

Bacia de Santos

5



Curva de Produção - Brasil: Óleo e LGN

PNG  2013-2017 6



Taxa de Acidentes em Operações com Helicópteros
(Acid. / 100K hrs de vôo)

12

10

9

7

5

4

2

0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Petrobras IHST:  USA IHST:  Worldwide OGP:  Offshore

7



Operações com Helicópteros

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Petrobras: E&P Brasil: CENIPA OGP: Offshore
8

Nº de Acidentes



Volúme de Tráfego e Acidentes
Petrobras e Noruega

8
120.000

7

6 100.000

5 80.000

4
60.000

3
40.000

2

1 20.000

0 0

Acidente Acidente Hrs de Vôo Hrs de Vôo

9

Acidentes

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Horas de Vôo



Noruega
Helicópteros - Offshore

Mudança Estimada dos Níveis de Riscos de Acidentes

Fontes: SINTEF REPORT (Helicopter Safety Study – 3),  



Noruega
Helicópteros - Offshore

Redução dos Riscos:  como conseguir isso ?

Fontes: SINTEF REPORT (Helicopter Safety Study – 3),  



Programa de Excelência Operacional em Transporte Aéreo

12



Panorama da Segurança Operacional na
Operação Offshore

José L. Roque
jlroque@petrobras.com.br

Rio de Janeiro, 16/4/13
13



Omega 40 (2012) 584–593
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Omega
n Corr
E-m

irina.gri
gilbert.l

0305-04
doi:10.1
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/omega
Passenger and pilot risk minimization in offshore helicopter transportation
Fubin Qian a,n, Irina Gribkovskaia a, Gilbert Laporte b, Øyvind Halskau sr. a

a Molde University College, Postboks 2110, N-6402 Molde, Norway
b Canada Research Chair in Distribution Management, HEC Montréal, 3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Canada H3T 2A7
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 December 2010
Accepted 6 November 2011
 solving the helicopter routing problem with a risk objective expressed in terms of expected number of
This paper was processed by fatalities. A mathematical model is proposed and a tabu search heuristic is applied to this problem.
Associate Editor Yagiura.

Three routing policies are considered: a direct routing policy, a Hamiltonian routing policy, and a

Available online 22 November 2011

Keywords:
Helicopter transportation
Pickup and delivery routing problem
Risk minimization
Tabu search heuristic
esponding author. Tel.: þ47 97435197; fax:
ail addresses: qianfubin@hotmail.com (F. Qian
bkovskaia@himolde.no (I. Gribkovskaia),
aporte@cirrelt.ca (G. Laporte), oyvind.halskau

83/$ - see front matter & 2011 Elsevier Ltd. A
016/j.omega.2011.11.003
a b s t r a c t

In the offshore petroleum industry, employees are transported to and from the offshore installations by
helicopter, which represents a major risk. This paper analyzes how to improve transportation safety by

general routing policy. Extensive computational experiments are conducted on instances derived from
real data in order to assess and compare these policies under a travel time, a passenger risk and a
combined passenger and pilot risk objective. Several management insights can be derived from this
study. In particular, our results show that passenger transportation risk can be reduced by increasing
travel time at the expense of pilot risk. This can be achieved through a reduction of the average number
of passengers onboard by applying either a Hamiltonian or a general routing policy. Our methodology
can also be used to derive an equitable distribution of risk between passengers and pilots, considering
that pilots fly much more frequently than passengers.

& 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

Helicopter has been the main way of transporting personnel to
and from offshore installations for more than 60 years. Kaiser [18]
states that Humble Oil and Refining and Kerr-McGee began using
helicopters to transport workers to offshore facilities as early as
1948. Travel by helicopter is more comfortable and less harmful
in terms of travel sickness and tiredness as compared to travel by
ship. However, helicopter transportation is perceived by many
offshore workers to be an uncomfortable and risky part of their
work. They experience heaviness and weightlessness during take-
off and landing, heavy noise, strong vibrations, and even some-
times incidents or accidents. Vinnem et al. [32] claim that the
hazards associated with helicopter transportation of personnel
are among the main risks experienced by offshore employees.
Table 1 presents a comparison of average passenger fatality rate
per billion passenger-kilometers by transportation mode, in
which the offshore helicopter transport holds the highest risk
among all public transportation modes.

Helicopter accidents are frequently reported. For example, a fatal
accident took place on April 1, 2009 when a helicopter carrying
personnel from BP’s Miller platform crashed into the North Sea,
killing all 16 people onboard. European offshore helicopter data
þ47 71214100.
),

@himolde.no (Ø. Halskau sr.).

ll rights reserved.
indicate that there have been 23 fatal and major injury accidents in
the offshore oil industry from 1968 to 2000 [25]. A recent summary
report from the Helicopter Safety Study 3 (HSS-3), undertaken by
SINTEF Trondheim, shows that among 28 OGP1 offshore accidents
from 2000 to 2005, 22 occurred during the take-off or landing phase.

In helicopter transportation, a flight consists of a sequence of
connecting stages that starts from an onshore heliport, visits
some offshore installations to pick up or/and deliver some
passengers, and usually ends at the same heliport. Helicopter
routing can be viewed as a vehicle routing problem with pickups
and deliveries (VRPPD). In this problem the aim is to design a
set of minimum cost routes for several vehicles performing
pickups and deliveries at customer locations, subject to capacity
constraints and other side constraints [5,1].

Several studies on helicopter routing for passenger transporta-
tion have been published, with a focus on minimizing transporta-
tion cost in terms of travel distance or time [11,9,28–30]. Moreno
et al. [24] and Menezes et al. [22] seek to minimize the flight costs,
the number of flights, and the total number of offshore landings in
order to improve flight safety. The objective function in the
optimization model uses weights to balance these multiple goals.

Qian et al. [26] introduced a risk measure for passenger
transportation by helicopter and proposed a risk objective in
terms of the expected number of fatalities. They modeled the
problem as an integer linear program which was solved by CPLEX
1 The International Association of Oil & Gas Producers.



F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593 585
for small instances. The purpose of this paper is to derive insights
into passenger transportation safety by comparing the solutions
obtained from optimizing risk or cost objectives under different
helicopter routing policies. This study differs from traditional
operational research studies because of its focus on learning as
opposed to optimization [23] and on planning in a high risk
environment (see, e.g., [27]). Our focus is therefore on analysis,
as opposed to algorithmic design. Comparative analyses are
performed on 120 instances derived from real-life settings
through the application of a tabu search heuristic. We also carry
out experiments in relation to the equity aspect of risk distribu-
tion between passengers and pilots.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
some routing policies and perspectives on reducing transportation
risk are presented. A mathematical model to minimize the risk,
together with a summary of the tabu search heuristic, are provided
in Section 3. Computational results based on instances derived from
a real-life setting are presented in Section 4, followed by conclusions
in Section 5.

2. Passenger transport risk and routing policies

Risk is defined as the combination of the probability of an
event (the equivalent term ‘accident frequency’ is used in the
safety context) and its consequences (The International Organiza-
tion for Standardization/the International Electrotechnical Com-
mission Guide (ISO/IEC) 73). Using this definition, risk is often
defined as an expected consequence; see Erkut and Verter [8] and
Zografos and Androutsopoulos [33] who used this definition in
the context of hazardous materials transportation.
Table 1
A comparison of average passenger fatality rates per billion passenger kilometers
by transportation mode 1995–2004 (from UK Offshore Public Transport Helicopter
Safety Record (1977–2006)) [31].

Transportation mode 1995–2004 average

Air 0.01
Rail 0.4
Car 2.8
Offshore helicopter 6.3

Fig. 1. Five possible solutions for the helicopter rout
The risk for passenger transportation is defined as the
expected number of fatalities for persons, which include both
passengers and pilots. As in Qian et al. [26], risk is decomposed
into take-off and landing risk (TLrisk) and cruise risk (Crisk):

Risk¼ TLriskþCrisk ¼ PTL  f TL  pTLþPFH  f C  pC , ð1Þ

where PTL is the total number of person take-offs and landings, f TL

is the probability of an accident during a combined take-off and
landing operation, defined as the mean number of take-off and
landing accidents per million pairs of take-offs and landings, pTL is
the probability of a fatal outcome for an individual person
involved in a take-off and landing accident; PFH is the total
person flight hours, f C is the probability of an accident during
one cruise hour, defined from statistics as the mean number of
cruise accidents per million flight hours, pC is the probability of a
fatal outcome for an individual involved in a cruise accident. The
PTL measure is a summation of persons exposed to pairs of take-
offs and landings over all flight stages. The PFH measure is a
summation over all flight stages of the number of persons on
board, multiplied by the flight hours of each flight stage. Hokstad
et al. [17] define the risk of offshore passenger transport as the
product of accident frequency and the average consequence of an
accident without classifying the risk into take-off and landing risk
and cruise risk in helicopter transportation.

We implement and compare three routing policies: a direct
routing policy (D), a Hamiltonian routing policy (H), and a general
routing policy (G). Under the direct routing policy, each installa-
tion is served directly from the heliport so that the number of
routes is equal to the number of installations. The term ‘Hamilto-
nian’ refers to the fact that each installation is visited exactly once
for the combined pickup and delivery within a tour. In a general
solution, each installation is allowed to be visited twice if
necessary, once for delivery and once for pickup, and these visits
to an installation may take place in two different flights.

Fig. 1 illustrates how risk for passengers and for pilots varies in
five solutions under the three routing policies for a problem with
two installations 1 and 2 to be served from heliport 0 by a helicopter
with two pilots and transportation capacity for 19 passengers
onboard. Suppose it takes 1 h to travel between the heliport
and each installation, and 0.9 h between the two installations.
ing problem with two installations to be served.



586 F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593

Table 2
The impact of routing policy on risk and travel time.

Routing policy Solution Pax Risk Pilot Risk Total risk Travel Time

D (a) 33.22 12.08 45.30 4.0
H (b) 47.46 8.89 56.35 2.9

(c) 50.31 8.89 59.20 2.9
G (d) 41.76 11.74 53.50 3.8

(e) 56.00 11.74 67.74 3.8
The numbers shown in parentheses are the pickup demand pi and
the delivery demand di, respectively. The numbers in the square is
the number of onboard passengers at each flight stage. The accident
frequencies f TL and f C are determined according to historical data as
in Qian et al. [26]. The frequency f TL of take-off and landing accidents
is 0.65 per million pairs of take-offs and landings. The frequency f C

of cruise accidents is 0.86 per million flight hours. The probabilities
pTL and pC are assumed to be one.

The risk distribution between passengers and pilots is presented in
Table 2 for five solutions. ‘Pax’ is used to represent passengers. For
simplicity, in this table and everywhere in this paper, all reported risk
values are the actual values multiplied by 106. In solution (a) resulting
from the direct routing policy, the passenger PTL is 10þ6þ4þ2¼22
and the passenger PFH is 101.0þ61.0þ41.0þ21.0¼22.0.
Using formula (1) for passengers, we compute the passenger risk as
33.22. The pilot PTL is 2þ2þ2þ2¼8 and the pilot PFH is
21.0þ21.0þ21.0þ21.0¼8.0, which results in pilot risk of
12.08. Solution (a) has a total risk of 45.30 and a travel time of 4.0 h.
The Hamiltonian solutions (b) and (c) have the same risk of 8.89 for
pilots, and the same travel time of 2.9 h. In these solutions the routes
are constructed in reverse directions; the difference in total risk show
that trip direction may affect the passenger risk. The risk for
passengers and the total risk are smaller in the general solution (d),
compared with the Hamiltonian solutions. The Hamiltonian solutions
have the lowest travel time, while the passenger risk and total risk
are relatively high in comparison with the solutions (a) and (d).
Solution (e) is dominated by solution (d).

Three players are involved in offshore helicopter transporta-
tion: the helicopter operator, the pilots, and the passengers. From
an operating cost point of view, the operator will choose the
Hamiltonian solution (b) or (c) because of low costs resulting
from the minimum travel time; pilots will also prefer these
solutions since the lowest risk for themselves. With solution (a),
the risk for passengers and the total risk are minimized. The
decision maker will choose this solution if safety is prioritized.
However, it may not be realistic to serve each installation directly
when fleet size is insufficient. In such cases, it may only be
possible to choose between Hamiltonian and general solutions.

Proposition 1 presents an interesting property of a general
solution when only passenger PTL is minimized.

Proposition 1. If only passenger PTL is minimized in a general
routing strategy, there exists an optimal solution in which each route
starts pickup operations after finishing all delivery operations.

Proof. Assume installations 1, . . . ,n are served in a route and each
has a delivery demand di and a pickup demand pi. The helicopter
flyinPg the route starts its first flight stage from the heliport with
all n

i ¼ 1 di passengers onboard. Assume the helicopter follows a
sequence ðv1, . . . ,vnÞ of installations to perform all deliveries, in
which vi denotes the installation visited on the i-th position on a
delivery route ðv1, . . . ,vnÞ. The PTL from these deliveries will be

Xn Xn Xn

diþ diþ diþ    þdvn ¼ dv þ2d
1 v þ    þnd : ð2Þ

2 vn

i ¼ 1 i ¼ 1 i ¼ 1
i a v1 i a v1 ,v2
The sequence ðv1, . . . ,vnÞ with non-increasing dv minimizes (2) (see,
i

for example, Theorem 368 in [15]). Similarly, assume ui is the
installation visited on the i-th position on a pickup route
ðu1, . . . ,unÞ and the helicopter follows the sequence ðu1, . . . ,unÞ of
installations for the pickups. The PTL from these pickups is equal to

Xun

pu þðpu þp  þ
1 u Þþ   p

2 i ¼ npu þðn1Þp þ   þp
1 u 

1 u : ð3Þ
1 n

i ¼ u1

The sequence ðu1, . . . ,unÞ with non-decreasing pu minimizes (3).
i

Thus, there exists an optimal solution with respect to PTL visiting
the installations in the sequence ðv1, . . . ,vnÞ with non-increasing dvi

for delivery operations and afterwards visiting the installations in
the sequence ðu1, . . . ,unÞ with non-decreasing pu for the pickup

i

operations. &

If for a given route the sequence ðv1, . . . ,vnÞ with non-increas-
ing dv happens to be the same as the sequence ðu1, . . . ,unÞ with

i

non-decreasing pu for the passenger PTL minimization problem,
i

we obtain a Hamiltonian optimal solution by visiting each instal-
lation only once in this sequence. Proposition 1 provides a rule for
determining an optimal passenger PTL solution for a single flight,
but it does not apply to the passenger PFH minimization problem.
For example, assume two installations 1 and 2 are served from
heliport 0, installation 1 has one passenger to be delivered, and
installation 2 has two. Neither installation has a pickup demand.
The travel time between 0 and 1, 0 and 2, 1 and 2 are 0.2, 0.7 and
0.6 h, respectively. The solution with minimum PTL is (0, 2, 1, 0),
whereas the solution with minimum PFH is (0, 1, 2, 0).

Risk management problems arise in a number of transportation
settings beyond helicopter routing. Erkut and Verter [8] present an
overview and analysis of path selection for the transportation of
hazardous materials between origin and destination pairs under
several definitions of risk. They summarize the five risk models
suggested in the literature; these are expected consequence,
population exposure, incident probability, perceived risk, and con-
ditional risk. Hazardous materials distribution problems are also
defined as bi-objective vehicle routing problems in Zografos and
Androutsopoulos [33], in which the authors minimize transporta-
tion risk in terms of expected consequence and cost. Giannikos [12]
considers four objectives: the total operating cost, the total per-
ceived risk, the equitable risk distribution among population
centers, and the equitable risk distribution of disutility caused by
the operation of the treatment facilities, for locating treatment sites
and routing hazardous wastes.

Equity of risk distribution between passengers and pilots is an
important issue in this paper, given that pilots have to fly
helicopters significantly more frequently than offshore workers
as passengers. In our model, it is appropriate to handle equity
through weight adjustments in the objective function because both
passenger risk and pilot risk are measured on the same scale. For
further discussions on equity issues in more general settings, see
Mandell [20], Marsh and Schilling [21] and Eiselt and Laporte [7].
3. Solution methodology

This section presents the mathematical model we have devel-
oped, and the tabu search heuristic we have applied to solve the
helicopter routing problem.

3.1. Mathematical model

The mathematical formulation presented in this section is an
extension of the model proposed for helicopter routing problem
in Qian et al. [26]. The helicopter routing problem in Qian et al.
[26] is viewed as an application of Multi-Vehicle Hamiltonian



F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593 587
One-to-Many-to-One Pickup and Delivery Problem with Com-
bined Demands (1–M–1 9PD9 m), which is usually called VRPPD
(see [1] for a classification scheme and survey of pickup and
delivery problems). Indeed, each installation receives a delivery
originating at a common heliport and sends a pickup quantity to
the heliport, which makes it a case of this problem.

Gribkovskaia et al. [13] have introduced the concept of general
solution for the VRPPD which encompasses known solution
shapes such as Hamiltonian, double-path and lasso. In a general
solution, each customer can be visited once or twice. If a customer
is visited once, a pickup and a delivery are performed simulta-
neously. If a customer is visited twice, the two operations are
performed separately. Gribkovskaia et al. [13,14] show that a
general routing strategy may result in cost savings for the single
vehicle routing problems with pickups and deliveries. Hoff et al.
[16] have implemented a general routing strategy to the VRPPD
and have shown that such solutions outperform other solution
shapes in terms of cost.

The helicopter routing problem can be defined on a directed
graph G¼ ðV ,AÞ, where V ¼ f0, . . . ,ng is the node set, A¼ fði,jÞ :
i,jAV ,ia jg is the arc set, and T ¼ ðtijÞnþ1,nþ1 is a travel time
matrix defined on A. Node 0 corresponds to the depot (the
onshore heliport), and the remaining nodes correspond to custo-
mers (the offshore installations). The offshore installations are
served by a homogeneous fleet composed of m helicopters, each
having the same capacity Q, where m is a decision variable. Each
installation i has a number pi of workers to be picked up and
brought back to the onshore heliport, and a number di of workers
to be delivered to that installation from the onshore heliport. We
denote by g the number of pilots who fly the helicopter.

To obtain a general solution, the original graph is extended by
duplicating each node. We associate two nodes i and iþn to each
installation i. Node i has a delivery demand di and no pickup,
while iþn has no delivery but a pickup demand pi. If nodes i and
iþn are visited in succession in a route, the delivery and pickup
operations are effectively performed by one visit to installation i.
Otherwise, the two operations are performed separately by the
same vehicle or by two different vehicles [16]. We define the
exten8ded travel time matrix T ¼ ðt ijÞð2nþ1Þð2nþ1Þ, where

>>< tij if irn and jrn,
tin,j if iZnþ1 and jrn,

t ij ¼>>: ti,jn if irn and jZnþ1,
tin,jn if iZnþ1 and jZnþ1:

W(e also define the following variables:

1 if a helicopter travels directly from i to j ði,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n; ia jÞ,
xij ¼ 0 otherwise,

lij¼the number of passengers on a helicopter traveling from i
to j ði,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n; ia jÞ,

uij ¼ the pickup load on a helicopter from i to j ði,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n; ia jÞ,

vij ¼ the delivery load on a helicopter from i to j ði,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n; ia jÞ:

The mathem0atical model is then stated a1s follows:

@ X X
minimize A1 f TLp lijþ f CpC tijl ATL ij ð4aÞ

i,j ¼ 0,...,2n, i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,
i a j 7 n i a j 7 n

0 X 1
þA @ X

2 f TLpTL gxijþ f CpC gt A
ijxij ð4bÞ

i,j ¼ 0,...,2n i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,
i a j 7 n i a j 7 n

X
þA3 tijxij ð4cÞ

i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,
i a j 7 n
subject to

X2n X2n

mr x0i ¼ xi0 ¼mrm, ð5Þ
i ¼ 1 i ¼ 1

X2n

xij ¼ 1, j¼ 1, . . . ,2n, ð6Þ
i ¼ 0

X2n

xij ¼ 1, i¼ 1, . . . ,2n, ð7Þ
j ¼ 0

X2n X (
2n pi if i¼ nþ1, . . . ,2n,

uij uji ¼ ð8Þ
0 otherwise,

j ¼ 0 j ¼ 0

u0i ¼ 0, i¼ 1, . . . ,2n, ð9Þ

uijZpixij, i,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n, ia j ð10Þ

Xn X (
n di if i¼ 1, . . . ,n,

vji vij ¼ ð11Þ
0 otherwise,

j ¼ 0 j ¼ 0

vi0 ¼ 0, i¼ 1, . . . ,2n, ð12Þ

vijZdjxij, i,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n, ia j, ð13Þ

lij ¼ uijþvij, i,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n, ia j, ð14Þ

lijrQxij, i,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n, ia j, ð15Þ

xijAf0;1g,uij,vijZ0, i,j¼ 0, . . . ,2n, ia j: ð16Þ

In this formulation, the objective function consists of three
parts. The first two parts are the passenger risk (4a) and the pilot
risk (4b), respectPively. The passenger risk is a wPeighted sum of
passenger PTL¼ i,j ¼ 0,...,2n, lij and passenger PFPH¼ i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,tijlij. The

i a j 7 n i a j 7 n

pilot rPisk is a weighted sum of pilot PTL¼ i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,gxij and pilot
i a j 7 n

PFH¼ i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,gtijxij. Note that gxij is the number of pilots in a
i a j 7 n

helicopter traveling from iPto j. The third part (4c) is a weighted
total travel time equal to i,j ¼ 0,...,2n,tijxij as in the classical Vehicle

i a j 7 n

Routing Problem (VRP). The three non-negative parameters A1, A2

and A3 control the relative importance of the three components of
the objective function.

Constraints (5) ensure that the number of routes lies in
between a lower bound m and an upper bound m, where m is
the minimum number of routes required to meet all the pickup
and delivery demands and mrn. Constraints (6) and (7) mean
that at each node of the extended graph a single service (pickup or
delivery) is performed. Constraints (8) balance the outflow and
inflow of the pickup load for each node. These constraints also
eliminate subtours. Constraints (9) stipulate that each helicopter
has no initial pickup load onboard when leaving the depot.
Constraints (10) define the lower bounds for the pickup flow on
the arcs. Corresponding to constraints (8)–(10), constraints
(11)–(13) are used to control the delivery loads. Constraints (14)
state that the onboard load of a helicopter equals the pickup load
plus the delivery load; the load fluctuation will depend on the
sequences of the visits. Constraints (15) ensure that the capacity
constraint will not be violated along a route. Constraints (16)
impose binary and non-negativity restrictions on the variables.

In this formulation, a Hamiltonian solution can be obtained by
imposing the following constraints which force pickup and
delivery operations to be performed simultaneously:

xi,iþn ¼ 1, i¼ 1, . . . ,n: ð17Þ



588 F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593
It is straightforward to include in this model upper bounds on
the flying time and on the number of take-offs and landings of a
helicopter. We did not consider such constraints in our analysis
because they would have led to the introduction of additional
parameters. Recall that our aim is to study the trade-offs between
cost and risk under the same operating rules which should be
kept as simple as possible.

3.2. Unified tabu search algorithm

The model just described cannot be solved exactly for large
values of n. We therefore apply a heuristic for its solution. This
section presents a summary of the unified tabu search algorithm
(UTSA) adapted to the helicopter routing problem with an
objective made up of safety and cost components.

The UTSA was developed by Cordeau et al. [2] for three
variants of the VRP: the Periodic VRP, the Periodic Traveling
Salesman Problem and the Multi-Depot VRP. It was later applied
to the VRP with time windows, the Periodic VRP with time
windows and the Multi-Depot VRP with time windows [3], and
their extensions to problems with route duration constraints [4].
The UTSA was recently adapted to solve the single vehicle routing
problem with pickups and deliveries [13] and the single vehicle
pickup and delivery problem with capacitated customers [14].

Starting from an initial feasible or infeasible solution, the UTSA
works with a penalized objective function f ðsÞ ¼ cðsÞþaqðsÞ, where
c(s) is defined by (4a), (4a) and (4b), or (4c), q(s) is the total
capacity violation of solution s, and a is a positive parameter
which is updated at each iteration: initially set at 1, it is divided
by 1þd if the current solution is feasible or multiplied by 1þd is
the current solution is infeasible.

To each solution s is associated an attribute set BðsÞ ¼ fði,kÞ :
customer i is visited by vehicle k}. The neighborhood N(s) of
solution s is defined by all solutions that can be reached from s by
removing customer i from route k and inserting it into another
route k0. A transition from solution s to a new solution s0ANðsÞ is
called a move, which can also be interpreted by the removal
attribute (i,k) from the set B(s) and the inclusion of attribute ði,k0Þ
in the set Bðs0Þ, ðkak0Þ.

Continuous diversification is achieved by penalizing the attri-
butes most frequently added to the solution when evaluating a
move. Let MðsÞDNðsÞ be an admissible subset of neighbor solu-
tions which can be reached by a non-tabu move from s, or which
are feasible and meet the aspiration criterion. Let rik0 be the
frequency at which attribute ði,k0Þ has been present in the
solution. Any solution s0AMðsÞ such that f ðs0ÞZ f ðsÞ is penalized

pffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
by a term pðs0Þ ¼ g nmcðsÞrik0=l, where g is used to control the
intensity of diversification and l is the iteration counter. The
selection of the best solution s0AMðsÞ is based on the penalized
objective f ðs0Þþpðs0Þ.

Every time a new best solution is encountered, an intra-route
re-optimization is performed in an attempt to identify a better
solution nearby by altering the sequence of vertices in each route.
The algorithm terminates when a fixed number Z iterations is
reached, where Z is a user-controlled parameter.
4. Comparative analyses

We have performed several computational experiments in
order to compare the three routing policies under various objec-
tives. Our purpose by doing so is to determine how the choice of a
specific routing policy and of an objective function affects
passenger and pilot risk. We also provide insights on equity
issues relative to passenger and pilot risk. More specifically, we
compare the direct, Hamiltonian and general routing policies.
We also compare three objectives: passenger risk ðA1 ¼ 1, A2 ¼ A3

¼ 0Þ, total risk ðA1 ¼ A2 ¼ 1, A3 ¼ 0Þ, and travel time ðA1 ¼ A2 ¼

0, A3 ¼ 1Þ. The direct routing policy yields the same solutions
under the three objectives and is only applied for m¼n. This is
why we use these solutions as bounds for the solutions under
Hamiltonian and general routing policies. Section 4.1 describes
two sets of test instances. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 deal with the
Hamiltonian and the general routing policies, respectively, and
focus on passenger risk analysis. Section 4.4 provides a compar-
ison of passenger and pilot risk in both flight stages under the
three routing policies. We study trade-offs between the mini-
mization of passenger risk and the minimization of pilot risk in
Section 4.5.

The experiments were performed by applying the UTSA
heuristic. The algorithm was coded in C using Pelles for Windows,
version 5.00.8, and run on a personal computer with an
inter(R) Core(TM)2 Duo CPU E8400 @ 3.00 GHz, 2.99 GHz, and
3.25 GB of RAM, with the operating system Microsoft Windows
XP Professional Version 2002, Service Pack 3.

The UTSA works with four user-controlled parameters, i.e. d, g ,
y, Z. The two parameters d and g are randomly selected in the
range (0,1). The parameter y is an integer randomly selected in
pffiffiffiffiffiffiffi

½1, mn. The randomly selected values of these parameters are
updated at each iteration, as in Cordeau et al. [3]. The algorithm
was executed five times with Z¼ 105 for each instance, and the
best results out of the five runs are reported.

The UTSA heuristic was tested on two sets of randomly
generated instances to examine its effectiveness. We have created
10 instances with n¼10 and 10 instances with n¼15 by randomly
selecting a depot and customers from a 100100 square with
integer coordinates. Euclidean distances were used to calculate
travel times. The optimal solutions were obtained by CPLEX 9.0. In
each of the five runs the UTSA heuristic for all instances yields
optimal Hamiltonian solutions for the three objectives. The UTSA
generates in each run optimal general solutions with the passen-
ger risk objective for all instances with n¼10. Among these
instances, the UTSA heuristic identifies optimal general solutions
with the total risk objective for seven instances, and the average
gap of the best solutions of the five runs (measured by (best
heuristic solution – optimal solution)/optimal solution) is 0.02%.
These results indicate that the proposed heuristic is capable of
generating high quality solutions and its performance is stable
over the runs. CPLEX fails to give optimal general solutions for the
instances with n¼15. For these instances, we obtain the lower
bounds by solving the linear relaxation of the mathematical
formulation. However, these results are very uninformative since
the average gap between heuristic solutions and the correspond-
ing lower bounds is nearly 20%.

4.1. Test instances

We have generated two sets of instances based on geographi-
cal data associated with the installations at two offshore opera-
tion regions in the North Sea. These two sets of instances are
referred to as the Flesland instance set and the Sola instance set.
Each Flesland instance consists of 34 installations served from
Flesland heliport, Bergen. Each Sola instance is based on a
network of 37 installations served from Sola heliport, Stavanger.
In the Sola instances, the installations are located much further
from the heliport than in the Flesland instances. The locations of
the installations and of the heliports are represented in latitude
and longitude coordinates, which are used to determine the flying
time in hours based on an average speed of 250 km/h.

The helicopter fleet is assumed to be homogeneous. Each
helicopter can accommodate 19 passengers and is operated by
two pilots. The delivery amounts di of the installations are



F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593 589

Table 4
Average deviations (in %) of Pax Risk and Total Risk solutions from the Travel Time
solutions under the Hamiltonian routing policy.

Ins. Objective Pax Pax Pax Pax Pilot Flying
onboard PTL PFH risk risk hours

F5 Pax Risk 7.83 7.84 3.96 4.92 2.05 8.42
Total Risk 7.74 7.75 3.70 4.92 1.97 8.08

F10 Pax Risk 5.48 5.49 5.11 2.73 1.69 5.13
Total Risk 5.13 5.14 5.34 2.58 1.53 4.66

F15 Pax Risk 6.18 6.14 0.51 3.56 1.01 2.60
Total Risk 6.00 5.98 0.26 3.56 0.89 2.30

S5 Pax Risk 6.76 6.76 2.37 3.90 1.67 5.36
Total Risk 6.57 6.57 1.96 3.91 1.23 4.86

S10 Pax Risk 5.14 5.15 1.76 2.20 1.45 3.39
Total Risk 5.07 5.07 1.26 2.37 1.18 2.76

S15 Pax Risk 7.23 7.24 1.17 4.37 1.21 2.56
Total Risk 7.12 7.13 1.38 4.41 1.00 2.12
uniformly distributed integers on the interval [a, b]. As in Dethloff
[6], the pickup amount pi is given by the formula pi ¼ ð0:5þxÞdi,
where x is uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 1], and further
rounded up or down to the nearest integer. If the pickup amount
pi happens to be greater than or equal to the helicopter capacity
19, it is reset to pi19. By varying the interval [a, b], we have
generated three groups of instances within each instance set.
Within the Flesland set, we have created the F5, F10, and F15
instance groups with [a, b]¼[1, 5], [1, 10], and [1, 15], respec-
tively. Similarly we have created instance groups S5, S10, and S15
within the Sola set. With 20 instances in each group within two
sets, we have generated a total of 120 instances. Regarding the
number of routes, we have observed that when m is not fixed a
priori, most solutions tend to be made up of direct trips to every
installation under a risk minimization objective and are Hamilto-
nian under a cost minimization objective. When m is free, it is
also difficult to calibrate the vehicle fixed costs. To avoid this
complication and to ensure fair comparisons between the various
routing policies, we have therefore used the minimum number of
routes required in each instance, as determined by the demands.
The accident frequencies f TL and f C , together with the probabilities
pTL and pC , are given in Section 2.

4.2. Comparative analysis for the Hamiltonian routing policy

Computational results for Hamiltonian solutions are summar-
ized in Tables 3 and 4. Statistics for each group of instances are
reported for the three objective functions, i.e. the travel time (line
Travel Time), the risk for passengers (line Pax Risk), and the total
risk including passenger risk and pilot risk (line Total Risk). These
are values for the components and the elements of the objective
function (4), and include the average number of passengers
onboard during a flight stage (column Pax onboard), the passenger
PTL (column Pax PTL), the passenger PFH (column Pax PFH), the
risk for passengers (column Pax risk), the risk for pilots (column
Pilot risk), and the average flying time per flight (column Flying
hours). Table 3 provides these values computed for each objective
function, while Table 4 presents the percent deviations of the
values obtained with the Pax Risk and the Total Risk objectives
from the values obtained with the Travel Time objective.

Overall, the same conclusions apply to all groups of instances.
As can be seen from Table 3, the most important part of the total
risk is the passenger risk, most of which is the take-off and
landing risk, proportional to the passenger PTL value. The first
Table 3
Computational results for three objectives under the Hamiltonian routing policy.

Ins. Objective Pax Pax Pax Pax Pilot Flying
onboard PTL PFH risk risk hours

F5 Travel Time 16.87 678.05 167.97 585.19 69.15 9.82
Pax Risk 15.55 624.90 174.63 556.37 70.57 10.65
Total Risk 15.56 625.50 174.19 556.38 70.51 10.61

F10 Travel Time 17.04 768.35 311.26 746.39 87.32 16.68
Pax Risk 16.11 726.20 295.34 726.03 88.80 17.54
Total Risk 16.17 728.85 294.63 727.13 88.66 17.46

F15 Travel Time 15.86 804.05 384.70 853.47 107.88 24.36
Pax Risk 14.88 754.65 386.66 823.05 108.97 25.00
Total Risk 14.91 756.00 385.69 823.10 108.84 24.92

S5 Travel Time 17.00 740.15 254.46 699.93 82.03 14.78
Pax Risk 15.85 690.15 260.49 672.62 83.40 15.57
Total Risk 15.88 691.50 259.43 672.59 83.04 15.50

S10 Travel Time 16.63 834.65 469.65 946.42 113.46 28.02
Pax Risk 15.77 791.70 477.91 925.61 115.10 28.97
Total Risk 15.78 792.30 475.56 923.98 114.80 28.80

S15 Travel Time 16.03 876.25 593.00 1079.54 134.60 36.91
Pax Risk 14.87 812.85 586.02 1032.33 136.23 37.86
Total Risk 14.89 813.80 584.85 1031.94 135.94 37.69
observation is the result of the large average number of passen-
gers onboard. The second reflects the fact that passenger PTL in a
Hamiltonian solution is the product of Pax onboard and total
number of take-offs and landings (equal to nþm), while passen-
ger cruise risk is proportional to passenger PFH, approximately
equal to the product of Pax onboard and Flying hours.

It is easy to see that for all objective functions the average
flying time and risks increase with demands, and are larger for the
Sola instances, in which installations are located much further
from the heliport. When minimizing risk, as opposed to travel
time, solutions tend to have fewer passengers onboard and longer
flying times, resulting in lower risk for passengers and slightly
higher risk for pilots. Flying times and pilot risk are only slightly
larger if passenger risk is minimized as opposed to total risk. We
can conclude that minimizing passenger risk benefits passengers
at the expense of pilots and flying time.

Table 4 illustrates that under risk minimization objectives the
average number of passengers onboard decreases while the
average flying time increases with respect to the values observed
under a travel time minimization objective. The consequences of
an accident are proportional to the average number of passengers
onboard who could be potentially involved in an accident.
The total risk is reduced because of the much smaller conse-
quences of take-off and landing accidents, but this effect is
somewhat offset by the increase in the cruise accident probability
due to the longer flying times. Table 4 shows that the decrease in
passenger risk is more significant than the increase in pilot risk. It
also shows that the increase in flying times and pilot risk is larger
for instances with small demands. Solutions obtained under the
Total Risk minimization objective yield slightly lower increase in
flying times and pilot risk, compared with solutions in which only
the Pax Risk is minimized.

In these computational results, we have also observed a new
feature of Hamiltonian solutions under risk minimization objec-
tives. Fig. 2 depicts three Hamiltonian solutions for a small
instance, where the flights representing direct services to the
installations are not drawn for the sake of legibility. An interest-
ing observation is that the Travel Time solution has one flight
with three visited installations (TRS, ASC and HEI), while neither
of the other two solutions has a flight with more than two visited
installations. This means that the solutions with risk minimiza-
tion objectives have less variability in terms of number of
installations visited during the same flight. The standard devia-
tion was used to measure the variability of the number of
installations visited in a flight in Hamiltonian solutions for the
two tested sets of instances. Over the Flesland instances, the
average standard deviation of the number of installations visited
in a flight is 0.986 for Travel Time solutions and 0.905 for Pax Risk



590 F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593

Table 5
Computational results for two objectives under the general routing policy.

Ins. Objective Pax Pax Pax Pax Pilot Flying
onboard PTL PFH risk risk hours

F5 Pax Risk 7.27 532.85 164.52 487.84 123.08 16.18
Total Risk 9.46 542.85 167.26 496.70 97.21 13.03

F10 Pax Risk 7.97 624.60 280.23 646.99 144.63 24.91
Total Risk 9.86 629.60 283.51 653.06 119.16 20.98

F15 Pax Risk 8.16 679.65 373.69 763.15 164.72 32.85
Total Risk 10.28 685.05 377.10 769.59 134.54 27.85

S5 Pax Risk 7.32 582.10 248.65 592.21 144.52 23.90
Total Risk 9.37 592.70 252.81 602.67 115.98 19.51

S10 Pax Risk 8.08 697.50 461.86 850.57 183.39 41.36
Total Risk 9.70 702.20 464.24 855.679 152.10 33.67

S15 Pax Risk 7.97 723.45 566.99 957.85 207.76 52.20
Total Risk 10.10 729.55 570.25 964.62 165.13 41.39
solutions. Over the Sola instances, the average standard deviation
is 0.961 for Travel Time solutions and 0.880 for Pax Risk solutions.
Pax Risk solutions tend to evenly distribute the number of
installations visited in each flight.

4.3. Comparative analysis for the general routing policy

The general routing policy was implemented under the objec-
tives of minimizing Pax Risk and Total Risk, in order to assess the
impact on transportation risk of allowing a second visit to the
installations. Computational results are presented in Table 5.
The average deviations of the reported statistics with respect to
those obtained under the Travel Time objective (which are the
same as for the Hamiltonian routing policy) are shown in Table 6.

The observations made in Section 4.2 for the Hamiltonian routing
policy also hold for the general routing policy, except that the
variations in values are now more important. As can be seen from
Table 5, compared to Table 3, under the general routing policy the
average number of passengers onboard is much less, while flying
times are longer. This results in a much lower risk for passengers
and in a significantly higher risk for pilots, while the total risk is
reduced compared with the Hamiltonian routing policy.

The reduction in the average number of passengers onboard
compared with Travel Time solutions (illustrated in Table 6) is so
remarkable that both passenger PTL and passenger PFH decrease,
leading to a considerable decrease in passenger risk. On the other
hand, the important increase in flying times leads to a substantial
Fig. 2. Travel Time solution (top left), Pax Risk solution (top right), and Total Risk so
increase in pilot risk. Since passenger risk dominates pilot risk,
the overall risk decreases although pilot risk increases more than
passenger risk decreases in percentage.

In Pax Risk solutions, all installations are visited twice, except
those at which the helicopters perform their last delivery and
their first pickup. This yields two pairs of take-offs and landings at
each installation, and longer travel times. This does not very
much affect passenger risk (as the number of passengers onboard
is low), but considerably increases pilot risk. Under this policy,
passenger risk is reduced considerably at the high expense of pilot
lution (bottom) under the Hamiltonian routing policy on an illustrative instance.



F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593 591
risk and flying time. In Total Risk solutions, pickups and deliveries
are often performed during the same visit, resulting in fewer take-
offs and landings and in shorter travel times. The Total Risk
solutions have more passengers onboard and a slightly higher
passenger risk, but pilot risk is to a large extent smaller than in
Pax Risk solutions. Thus, under the general routing policy the
minimization of Total Risk reduces pilot risk remarkably without
deteriorating passenger risk significantly compared with the
minimization of Pax Risk.

4.4. Comparative analysis of three routing policies

The average values of the passenger and pilot risks are
presented in Table 7 for the two flight phases and for the three
routing policies.
Table 6
Average deviations (in %) of risk solutions from the Travel Time solutions under
the general routing policy.

Ins. Objective Pax Pax Pax Pax Pilot Flying
onboard PTL PFH risk risk hours

F5 Pax Risk 56.93 27.25 2.10 19.96 78.13 64.76
Total Risk 43.92 22.89 4.17 15.12 40.57 32.73

F10 Pax Risk 53.21 23.02 11.07 15.36 65.63 33.03
Total Risk 42.14 14.34 8.91 12.50 36.46 25.78

F15 Pax Risk 48.57 18.30 2.94 11.84 52.69 25.83
Total Risk 35.19 12.84 1.97 9.83 24.72 14.31

S5 Pax Risk 56.94 21.35 2.28 15.39 76.18 61.72
Total Risk 44.84 19.92 0.65 13.90 41.38 32.02

S10 Pax Risk 51.42 16.43 1.66 10.13 61.63 47.57
Total Risk 41.67 15.87 1.15 9.59 34.06 20.15

S15 Pax Risk 50.28 17.44 4.39 11.27 54.35 41.41
Total Risk 36.99 16.74 3.84 10.65 22.69 12.14

Table 7
Comparative analysis of risks under three routing policies.

Instance Policy Objective Passengers

TLrisk Cris

Flesland D – 241.80 218
H Travel Time 487.60 247

Pax Risk 456.25 245
Total Risk 457.24 244

G Pax Risk 398.04 234
Total Risk 402.46 237

Sola D – 264.78 345
H Travel Time 531.06 377

Pax Risk 497.19 379
Total Risk 497.82 378

G Pax Risk 434.00 366
Total Risk 438.63 369

Table 8
Computational results with variable equity factor p.

Instance p Pax risk Pilot risk Total risk Tra

F10 1 486.42 153.23 639.65 39
50 662.14 110.72 772.85 21

100 718.15 106.40 824.55 18
150 722.46 106.53 829.00 18

S10 1 684.11 194.62 878.72 58
50 888.70 140.72 1029.43 32

100 900.15 137.90 1038.05 31
150 928.09 137.34 1065.43 30
As was shown by Qian et al. [26] for the uncapacitated problem,
the direct routing policy provides lower bounds for passenger risk,
both in the take-off and landing phase and in the cruise phase, and
is best for passengers. However, it provides upper bounds for pilot
risk in both flight phases for Hamiltonian solutions. In turn, Travel
Time solutions under the Hamiltonian routing policy yield lower
bounds for pilot risk and upper bounds for passenger risk, and are
best for pilots.

Under both Hamiltonian and general routing policies, mini-
mizing passenger risk is best for passengers and worst for pilots,
while minimizing total risk is slightly worse for passengers
and better for pilots, particularly for the general routing policy.
Take-off and landing risk dominates cruise risk for passengers and
pilots under the Hamiltonian and general routing policies. The
difference between take-off and landing risk and cruise risk for
passengers is larger under the Hamiltonian policy than under the
general policy. The opposite is true for pilots. Hamiltonian
solutions yield a lower pilot risk than general solutions do. In
contrast, general solutions obtained with the Pax Risk objective
are the best for passengers at the expense of higher pilot risk.
However, when the total risk is minimized, the general policy
provides the next best passenger risk values and a remarkably
reduced pilot risk, thus yielding the lowest total risk values and a
fairer distribution of risk between passengers and pilots.

All risks are higher for the Sola instances, with a more important
contribution of the cruise risk. This can be explained by the longer
travel distances from the heliport to the installations.

4.5. Equitable distribution of risk between passengers and pilots

The results presented in the previous sections are based on the
computation of a single solution, which neglects the time dimen-
sion of the problem with respect to the risk distribution between
passengers and pilots. In the Norwegian offshore petroleum
Pilots

k Total TLrisk Crisk Total

.82 460.62 88.40 79.91 168.31

.66 735.26 58.96 29.16 88.12

.57 701.82 58.96 30.49 89.45

.96 702.20 58.96 30.38 89.34

.62 632.66 101.79 42.39 144.18

.32 639.78 81.49 35.48 116.97

.59 610.37 96.20 125.42 221.62

.57 908.63 64.33 45.70 110.03

.67 876.85 64.33 47.25 111.58

.35 880.27 64.33 46.93 111.26

.22 800.21 111.22 67.34 178.56

.03 807.66 90.18 54.22 144.40

vel time Number of TLs Pax onboard Number of flights

.43 65.70 6.11 28.50

.29 48.50 13.35 14.50

.93 46.10 15.42 12.10

.78 46.00 15.61 12.00

.88 71.80 6.59 29.60

.69 52.40 14.28 15.30

.04 51.60 14.82 14.60

.65 51.00 15.47 13.90



592 F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593
industry, offshore workers usually start their shift by taking a
helicopter to an installation and return to their base two weeks
later. They will have a four-week holiday before starting a new
shift. This means that an offshore worker will take two helicopter
trips in six weeks. In contrast, the pilots may fly an average of
3.288 h per day (1200 h in any 365 consecutive days2). In six
weeks, a pilot may fly up to 138 h, while a passenger only flies
between 1 and 4 h in two trips. To achieve an equitable distribu-
tion of risk between passengers and pilots, we introduce a
multiplier p ranging from 1 to 150 and acting as an equity factor
for the pilot risk (4b) in the model, i.e. A2 ¼ pA1. We also let the
algorithm to determine the number of flights for each instance,
instead of using the minimum number of flights as in the previous
sections because we did not want the analysis to be constrained
by the operating cost. The upper bound m is set equal to the
number of installations in each instance. The computational
results for these experiments are reported in Table 8 for 10 of
F10 and 10 of S10 instances under a general routing policy.

In the solutions without penalty ðp¼ 1Þ, most installations are
served directly as can be seen from the ‘Number of flights’ column
for both F10 and S10 instances. In solutions with penalty (p¼ 50,
100, and 150), Hamiltonian routes are constructed to simulta-
neously perform a pickup and a delivery at each installation,
except for one installation which is served twice by two flights in
one S10 instance. The number of installations served in each flight
is larger on average in the solutions with penalty, since the
number of flights is reduced by about half, as compared with
the solutions without penalty.

In both the F10 and the S10 instances, pilot risk is reduced
radically when p¼ 50. The reduction of pilot risk is due to the
lower number of pairs of take-offs and landings (column Number
of TLs) and to shorter travel time (column Travel time). In
addition, the average number of passengers onboard (column
Pax onboard) is doubled, which results in a massive increase in
passenger risk (column Pax risk).

With penalty value over 50, pilot risk decreases only slightly,
but the increase in passenger risk leads to a total risk increase. No
notable changes in risks and other solution characteristics were
observed when the penalty value exceeded 100.
5. Conclusions

We have considered a helicopter routing problem arising in
the transportation of employees to offshore installations from an
onshore heliport. The problem was modeled with the objective of
risk minimization for passengers and pilots, expressed as the
expected number of fatalities during take-off and landing and
cruise phases of a flight. With passenger risk and total risk
minimization objectives, three routing policies were implemen-
ted using tabu search, and compared on real-based data instances.

Results of comparative analyses show that the direct routing
policy is optimal for passengers, while the Hamiltonian routing
policy is best for pilots. The most important part of the total risk is
the risk experienced by passengers during the take-off and land-
ing phase. Transportation risk can be reduced at the expense of
pilot risk and extra travel time by reducing the number of
passengers onboard. The lowest total risk for the capacitated
helicopter routing problem can be achieved under a general
routing policy in which a second visit to the installations is
allowed. A penalty mechanism was applied to achieve an equi-
table distribution of risks between passengers and pilots.
2 http://www.pprune.org/rotorheads/401851-flight-time-duty-time-limita
tions.html. Last accessed November 17, 2010.
Acknowledgments

The Helicopter Safety Study 3 (HSS-3) was sponsored by eight
oil companies operating on the Norwegian continental shelf. The
authors are grateful for the support received from this project,
especially from Per Hokstad and Ivonne Herrera. We thank Jan Erik
Price, from the helicopter operator CHC Norway, for his generous
assistance during this research. This work was partially supported
by the Canadian Natural Science and Engineering Council under
grant 39682-10. This support is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks
are due to the referees for their valuable comments.
References

[1] Berbeglia G, Cordeau J-F, Gribkovskaia I, Laporte G. Static pickup and delivery
problems: a classification scheme and survey. TOP 2007;15:1–31.

[2] Cordeau J-F, Gendreau M, Laporte G. A tabu search heuristic for periodic and
multi-depot vehicle routing problems. Networks 1997;30:105–19.

[3] Cordeau J-F, Laporte G, Mercier A. A unified tabu search heuristic for vehicle
routing problems with time windows. Journal of the Operational Research
Society 2001;52:928–36.

[4] Cordeau J-F, Laporte G, Mercier A. Improved tabu search algorithm for the
handling of route duration constraints in vehicle routing problems with time
windows. Journal of Operational Research Society 2004;55:542–6.

[5] Desaulniers G, Desrosiers J, Erdmann A, Solomon MM, Soumis F. VRP with
pickup and delivery. In: Toth P, Vigo D, editors. The vehicle routing problem.
Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics; 2002.

[6] Dethloff J. Vehicle routing and reverse logistics: the vehicle routing problem
with simultaneous delivery and pick-up. Operations Research Spectrum
2001;23:79–96.

[7] Eiselt HA, Laporte G. Objectives in location problems. In: Drezner Z, editor.
Facility location: a survey of applications and methods, Springer series in
operational research and financial engineering. New York: Springer-Verlag;
1995. p. 151–80.

[8] Erkut E, Verter V. Modeling of transport risk for hazardous materials.
Operations Research 1998;46:625–42.

[9] Fiala Timlin MT, Pulleyblank WR. Precedence constrained routing and
helicopter scheduling: heuristic design. Interfaces 1992;22(3):100–11.

[11] Galva~o RD, Guimaraes J. The control of helicopter operations in the Brazilian
oil industry: issues in the design and implementation of a computerized
system. European Journal of Operational Research 1990;49:266–70.

[12] Giannikos I. A multiobjective programming model for locating treatment
sites and routing hazardous wastes. European Journal of Operational
Research 1998;104:333–42.

[13] Gribkovskaia I, Halskau Ø, Laporte G, Vlček M. General solutions to the single
vehicle routing problem with pickups and deliveries. European Journal of
Operational Research 2007;180:568–84.

[14] Gribkovskaia I, Laporte G, Shlopak A. A tabu search heuristic for a routing
problem arising in servicing of offshore oil and gas platforms. Journal of
Operational Research Society 2008;59:1449–59.

[15] Hardy G, Littlewood JE, Pólya G. Inequalities. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press; 1934.

[16] Hoff A, Gribkovskaia I, Laporte G, Løkketangen A. Lasso solution strategies for
the vehicle routing problem with pickups and deliveries. European Journal of
Operational Research 2009;192:755–66.

[17] Hokstad P, Jersin E, Sten T. A risk influence model applied to North Sea
helicopter transport. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 2001;74:
311–22.

[18] Kaiser MJ. World offshore energy loss statistics. Energy Policy 2007;35:
3496–525.

[20] Mandell MB. Modelling effectiveness-equity trade-offs in public service.
Management Science 1991;37:467–82.

[21] Marsh MT, Schilling DA. Equity measurement in facility location analysis:
a review and framework. European Journal of Operational Research 1994;74:
1–17.

[22] Menezes F, Porto O, Reis ML, Moreno L, Poggi de Araga~o M, Uchoa E, et al.
Optimizing helicopter transport of oil rig crews at Petrobras. Interfaces
2010;40:408–16.

[23] Mingers J. Soft OR comes of age – but not everywhere!. Omega 2011;39:
729–41.

[24] Moreno L, Poggi de Araga~o M, Uchoa E. Column generation based heuristic for
a helicopter routing problem. Lecture notes in computer science, vol. 4007.
Berlin: Springer; 2006. p. 219–30.

[25] Morrison G. Helicopter safety offshore. Aberdeen: Health and Safety Executive;
2001.

[26] Qian F, Gribkovskaia I, Halskau Ø. Helicopter routing in the Norwegian oil
industry: including safety concern for passenger transport. International
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 2011;41(4):
401–15.

[27] Rakes TR, Deane JK, Rees LP. IT security planning under uncertainty for high-
impact event. Omega 2012;40:79–88.



F. Qian et al. / Omega 40 (2012) 584–593 593
[28] Rosero VB, Torres F. Ant colony based on a heuristic insertion for a family
of helicopter routing problems. In: Conference proceedings from the third
international conference on production research-Americas’ Region 2006
(ICPR-AM06), Parana, Brazil; 2006.

[29] Sierksma G, Tijssen GA. Routing helicopters for crew exchanges on off-shore
locations. Annals of Operations Research 1998;76:261–86.

[30] Tang FA, Galva~o RD. A tabu search algorithm for the vehicle routing problem
with simultaneous pick-up and delivery service. Computers & Operations
Research 2006;33:595–619.
[31] UK Offshore Public Transport Helicopter Safety Record 1977–2006. Retrieved
from /http://s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/www.oilandgasuk.co.uk/
ContentPages/1245560396.pdfS [Last accessed November 25, 2011].

[32] Vinnem JE, Aven T, Husebø T, Seljelid J, Tveit OJ. Major hazard risk indicators
for monitoring of trends in the Norwegian offshore petroleum sector.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 2006;91:778–91.

[33] Zografos KG, Androutsopoulos KN. A heuristic algorithm for solving hazar-
dous materials distribution problems. European Journal of Operational
Research 2004;152:507–19.



 

 

 

 

PLANEJAMENTO DE REDE LOGÍSTICA DE TRANSPORTE AÉREO DE 

PESSOAS PARA ATIVIDADES DE EXPLORAÇÃO E PRODUÇÃO DE 

PETRÓLEO EM BACIA MARÍTIMA UTILIZANDO PROGRAMAÇÃO INTEIRA 

MISTA 

 

Nathália da Silva Sena 

Dissertação de Mestrado apresentada ao 

Programa de Pós-graduação em Engenharia de 

Produção, COPPE, da Universidade Federal do 

Rio de Janeiro, como parte dos requisitos 

necessários à obtenção do título de Mestre em 

Engenharia de Produção.  

Orientadores: Virgílio José Martins Ferreira 

Filho  

Laura Silvia Bahiense da Silva 

Leite 

 

Rio de Janeiro 

Julho de 2011 

 



PLANEJAMENTO DE REDE LOGÍSTICA DE TRANSPORTE AÉREO DE 

PESSOAS PARA ATIVIDADES DE EXPLORAÇÃO E PRODUÇÃO DE 

PETRÓLEO EM BACIA MARÍTIMA UTILIZANDO PROGRAMAÇÃO INTEIRA 

MISTA 

 

Nathália da Silva Sena 

 

DISSERTAÇÃO SUBMETIDA AO CORPO DOCENTE DO INSTITUTO ALBERTO LUIZ 

COIMBRA DE PÓS-GRADUAÇÃO E PESQUISA DE ENGENHARIA (COPPE) DA 

UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO RIO DE JANEIRO COMO PARTE DOS REQUISITOS 

NECESSÁRIOS PARA A OBTENÇÃO DO GRAU DE MESTRE EM CIÊNCIAS EM 

ENGENHARIA DE PRODUÇÃO. 

 

Examinada por: 

________________________________________________ 

Prof. Virgílio José Martins Ferreira Filho, D.Sc. 

        

________________________________________________ 

Profª. Laura Silvia Bahiense da Silva Leite, D.Sc. 

 

________________________________________________ 

Prof. Nelio Domingues Pizzolato, Ph.D. 

 

________________________________________________ 

Prof. Luiz Satoru Ochi, D.Sc. 

 

 

RIO DE JANEIRO, RJ - BRASIL 

JULHO DE 2011



 

 

 

 

Sena, Nathália da Silva 

Planejamento de rede logística de transporte aéreo de 

pessoas para atividades de exploração e produção de petróleo 

em bacia marítima utilizando programação inteira mista/ 

Nathália da Silva Sena. – Rio de Janeiro: UFRJ/COPPE, 2011. 

XV, 125 p.: il.; 29,7 cm. 

Orientadores: Virgílio José Martins Ferreira Filho  

Laura Silvia Bahiense da Silva Leite                                                                                   

Dissertação (mestrado) – UFRJ/ COPPE/ Programa de 

Engenharia de Produção, 2011. 

 Referencias Bibliográficas: p.74-77. 

1. Modelos de Localização. 2. Pesquisa Operacional. 3. 

Planejamento de Rede Logística. I. Ferreira Filho, Virgílio José 

Martins et al. II. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 

COPPE, Programa de Engenharia de Produção. III. Titulo. 

 

iii 
 



 

DEDICATÓRIA 

 

 

 

 

 

“Se eu vi mais longe, foi por estar de pé 
sobre ombros de gigantes.” (Isaac Newton)  

Dedico aos meus pais João e Sylvia pela 
educação e apoio e a meu marido Thyago 

pela paciência, incentivo e dedicação. 

 

 iv 
 



 

AGRADECIMENTOS 

 

 

A Deus, que me criou, deu saúde e forças para correr atrás de meus sonhos. 

A meus pais que me ensinaram o valor da educação, me apoiaram e incentivaram 
sempre. 

Ao Thyago, meu marido, que foi companheiro, paciente e não me deixou desanimar. 

Aos orientadores Virgílio e Laura pelo direcionamento do trabalho. 

À Petrobras pela disponibilização das informações e pela minha liberação para a 
finalização do mestrado. 

Aos demais familiares e amigos pelo apoio e torcida! 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 v 
 



 

Resumo da Dissertação apresentada à COPPE/UFRJ como parte dos requisitos 
necessários para a obtenção do grau de Mestre em Ciências (M.Sc.) 

 

PLANEJAMENTO DE REDE LOGÍSTICA DE TRANSPORTE AÉREO DE 

PESSOAS PARA ATIVIDADES DE EXPLORAÇÃO E PRODUÇÃO DE 

PETRÓLEO EM BACIA MARÍTIMA UTILIZANDO PROGRAMAÇÃO INTEIRA 

MISTA 

 

Nathália da Silva Sena 

Julho/2011 

Orientador(es): Virgílio José Martins Ferreira Filho  

Laura Silvia Bahiense da Silva Leite 

                          

 

Programa: Engenharia de Produção 

 
As descobertas de petróleo dos últimos anos, principalmente na camada do pré-

sal da Bacia de Santos, apontam para um grande crescimento da exploração e produção 
de petróleo no Brasil. Conseqüentemente, haverá aumento da demanda por 
movimentação de passageiros para as sondas de perfuração e plataformas de produção. 
Este transporte se tornará também mais complexo devido ao aumento da distância 
média entre os campos e a costa brasileira.  

O helicóptero é o modal mais utilizado para este fim.  Este é o meio de 
transporte de maior eficiência devido à rapidez e segurança, porém apresenta custos 
elevados. Logo, a otimização da rede logística de transporte de passageiros para 
trabalho em atividade offshore torna-se um tema economicamente relevante. 

O objetivo desta dissertação é o aprimoramento do modelo de otimização 
utilizado atualmente para planejamento de rede logística de passageiros da Petrobras. 
Este modelo provê aos gestores informações mais precisas para auxiliá-los nas tomadas 
de decisão com relação ao planejamento da infraestrutura logística. Decisões estas que 
envolvem dispêndios consideráveis e que uma vez tomadas não são facilmente 
alteradas. 

O modelo aperfeiçoado proposto apresenta menor nível de incertezas nos 
resultados gerados de localização de aeródromos, distribuição da demanda e frota. Os 
cenários rodados no estudo de caso apresentaram tempo de processamento aceitável, 
mesmo tendo um aumento considerável de complexidade. As revisões no modelo 
possibilitaram utilizá-lo também para a definição do perfil ótimo de frota, gerando 
oportunidades de redução de custos para a empresa.   

 vi 
 



 

Abstract of Dissertation presented to COPPE/UFRJ as a partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Science (M.Sc.) 
 

LOGISTIC NETWORK PLANNING FOR PEOPLE AIR TRANSPORT TO WORK 

IN PETROLEUM PRODUCTION AND EXPLOTATION USING MIXED INTEGER 

PROGRAMMING 

 

Nathália da Silva Sena 

July/2011 

Advisors: Virgílio José Martins Ferreira Filho  

Laura Silvia Bahiense da Silva Leite 

                  

 

Department: Industrial Engineering 
 

The oil discoveries of recent years, especially in the pre-salt Santos Basin, show 
a large increase in petroleum exploration and production in Brazil. Thus, crew transport 
demand  for drilling rigs and production platforms will increase. This transport will also 
become more complex due to increased average distance between the fields and the 
Brazilian coast. 

The helicopter is the most used modal for this purpose. This is the mean of 
transportation with the highest efficiency due to speed and safety, but it has high costs. 
Therefore, optimization of crew transport logistic network becomes an economically 
relevant issue. 

The objective of this thesis is to improve the optimization model currently used 
in Petrobras for planning of the crew transport logistics network. This model provides 
more accurate information to managers to assist the decision making regarding the 
planning of the logistics infrastructure. Such decisions involve considerable 
expenditures, and once made are not easily changed.  

The proposed model shows lower level of uncertainty in the outputs of location 
of airfields, demand allocation and profile of the fleet. The scenarios generated in the 
case study presented acceptable processing time, despite a considerable increase in 
complexity. The revisions in the model allowed its use to define the optimal profile of 
the fleet creating cost saving opportunities for the company.  
 

 vii 
 



 

SUMÁRIO 

 
1. INTRODUÇÃO ....................................................................................................... 1 

1.1 RELEVÂNCIA DO TEMA ............................................................................... 1 

1.2 OBJETIVOS ...................................................................................................... 3 

1.3 CONTRIBUIÇÕES DO TRABALHO .............................................................. 3 

1.4 ESTRUTURA DO TRABALHO ...................................................................... 4 

2. SISTEMA LOGÍSTICO DE TRANSPORTE DE PESSOAL PARA 
TRABALHO OFFSHORE ............................................................................................ 5 

2.1 HISTÓRICO E SITUAÇÃO ATUAL DA CADEIA ........................................ 5 

2.2 COMPONENTES DO SISTEMA LOGÍSTICO ............................................... 9 

2.2.1 Bases Terrestres ........................................................................................ 9 

2.2.2 Aeródromos ............................................................................................... 9 

2.2.3 Unidades Marítimas (UM) ..................................................................... 10 

2.2.4 Helicópteros ............................................................................................. 11 

2.2.5 Demanda .................................................................................................. 12 

2.3 REGULAMENTAÇÃO APLICADA ÀS OPERAÇÕES NO ESPAÇO 
AÉREO BRASILEIRO ............................................................................................... 14 

2.4 PLANEJAMENTO DO TRANSPORTE DE PASSAGEIROS ...................... 16 

2.4.1 Operacional ............................................................................................. 17 

2.4.2 Tático ....................................................................................................... 19 

2.4.3 Estratégico ............................................................................................... 20 

3. FUNDAMENTAÇÃO TEÓRICA E REVISÃO BIBLIOGRÁFICA ............... 22 

3.1 SISTEMAS DE APOIO À DECISÃO ............................................................ 22 

3.2 REDES DE DISTRIBUIÇÃO LOGÍSTICA ................................................... 23 

3.3 O PROBLEMA DE LOCALIZAÇÃO ............................................................ 24 

3.3.1 Histórico .................................................................................................. 24 

3.3.2 Classificação dos problemas de localização.......................................... 25 

3.3.3 Métodos de Resolução dos Problemas de Localização ........................ 28 

4. PROBLEMA BÁSICO DE LOCALIZAÇÃO DE AERÓDROMOS .............. 31 

4.1 MODELAGEM CONCEITUAL ..................................................................... 31 

4.2 MODELAGEM MATEMÁTICA ................................................................... 33 

 viii 
 



 

4.3 O SOFTWARE UTILIZADO ......................................................................... 39 

4.4 ENTRADA E SAÍDA DE DADOS ................................................................. 39 

4.5 LIMITAÇÕES DO MODELO ........................................................................ 40 

5. MODELO APERFEIÇOADO DE LOCALIZAÇÃO DE AERÓDROMOS .. 42 

5.1 REVISÃO DO CÁLCULO DE DISTÂNCIAS AERÓDROMO-UM PARA 
BACIA DE CAMPOS ................................................................................................ 42 

5.2 TRANSFORMAR VARIÁVEL CONTÍNUA K EM INTEIRA .................... 43 

5.3 RESTRIÇÃO DE VAGAS .............................................................................. 44 

5.4 RESTRIÇÕES DE HELIPONTOS DE ALGUMAS UNIDADES 
MARÍTIMAS .............................................................................................................. 44 

5.5 INCLUSÃO DOS INVESTIMENTOS EM CONSTRUÇÃO E 
ADEQUAÇÃO DE AERÓDROMOS E DE SEUS CUSTOS OPERACIONAIS ..... 46 

5.6 INCLUSÃO DO CÁLCULO DE OCUPAÇÃO MÁXIMA DA AERONAVE 
DE ACORDO COM A DISTÂNCIA, RESPEITANDO SUA AUTONOMIA ......... 47 

6. ESTUDO DE CASO .............................................................................................. 51 

6.1 CASO LOGÍSTICO ......................................................................................... 51 

6.1.1 Demanda .................................................................................................. 52 

6.1.2 Aeródromos ............................................................................................. 54 

6.1.3 Helicópteros ............................................................................................. 55 

6.2 AMBIENTE COMPUTACIONAL ................................................................. 58 

6.3 CENÁRIOS ..................................................................................................... 59 

6.3.1 Cenário livre e sem custos ...................................................................... 60 

6.3.2 Capacitado e sem custos ......................................................................... 61 

6.3.3 Livre e com custos; ................................................................................. 61 

6.3.4 Capacitado e com custos; ....................................................................... 62 

6.3.5 Capacitado, com custos e com demanda aumentada em 25% ........... 62 

6.3.6 Capacitado, com custos e com demanda reduzida em 25% ............... 62 

6.4 RESULTADOS ............................................................................................... 63 

7. CONCLUSÕES E RECOMENDAÇÕES ........................................................... 71 

8. REFERÊNCIAS BIBLIOGRÁFICAS ................................................................ 74 

ANEXO I – RESULTADOS COMPLETOS ............................................................. 78 

ANEXO II – PROGRAMA FONTE ......................................................................... 115 

 

 ix 
 



 

ILUSTRAÇÕES 
 
Figura 1: Crescimento das reservas provadas de petróleo brasileiras (Fonte: Adaptado de ANP, 
2009) ............................................................................................................................................. 1 
Figura 2: Aumento das distâncias à costa e dispersão das unidades marítimas da Petrobras na 
Bacia de Santos em relação à Bacia de Campos e Espírito Santo (Fonte: Mapa desenvolvido a 
partir de dados disponibilizados pela Petrobras) ........................................................................... 2 
Figura 3: Sikorsky S61N - Primeiro helicóptero utilizado para transporte aéreo de passageiros 
para plataformas marítimas da Petrobras, na Bacia de Campos. (LAUX, 2010) .......................... 6 
Figura 4: Sistemas de Transbordo de Passageiros de Embarcação para Unidade Marítima 
(Adaptado de STRONG, 2008 e LOCKHEED MARTIN, 2008) ................................................. 7 
Figura 5: Distribuição Geográfica dos Aeroportos a Serviço da Petrobras no SSE (Fonte: Mapa 
desenvolvido a partir de dados disponibilizados pela Petrobras) .................................................. 8 
Figura 6: Distribuição de passageiros por aeroporto, no SSE em 2010 (Fonte: Dados 
disponibilizados pela Petrobras) .................................................................................................... 8 
Figura 7: Elos do Sistema Logístico de Transporte de Passageiros para atividade de exploração 
e produção de petróleo e gás natural offshore da Petrobras .......................................................... 9 
Figura 8: Exemplos de unidades marítimas de produção de petróleo (Fonte: Banco de Imagens 
Petrobras) .................................................................................................................................... 11 
Figura 9: Nova carta aeronáutica da Área de Controle Terminal (TMA) Macaé. (Fonte: 
AIS/DECEA, 2009) ..................................................................................................................... 16 
Figura 10: Três pilares para a definição da capacidade aeronáutica (Fonte: Adaptado de 
HORONJEFF e MCKELVEY, 1993) ......................................................................................... 21 
Figura 11: Distribuição dos custos logísticos para empresas brasileiras (Fonte: ILOS, 2010) ... 23 
Figura 12: Variação mensal da movimentação de passageiros da Petrobras no Sul-Sudeste em 
2009 (Fonte: SENA e FERREIRA FILHO, 2010) ...................................................................... 33 
Figura 13: Metodologia de Planejamento de Rede Logística (Adaptado de SENA et. al. 2010) 51 
Figura 14: Metas de produção de óleo e gás natural 2010-2020 (GABRIELLI e BARBASSA, 
2011) ........................................................................................................................................... 53 
Figura 15: Estimativa de demanda de passageiros utilizada no estudo de caso. (Fonte: Valores 
arbitrados para teste do modelo não representando a demanda real) .......................................... 54 
Figura 16: Mapa ilustrativo dos aeródromos em operação e dos pontos considerados como 
potenciais para novas bases aeroportuárias no estudo de caso. ................................................... 55 
Figura 17: Aeronave AW 139 da empresa AgustaWestland ....................................................... 56 
Figura 18: Aeronave EC225 da empresa Eurocopter .................................................................. 56 
Figura 19: Taxas de desempenho do solver GUROBI versus CPLEX na resolução de MIPs de 
acordo com estudo de benchmark de solvers (Adaptado de MITTELMANN, 2011) ................ 59 
Figura 20: Evolução do número médio de passageiros por aeronave até 2020  para a rodada b do 
cenário 4. ..................................................................................................................................... 67 
Figura 21: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4B .............................................. 67 
Figura 22: Distribuição dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4B ..................................... 68 
Figura 23: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 4B ........................................................................................................................... 69 
Figura 24: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1A .............................................. 78 
Figura 25: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1A ................................ 79 
Figura 26: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 1A .......................................................................................................................... 79 

 x 
 



 

Figura 27: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1B .............................................. 80 
Figura 28: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1B ................................ 80 
Figura 29: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 1B ........................................................................................................................... 81 
Figura 30: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1C .............................................. 81 
Figura 31: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1C ................................ 82 
Figura 32: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 1C ........................................................................................................................... 82 
Figura 33: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1D .............................................. 83 
Figura 34: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1D ................................ 83 
Figura 35: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 1D .......................................................................................................................... 84 
Figura 36: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2A .............................................. 84 
Figura 37: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2A ................................ 85 
Figura 38: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 2A .......................................................................................................................... 85 
Figura 39: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2B .............................................. 86 
Figura 40: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2B ................................ 86 
Figura 41: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 2B ........................................................................................................................... 87 
Figura 42: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2C .............................................. 87 
Figura 43: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2C ................................ 88 
Figura 44: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 2C ........................................................................................................................... 88 
Figura 45: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2D .............................................. 89 
Figura 46: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2D ................................ 89 
Figura 47: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 2D .......................................................................................................................... 90 
Figura 48: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3A .............................................. 90 
Figura 49: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3A ................................ 91 
Figura 50: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 3A .......................................................................................................................... 91 
Figura 51: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3B .............................................. 92 
Figura 52: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3B ................................ 92 
Figura 53: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 3B ........................................................................................................................... 93 
Figura 54: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3C .............................................. 93 
Figura 55: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3C ................................ 94 
Figura 56: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 3C ........................................................................................................................... 94 
Figura 57: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3D .............................................. 95 
Figura 58: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3D ................................ 95 
Figura 59: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 3D .......................................................................................................................... 96 
Figura 60: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4A .............................................. 96 
Figura 61: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4A ................................ 97 
Figura 62: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 4A .......................................................................................................................... 97 

 xi 
 



 

Figura 63: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4B .............................................. 98 
Figura 64: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4B ................................ 98 
Figura 65: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 4B ........................................................................................................................... 99 
Figura 66: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4C .............................................. 99 
Figura 67: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4C .............................. 100 
Figura 68: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 4C ......................................................................................................................... 100 
Figura 69: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4D ............................................ 101 
Figura 70: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4D .............................. 101 
Figura 71: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 4D ........................................................................................................................ 102 
Figura 72: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5A ............................................ 102 
Figura 73: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5A .............................. 103 
Figura 74: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 5A ........................................................................................................................ 103 
Figura 75: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5B ............................................ 104 
Figura 76: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5B .............................. 104 
Figura 77: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 5B ......................................................................................................................... 105 
Figura 78: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5C ............................................ 105 
Figura 79: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5C .............................. 106 
Figura 80: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 5C ......................................................................................................................... 106 
Figura 81: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5D ............................................ 107 
Figura 82: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5D .............................. 107 
Figura 83: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 5D ........................................................................................................................ 108 
Figura 84: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6A ............................................ 108 
Figura 85: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6A .............................. 109 
Figura 86: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 6A ........................................................................................................................ 109 
Figura 87: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6B ............................................ 110 
Figura 88: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6B .............................. 110 
Figura 89: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 6B ......................................................................................................................... 111 
Figura 90: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6C ............................................ 111 
Figura 91: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6C .............................. 112 
Figura 92: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 6C ......................................................................................................................... 112 
Figura 93: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6D ............................................ 113 
Figura 94: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6D .............................. 113 
Figura 95: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento 
para Cenário 6D ........................................................................................................................ 114 
 

 xii 
 



 

LISTA DE TABELAS  
 
 
Tabela 1: Níveis de planejamento da logística de transporte de passageiros e estudos publicados 
sobre as atividades ....................................................................................................................... 17 
Tabela 2: Taxonomia proposta por DASKIN (1995) apud TAFAZZOLI e MOZAFARI (2009)
 ..................................................................................................................................................... 26 
Tabela 3: Parâmetros considerados para as aeronaves AW 139 e EC 225.................................. 57 
Tabela 4: Dimensões dos cenários rodados ................................................................................. 60 
Tabela 5: Resumo dos Resultados Computacionais .................................................................... 63 
Tabela 6: Comparativo de rodadas com e sem penalização da função objetivo. ........................ 64 
Tabela 7: Comparativo de custos médios dos grupos de cenários em relação ao cenário 1........ 65 
Tabela 8: Análise de sensibilidade de custos dos cenários a variações na demanda ................... 65 

 xiii 
 



 

LISTA DE SIGLAS 

 

III COMAR – 3º Comando Aéreo Regional da Aeronáutica (RJ) 

AIMMS – Advanced Integrated Multidimensional Modeling Software 

ANAC – Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil; 

CEL – Centro de Estudos em Logística 

CFLP – Capacited Facility Location Problem 

COPPEAD – Instituto de Pós-Graduação e Pesquisa em Administração da Universidade 
Federal do Rio de Janeiro 

DAESP – Departamento Aeroviário do Estado de São Paulo 

DECEA – Departamento de Controle de Espaço Aéreo 

DP – Dinamic Positioning 

FPSO – Floating, Production, Storage and Offloading 

FSO – Floating, Storage and Offloading 

ICA – Instrução Civil Aeronáutica  

ICAO –International Civil Aviation Organization 

IFR –Instrument Flight Rules 

ILOS – Instituto de Logística e Supply Chain; 

NORMAN – Norma da Autoridade Marítima 

PBO – Peso Básico Operacional 

PMD – Peso Máximo de Decolagem 

POB – People on Board 

QAV – Querosene de Aviação 

SAD – Sistema de Apoio a Decisão 

SSE – Sul-Sudeste 

TMA – Área de Controle Terminal 

UFLP – Uncapacited Facility Location Problem 

UM – Unidade Marítima 

US-LOG – Unidade de Serviços de logística da Exploração e Produção da Petrobras 

 xiv 
 



 

VFR – Visual Flight Rules 

MIP –Mixed Integer Programming

 xv 
 



 

1. INTRODUÇÃO 

 

Neste capítulo apresenta-se o problema estudado nesta dissertação, os objetivos 
e contribuições do trabalho e, por fim, a estrutura desta dissertação. 

 

1.1 RELEVÂNCIA DO TEMA 

A definição da rede logística de atendimento às unidades marítimas de 

exploração e produção de petróleo, que contempla escolha da localização dos 

aeródromos, alocação da demanda a estes aeródromos e determinação do perfil da frota, 

torna-se cada dia mais impactante no custo logístico total, e conseqüentemente no custo 

de extração do óleo. Algumas causas são: 

 Crescimento acelerado das reservas de petróleo brasileiras ( 

 Figura 1); 

 Aumento das distâncias dos campos petrolíferos em relação à costa; e, 

 Aumento da dispersão das unidades marítimas (distância relativa entre estas 

unidades) (Figura 2). 

13.000 

57% de  
12.000 crescimento  

em 9 anos 
11.000 

10.000 

9.000 

8.000 

7.000 

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 

  

1 
 

MM Barris 



 

Figura 1: Crescimento das reservas provadas de petróleo brasileiras (Fonte: Adaptado de ANP, 2009) 

Bacia do 
Espírito 

1. Maior dispersão entre unidades Santo

2. Maior distância da costa

Bacia de Campos

Bacia de Santos

 
Figura 2: Aumento das distâncias à costa e dispersão das unidades marítimas da Petrobras na Bacia de 
Santos em relação à Bacia de Campos e Espírito Santo (Fonte: Mapa desenvolvido a partir de dados 
disponibilizados pela Petrobras) 

 

 O aumento de distâncias tanto em relação à costa como entre as unidades 

marítimas dificulta a formação de rotas de atendimento já que a autonomia da aeronave 

precisa ser respeitada e sua capacidade disponível para passageiros reduz com o 

aumento do peso de combustível carregado. Adicionalmente, as distâncias influenciam 

em uma maior necessidade de bases aéreas espalhadas ao longo da costa. 

Neste contexto, os custos logísticos tendem a causar um maior impacto no custo 

de extração de óleo. Portanto, é de grande importância a construção de uma rede 

logística otimizada para que não se inviabilize a produção nos campos mais distantes da 

costa.  

Entretanto, os desafios não estão relacionados apenas aos custos, mas também 

em relação à autonomia de vôo das aeronaves e a segurança de vôo, sendo de grande 

relevância a utilização de modelos de pesquisa operacional para auxiliar no 

planejamento de rede logística e planejamento de frota nos períodos de médio e longo 

prazo.  

 

2 
 



 

 

 

1.2 OBJETIVOS 

Esta dissertação tem como motivação o desenvolvimento de um modelo de 

planejamento de rede logística de transporte de passageiros para a Petrobras. Este 

modelo deve ser eficaz no suporte às decisões de longo prazo relativas as configurações 

logísticas da infraestrutura aeroportuária, e do perfil da frota para o transporte de 

passageiros para trabalho em bacias petrolíferas marítimas, nas atividades de exploração 

e produção de petróleo e gás natural.   

Este trabalho tem como base um modelo de programação inteira mista, 

desenvolvido pelo Centro de Estudos em Logística (CEL) do Instituto de Pós-

Graduação e Pesquisa em Administração da Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro 

(COPPEAD) e, adaptado internamente pela Petrobras pela área de Serviços de Pesquisa 

Operacional, juntamente com a Unidade de Serviços de Logística da Exploração e 

Produção (US-LOG), área usuária (SENA et. al., 2010). Tal modelo é utilizado 

atualmente para estudos de localização e dimensionamento de capacidade de 

aeródromos, auxílio nas projeções de longo prazo de frota e estudos de perfil de frota de 

helicópteros. Entretanto, foram identificadas algumas limitações e simplificações que 

geram incertezas ao resultado, podendo estimular decisões equivocadas que elevem os 

custos operacionais da empresa. 

Portanto, o objetivo final é aperfeiçoar o modelo, representando através de novas 

restrições e variáveis, reformulações e alterações no pré-processamento dos dados 

algumas características operacionais não contempladas no modelo básico, sem que o 

aumento no tempo computacional torne sua utilização inviável. 

 

1.3 CONTRIBUIÇÕES DO TRABALHO 

 

O modelo aperfeiçoado nesta dissertação possibilita que os gestores da Petrobras 

possam tomar decisões relativas à localização de aeródromos e alocação das demandas 

3 
 



 

de passageiros às bases aéreas com maior embasamento, em função da maior precisão e 

qualidade dos resultados fornecidos. 

Adicionalmente, o modelo indica a composição de frota de aeronaves de menor 

custo para diferentes cenários de demanda e custos de frota, sendo de grande 

importância para o planejamento logístico da companhia. 

 

 

1.4 ESTRUTURA DO TRABALHO 

Para cumprir o propósito estabelecido, esta dissertação está organizada como 

apresentado a seguir: no Capítulo 2 se descreve o sistema logístico de transporte de 

passageiros para trabalho offshore, no qual o problema de estudo desta dissertação esta 

inserido; a revisão da bibliografia disponível sobre o tema é realizada no Capítulo 3; o 

modelo atualmente utilizado, o qual é objetivo de aprimoramento desta dissertação, é 

detalhado no Capitulo 4; o Capitulo 5 descreve as alterações no algoritmo do modelo de 

modo torná-lo mais robusto; no Capitulo 6 apresenta-se um estudo de caso utilizando o 

modelo desenvolvido; as conclusões e as recomendações para estudos futuros são 

apresentadas no Capítulo 7, seguidas pela referências bibliográficas (Capítulo 8) e 

anexos. 

 

4 
 



 

2. SISTEMA LOGÍSTICO DE TRANSPORTE DE 

PESSOAL PARA TRABALHO OFFSHORE 

Neste capitulo descreve-se o sistema logístico de transporte de pessoal para 

trabalho em bacias petrolíferas marítimas.  Na seção 2.1 apresenta-se um histórico e a 

configuração atual da cadeia. Cada componente da cadeia logística é detalhado na seção 

2.2. A seguir, seção 2.3, descreve-se a regulamentação a qual esta sujeita a operação 

com helicópteros. Na sequência, descrevem-se as etapas do planejamento desta rede 

logística (Seção 2.4) e por fim, na seção Erro! Fonte de referência não encontrada. é 

apresentado o problema alvo desta dissertação e sua relevância. 

 

2.1 HISTÓRICO E SITUAÇÃO ATUAL DA CADEIA 

O transporte de passageiros para trabalho em exploração e produção de petróleo 

offshore, ao longo da história foi realizado através dos modais aéreo (helicópteros) e 

marítimo (lanchas rápidas). O modal aéreo é predominante nesta atividade devido à 

rapidez, flexibilidade e conforto proporcionado ao passageiro (BRITTAN e 

DOUGLAS, 2009).  

 A Petrobras começou suas atividades de transporte de passageiros para trabalho 

offshore em meados dos anos de 1970, quando houve início da exploração da Bacia de 

Campos. Inicialmente, utilizava-se um mix dos modais aéreo e marítimo. Tal 

movimentação perdurou até meados dos anos de 1990, porém através de estudo internos 

verificou-se que o modal aéreo apresentava maior flexibilidade e melhor desempenho 

(tempo e custo) do que o modal marítimo (HERMETO, 2009). 

5 
 



 

 

Figura 3: Sikorsky S61N - Primeiro helicóptero utilizado para transporte aéreo de passageiros para 
plataformas marítimas da Petrobras, na Bacia de Campos. (LAUX, 2010) 

 

Alguns estudos apontaram como sendo o transporte por lancha o mais seguro 

(SPOUGE et. al.; 1994). Entretanto, o modal marítimo, além de ser mais lento no 

trajeto, apresenta problemas no transbordo da embarcação para a plataforma, que 

usualmente é realizado por cestas içadas pelo guindaste da plataforma. Este sistema de 

transbordo apresenta limitações de operação de acordo com condição de mar e vento, 

tendo janela operacional menor que a do modal aéreo. 

Atualmente, existem novas tecnologias de transporte dos passageiros para 

plataformas, com lanchas mais rápidas (chegando a 50 nós de velocidade) e de maior 

estabilidade. Os sistemas de transbordo também passaram por evoluções tecnológicas 

tornando-se mais seguros. Como exemplo, tem-se a cesta rígida, que apresenta maior 

segurança que a convencional, sendo utilizada desde 2008 no Oeste da África 

(BRITTAN, 2009). Alguns modelos de rampa (Figura 4), também estão em 

desenvolvimento e/ou fase de testes. Entretanto, esta dissertação será limitada ao estudo 

do transporte pelo modal aéreo, utilizado em 100% das movimentações de passageiros 

da Petrobras, na região Sul-Sudeste (SSE) nos últimos anos. 

6 
 



 

 

Figura 4: Sistemas de Transbordo de Passageiros de Embarcação para Unidade Marítima (Adaptado de 
STRONG, 2008 e LOCKHEED MARTIN, 2008) 

 

A rede logística utilizada atualmente na operação de apoio offshore para o 

transporte aéreo de passageiros da Petrobras no SSE, escopo do estudo, é composta 

pelos aeroportos de Vitória, Macaé, Cabo Frio, Jacarepaguá, Itanhaém, Navegantes e o 

Heliporto de São Tomé, como pode ser visto no mapa da Figura 5. O heliporto de São 

Tomé pertence à Petrobras e possui uma localização privilegiada em relação às unidades 

da Bacia de Campos. O aeroporto de Cabo Frio é operado pela empresa Costa do Sol, o 

de Itanhaém é operado pelo Departamento Aeroviário do Estado de São Paulo 

(DAESP). Os demais aeroportos são operados pela INFRAERO. 

 

7 
 



 

Vitória

São Tom é

Macaé
Jacarepagu á

Cabo Frio
Itanhaém

Navegantes

 
Figura 5: Distribuição Geográfica dos Aeroportos a Serviço da Petrobras no SSE (Fonte: Mapa 

desenvolvido a partir de dados disponibilizados pela Petrobras) 

 
Na Figura 6, pode-se observar a distribuição da demanda entre as bases 

aeroportuárias realizada no ano de 2010. O aeroporto de Macaé foi o responsável por 

45% de toda a movimentação de passageiros no SSE. Agrupando-o com o heliporto de 

São Tomé e o aeroporto internacional de Cabo Frio, que também fazem o transporte 

para a Bacia de Campos, chega-se a 77% da movimentação total. Isto comprova que a 

grande concentração atual de atividades se encontra na região de Campos do Pós-Sal 

Bacia de Campos. 

 
Figura 6: Distribuição de passageiros por aeroporto, no SSE em 2010 (Fonte: Dados disponibilizados pela 

Petrobras) 

Entretanto, o crescimento previsto para os próximos anos está concentrado na 

província do Pré-Sal da Bacia de Santos, de maior extensão e distância da costa que as 

Bacias de Campos e Espírito Santo. 

8 
 



 

2.2 COMPONENTES DO SISTEMA LOGÍSTICO 

O Sistema logístico de movimentação de passageiros para trabalho em 

exploração e produção de petróleo e gás natural em bacias marítimas é composto por 

três elos principais, que são as bases terrestres, aéreas e unidades marítimas. Entre estes 

elos, ocorre a movimentação da demanda de passageiros através dos modais terrestre e 

aéreo. O problema de planejamento de rede logística envolve direta ou indiretamente 

cada um destes componentes através das variáveis e restrições presentes em sua 

formulação. 

Base Terrestre Aeródromo Unidade Marítima

Ônibus Helicóptero

 

Figura 7: Elos do Sistema Logístico de Transporte de Passageiros para atividade de exploração e 
produção de petróleo e gás natural offshore da Petrobras  

2.2.1 Bases Terrestres 

Cada funcionário está alocado a uma base terrestre da companhia e deve 

apresentar-se nesta base, sendo o transporte terrestre até a base aérea custeado pela 

empresa, por modal rodoviário. A partir da base aérea, os passageiros seguem viagem 

para as unidades marítimas de destino por meio de helicópteros. 

Estes custos, entretanto, se mostram irrelevantes comparados ao custo do 

transporte aéreo.  

2.2.2 Aeródromos 

Segundo a ICAO (1999), aeródromos são áreas definidas em terra ou na água 

(incluindo quaisquer construções, instalações e equipamentos) com o propósito de 

serem utilizadas, no todo ou em parte, para a chegada, partida e movimentação de 

9 
 



 

aeronaves em sua superfície. Estes são denominados heliportos quando utilizados para a 

chegada, partida e movimentação de helicópteros. 

Os heliportos utilizados para o transporte de passageiros offshore funcionam 

como centros de distribuição, sendo que sua localização influencia consideravelmente 

no dimensionamento de recursos e, como conseqüência, nos custos de extração de 

petróleo.  

2.2.3 Unidades Marítimas (UM) 

São as instalações offshore responsáveis pelas atividades de exploração e 

produção da empresa. Os principais tipos de UMs em utilização atualmente pela 

Petrobras são: 

a) Fixa de Produção: possui superestrutura apoiada no solo marinho através de 

jaqueta (estrutura metálica fixa). É utilizada em lâminas d’água rasas (até 450 metros de 

profundidade, aproximadamente). 

b) Flutuante de Produção: consiste em uma plataforma superior semi-submersível. 

A superestrutura, sempre acima da linha d’água, é ligada por colunas aos cascos 

submersos. É utilizada para produção de petróleo em campos de águas profundas. Em 

geral é posicionada na área através de ancoragem.  

c) FPSO/FSO (Floating, Production,Storage and Offloading/ Floating, Storage 

and Offloading): Tem as mesmas características de operação e projeto das semi-

submersíveis, exceto que seu casco não submerge. O posicionamento é mais crítico, por 

apresentar maior área atingida por ondas. Em geral é ancorado, podendo também ser 
1

equipado com sistema de posicionamento dinâmico . 

d) Sonda Ancorada: unidade marítima utilizada para perfuração e completação de 

poços. Pode ser do tipo semi-submersível ou um navio. Fixada na localidade por 

ancoragem. 

                                                     
1
 O sistema de posicionamento dinâmico controla automaticamente a posição de uma embarcação por 

meio de propulsão ativa. O sistema recebe as informações de sensores, sistemas de referência,  
propulsores e painel de controle, processa essas informações e as usa para calcular a potência necessária 
para manter a posição do navio/plataforma e em que direção essa potência deve ser aplicada. O resultado 
desse cálculo é então convertido em sinais que são enviados aos respectivos propulsores. 

10 
 



 

e) Sonda DP (Dinamic Positioning): possui as mesmas características que a sonda 

ancorada, exceto pela fixação na locação do poço que é realizada através de sistema de 

posicionamento dinâmico. 

f) Outros (Barcos Especiais, Unidades de Manutenção e Segurança, etc): demais 

tipos de unidades operando nas bacias petrolíferas marítimas que possuem heliponto e 

recebem passageiros por modal aéreo. 

 

Figura 8: Exemplos de unidades marítimas de produção de petróleo (Fonte: Banco de Imagens Petrobras) 

 

2.2.4 Helicópteros 

Helicópteros são aeronaves dotadas de hélices horizontais, que as tornam 

capazes de se estabilizar no ar e se deslocar em qualquer sentido. Pode-se também 

denominá-los aeronaves de asa rotativa, enquanto aviões são denominados aeronaves de 

asa fixa. 

Segundo ROCHA (2001), a maior diferença da aeronave de asa rotativa em 

relação à de asa fixa é sua capacidade de se mover independentemente nas três direções 

e seis sentidos e de girar, também de forma independente nos planos longitudinal, 

vertical transversal e horizontal. Estas características conferem ao helicóptero a 

11 
 



 

possibilidade de pouso e decolagem sem necessidade de pista, o que habilita este modal 

para o transporte de pessoas para trabalho em unidades de produção e exploração 

offshore.  

A capacidade de transporte do helicóptero varia de acordo com o modelo 

considerado. Cada modelo apresenta um Peso Máximo de Decolagem (PMD), que é o 

peso máximo com o qual consegue realizar vôo. A capacidade de transporte para um 

determinado destino, chamada de carga paga, de forma simplificada, é a diferença entre 

o PMD e o Peso Básico Operacional (PBO). O PBO é o somatório dos pesos de 

combustível necessário para a viagem, tripulação, equipamentos e peso bruto da 

aeronave. A carga paga pode ser utilizada para o transporte de passageiros e bagagem. 

Dividindo-se esta pelo peso médio do passageiro com sua bagagem, chega-se à 

quantidade de passageiros possíveis de serem transportados para um determinado 

modelo de helicóptero, considerando pontos de origem e destino estabelecidos. 

 

2.2.5 Demanda 

Cada tipo de UM apresenta um perfil diferente de demanda de passageiros que 

está relacionado à sua capacidade máxima de pessoas a bordo (People on Board – 

POB), definida pela Marinha Brasileira.  

As sondas, por exemplo, apresentam uma quantidade maior de passageiros 

eventuais que as plataformas de produção devido à maior necessidade de prestação de 

serviços especiais durante as fases de perfuração e completação de um poço, além de 

apresentarem maiores limitações de espaço e menores capacidades para acomodação de 

pessoas a bordo.  

Os principais tipos de demanda por movimentação de passageiros são descritos a seguir: 

a) Troca de Turma: O principal motivo de embarque de passageiros para 

plataformas e sondas é a troca de turma. Cada plataforma possui um POB (People on 

Board), que representa a quantidade de funcionários fixos desta unidade marítima, que 

trabalham em regime de embarque e utilizam os vôos de troca de turma. Os 

profissionais que trabalham em regime de embarque passam um período, em geral de 14 

dias na plataforma e retornam passando período igual ou maior de folga a depender de 

12 
 



 

2
regimes contratuais . Estes profissionais trabalham em funções essenciais para o 

funcionamento da operação sendo que para que um funcionário entre de folga outro tem 

que embarcar. Portanto, os vôos de troca de turma, em geral saem com toda a lotação da 

aeronave e retornam com a mesma quantidade de passageiros, sendo o tipo de vôo que 

melhor utiliza a frota. Como a cada 14 dias toda a equipe de uma plataforma é trocada, é 

necessário disponibilizar semanalmente 50% do POB em vagas nos vôos. É importante 

ressaltar que se utiliza uma vaga para movimentação de até 2 passageiros, sendo um 

embarque e um desembarque. 

b) Eventuais: Alguns profissionais embarcam esporadicamente para realização de 

atividades especiais, vistorias, manutenções etc. Estes funcionários não possuem uma 

escala fixa de vôos. Para que as unidades marítimas possam se programar para o 

embarque de passageiros eventuais, cada unidade tem disponíveis na semana um 

número fixo de vagas para este tipo de vôo que gira em torno de 15% de seu POB. Este 

tipo de embarque apresenta uma ocupação menor que os vôos de troca de turma, 

podendo visitar uma quantidade maior de unidades marítimas. Além disto, estes vôos 

não possuem o balanceamento garantido de passageiros para embarque e desembarque. 

Logo, não se aproveita toda a capacidade da frota. 

c) Comitiva e Outros: Além dos vôos descritos acima, existem os de comitiva, 

realizados para visitas especiais e fiscalização das plataformas e os vôos de transbordo, 

de passageiros de uma UM para outra. Para estes tipos de vôo não há uma regra 

específica de quantidade de vagas a disponibilizar. Entretanto, é necessário dimensionar 

aeronaves para esta função.  

O planejamento da rede logística considera como premissa que as UMs 

existentes manterão comportamentos históricos de demanda. Para as unidades novas é 

considerada projeção de demanda obtida a partir do tratamento estatístico das 

informações históricas e da segregação das unidades nos modelos definidos no início 

desta subseção. 

 
                                                     
2
 Funcionários concursados da Petrobras que trabalham nas plataformas em regime de embarque 

trabalham por 14 dias nas plataformas, com intervalo de 21 dias entre embarques. Funcionários de 
empresas contratadas, no geral fazem embarque de 14 dias com intervalos de 14 dias entre embarques. 

13 
 



 

2.3 REGULAMENTAÇÃO APLICADA ÀS OPERAÇÕES NO ESPAÇO AÉREO 

BRASILEIRO 

O transporte aéreo de passageiros, por não ser atividade fim da Petrobras, é 

terceirizado a empresas especializadas em aviação civil. Estas empresas, assim como 

outras empresas que operem no Espaço Aéreo Brasileiro, estão sujeitas as regras da 

Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil (ANAC) e ação fiscalizadora do Departamento de 

Controle de Espaço Aéreo (DECEA) e do Centro de Gerenciamento de Navegação 

Aérea do 3º Comando Aéreo Regional da Aeronáutica (III COMAR). 

Diversas características e regras operacionais estão associadas ao procedimento 

de controle de vôo utilizado pelas aeronaves. Os tipos de procedimento existentes são: 

a) VFR (Visual Flight Rules) – Vôo realizado seguindo regras de vôo visual. Neste 

tipo de vôo há maior suscetibilidade ao fator humano. Logo, a regulamentação exige 

maior espaçamento entre aeronaves e condições metereológicas mais favoráveis para 

que se possa realizar pousos e decolagens.  

b) IFR (Instrument Flight Rules) – Vôo realizado seguindo regras de vôo por 

instrumento. Como a aeronave está geo-referenciada e sob visão do controlador de vôo, 

as exigências de espaçamento são menores e pode-se operar em condições 

metereológicas mais extremas.  

Os vôos para transporte de passageiros offshore da Petrobras seguem as regras 
3

“IFR não-precisão”  para pouso e decolagem nas bases aéreas e regras VFR para 

operações nas plataformas. Como as unidades marítimas possuem estruturas compactas 

e há obstáculos muito próximos aos helipontos, o procedimento de pouso nas 

plataformas em IFR não é permitido. Portanto, como recomendado na ICA 100-12 

(COMANDO DA AERONÁUTICA, 2009), operações nas unidades marítimas só 

poderão ser realizadas à luz do dia, o que restringe a janela diária de operação. 

Adicionalmente, por questões de segurança, uma aeronave só pode ser designada a um 
                                                     
3
 Os procedimentos de vôo IFR podem ser subdivididos em IFR Não-Precisão e IFR Precisão.  Para vôos 

seguindo procedimento IFR Não-Precisão, utiliza-se para orientação, equipamentos de auxílio a 

navegação de não precisão, como: NDB, VOR, Recalada e Radar de Terminal. Os vôos com 

procedimento IFR precisão utilizam informações fornecidas por equipamentos de precisão como ILS, 

Radar de aproximação de precisão e MLS.  

14 
 



 

vôo se tiver autonomia para ir à unidade marítima, retornar à base e ainda ter reserva de 

combustível para 30 a 45 minutos, de acordo com sua capacidade de transporte. 

Os vôos offshore também estão sujeitos ao gerenciamento do tráfego do 

DECEA. Estes vôos são, em geral, realizados de forma linear entre aeródromo e 

unidade marítima. Entretanto, o elevado número de operações aéreas na Bacia de 

Campos, caracterizada por uma grande concentração de plataformas separadas por 

distâncias relativamente pequenas, cerca de 3 km entre plataformas, exigem 

procedimentos de controle maior, para garantir a segurança nas operações de transporte 

de passageiros offshore. Portanto, no ano de 2009, a Petrobras, juntamente com o 

DECEA, elaborou um estudo com a finalidade de definir nova carta aeronáutica para a 

Bacia de Campos. 

O resultado deste trabalho foi a criação de uma carta de vôo aeronáutica para a 

Área de Controle de Terminal (TMA) Macaé (Figura 9), com a definição de portais de 

entrada e saída das aeronaves para a Bacia de Campos, bem como gabaritos de altitude 

de vôo. Os procedimentos contidos nesta nova carta tornaram o fluxo mais contínuo e 

controlado, fornecendo mais subsídios para o trabalho dos controladores de vôo e 

tornando o processo mais seguro.  

De forma simplificada, o procedimento efetuado pela aeronave consiste em:  

a) decolagem do aeródromo de origem, cruzando o portal de entrada 

correspondente à unidade marítima a ser visitada, com altitude de vôo predeterminada 

(ex: 2.000 pés/3.000 pés); 

b) deslocamento pelo corredor de vôo até encontrar-se próximo à unidade; 

c)  efetuação do procedimento de aproximação e pouso na plataforma; 

d)  realização do desembarque e embarque de passageiros; 

e) decolagem em direção ao corredor de saída correspondente à unidade marítima 

visitada; 

f) ao fim do corredor, deslocamento linear até o destino final, que será o mesmo 

aeródromo de partida. 

15 
 



 

Figura 9: Nova carta aeronáutica da Área de Controle Terminal (TMA) Macaé. (Fonte: 

AIS/DECEA, 2009) 

Estas alterações nas rotas tiveram impacto significativo nas distâncias 

percorridas pelas aeronaves, principalmente nos vôos partindo do Heliponto de São 

Tomé.  

 

2.4 PLANEJAMENTO DO TRANSPORTE DE PASSAGEIROS 

O planejamento logístico do transporte de passageiros para trabalho offshore na 

Petrobras é composto por quatro macro-atividades, passando por três níveis de decisão, 

16 
 



 

conforme resumido na Tabela 1. Cada uma destas atividades será mais bem definida nas 

subseções a seguir. 

Tabela 1: Níveis de planejamento da logística de transporte de passageiros e estudos publicados sobre as 
atividades 

Período 
Nível de Bibliografia 

Atividade de Atualização Descrição 
Planejamento Disponível 

Análise 
MENEZES ET 

Roteirização diária 
AL 

dos atendimentos 
(2010);ROMERO 

seguindo os horários 
et. al. (2007); 

de vôo pré-definidos 
Operacional Roteirização Dia OnTime SIERKSMA E 

por unidade 
TIJSSEN (1998); 

marítima e as 
GALVÃO E 

solicitações de 
GUIMARÃES 

atendimento do dia. 
(1990) 

Definição de dias da 
semana e intervalos 

Anual - 
de horários e base 

Revisada 
aérea em que as 

quando há SHERALI et. al. 
unidades poderão 

Definição de mudança de (2010);TAM et. 
Tático Semana solicitar 

Tabela de Vôo área de al. (2011); YAN e 
atendimentos, além 

atendimento TU (2002) 
de um número de 

de uma 
vagas 

sonda. 
disponibilizadas 
nestes horários. 

Dimensionamento 
Dimensionamento de Frota a ser 

Tático Bi-anual Anual ROCHA (2001) 
de Frota contratada para os 

próximos a anos. 
Planejamento de 

longo prazo. Análise SENA ET. 
de Localização de AL.(2010); SENA 

Planejamento de 
Estratégico 20 anos Anual Bases e Alocação de E FERREIRA 

Rede 
demanda às bases FILHO (2010) 
além de análise de  

perfil de frota. 

 

2.4.1 Operacional 

O nível de planejamento operacional contempla a roteirização diária das 

aeronaves, sujeita a revisões de acordo com questões de peso de passageiros, de fatores 

climáticos que influenciam no consumo de combustível (temperatura, direção de vento e 

pressão atmosférica na região), indisponibilidade climática, indisponibilidade de 

aeronaves e questões de sazonalidade de demanda. A decisão operacional já foi bastante 

estudada, tendo uma série de artigos publicados sobre o assunto.  

17 
 



 

No âmbito internacional pode-se destacar o estudo de SIERKSMA e TIJSSEN 

(1998), que utilizou programação linear e heurística na resolução do problema de 

roteirização para atendimento a 51 plataformas no Mar do Norte. Já ROMERO et. al. 

(2007) combinou heurísticas de otimização com algoritmo genético para a resolução do 

problema de roteirização de helicópteros para transporte offshore, aplicando o modelo a 

um caso real da Mexican Oil Company - PEMEX.  

No contexto nacional, mais especificamente da Petrobras, destacam-se os 

estudos de GALVÃO E GUIMARÃES (1990) e MENEZES et. al (2010). Os primeiros 

autores descrevem o desenvolvimento de um sistema computadorizado, baseado em um 

método heurístico, para roteirização do atendimento às unidades marítimas da Petrobras 

da Bacia de Campos. Este modelo, entretanto, não foi implantado devido a dificuldades 

de relacionamento entre analistas de pesquisa operacional e cliente, que surgiram 

principalmente na fase de implementação. No segundo artigo, descreve-se uma segunda 

tentativa, bem sucedida, de implementação de ferramenta de roteirização na Petrobras. 

MENEZES et. al. (2010) apontam uma economia anual de $24 milhões, além de uma 

melhoria em segurança dos vôos com a implantação da ferramenta que teve sua 

formulação baseada em programação inteira mista, associada a um algoritmo de geração 

de colunas que associa heurística a métodos exatos.      

A programação dos vôos, conforme descrito em MENEZES et. al (2010), deve 

obedecer a uma série de restrições, descritas a seguir:  

a) Cada vôo começa e termina na mesma base aérea. 

b) Um helicóptero realiza no máximo 5 vôos em um dia. 

c) Um helicóptero precisa ser inspecionado após cada vôo, requerendo tempo de 

inspeção. 

d) O número de pousos em cada vôo é limitado. 

e) O número de pousos por passageiro também é limitado. 

f) Para cada intervalo de tempo, o número de helicópteros visitando uma mesma 

plataforma é limitado. 

g) Os helicópteros precisam parar para o almoço da tripulação. 

18 
 



 

h) A capacidade dos helicópteros não pode ser excedida. Esta varia com o tipo de 

helicóptero, capacidade de tanques de combustível, e distância a ser percorrida na rota.  

i) A aeronave só pode voar do nascer ao pôr do sol, por questões de segurança. 

j) As restrições de dimensões e peso das aeronaves para pouso nos helipontos de 
4

cada UM devem ser respeitadas .  

 

2.4.2 Tático 

 

O planejamento tático do transporte aéreo de passageiros é composto pelo 

dimensionamento de frota e pela elaboração das tabelas de vôo semanais que são 

reconfiguradas anualmente. 

A decisão de dimensionamento de frota foi estudada por ROCHA (2001), que 

adequou o modelo de ETEZADI e BEASLEY (1983) para o dimensionamento de frota 

de helicópteros para atendimento de vôos de trocas regulares de turma das unidades 

marítimas da Bacia de Campos atendidas na época pelo Heliponto de São Tomé. 

Atualmente o dimensionamento de frota é realizado para um horizonte de 2 

anos, sendo atualizado anualmente. Neste dimensionamento considera-se como restrição 

a disponibilidade de mercado dos modelos de helicóptero. 

 Já a elaboração da tabela de vôo é feita anualmente e revisada quando uma 

sonda muda de locação e, nesta nova locação, o atendimento necessita ser realizado por 

outra base aérea. A tabela é composta por horários de vôo para atendimento a cada UM 

por dia da semana e heliporto de origem. As restrições que devem ser atendidas na 

montagem da tabela de vôo são: restrições de horário de recebimento de cada UM; 

                                                     
4
 A utilização dos helipontos das plataformas para pousos e decolagens está sujeita a homologação, 

seguindo as Normas da Autoridade Marítima, NORMAN 01 (MARINHA DO BRASIL, 2010). Esta 
regulamentação é rigorosa no que se refere aos pesos e dimensões máximos admissíveis dos helicópteros 
que neles possam operar. Essas limitações são definidas em função da resistência estrutural, formato 
geométrico e dimensões de cada heliponto. Com a evolução da indústria aeronáutica, surgiram 
helicópteros comerciais maiores que apresentam potencial de redução de custos devido ao ganho de 
escala. Entretanto, algumas plataformas, mais antigas, não possuem capacidade de recebê-los, devido a 
restrições estruturais (tamanho de helipontos). 

19 
 



 

capacidade de vôos dos heliportos, capacidade de vôos no mesmo intervalo de horários 

numa mesma região do espaço aéreo.  

Não foi encontrado referencial teórico sobre a elaboração de tabela de vôo para 

transporte de passageiros por helicóptero para bacias petrolíferas marítimas. Entretanto, 

a programação de vôos de avião e das tripulações assim como a programação de trens já 

foram extensamente estudados podendo servir de base para elaboração de modelos de 

otimização para tabelas de vôo de helicópteros. Alguns exemplos de estudos nesta área 

são os de SHERALI et. al. (2010), TAM et. al. (2011) e YAN e TU (2001). 

 

2.4.3 Estratégico 

O planejamento estratégico contempla a definição da rede logística no longo 

prazo, com mapeamento da necessidade de novos aeroportos e da sua melhor 

localização e pré-dimensionamento da frota para planejamento de contratação. 

Na pesquisa bibliográfica realizada previamente, não foi encontrado material a 

respeito da decisão estratégica. Sendo está uma das motivações para o estudo desta 

dissertação, que teve início com a descrição e análise do modelo atual de localização de 

aeródromos e definição da rede logística de movimentação de passageiros para unidades 

de exploração e produção de petróleo e gás natural offshore. (SENA e FERREIRA 

FILHO, 2010)   

A logística de pessoas para trabalho em exploração e produção de petróleo 

offshore tem como principal meio de transporte aeronaves de asa rotativa (helicópteros). 

Este modal tem, como características, custos elevados com locação, manutenção e 
5

consumo de combustível . Estas características tornam os custos da frota aérea sensíveis 

à localização dos aeródromos e alocação das demandas a estes aeródromos, que 

depende da capacidade destes. 

A definição da capacidade aeroportuária envolve três questões descritas a seguir, 

sendo que a mais restritiva define a capacidade do aeroporto (HORONJEFF e 

MCKELVEY, 1993):  

                                                     
5
 O combustível utilizado pelos helicópteros e demais aeronaves com motores a turbina é o querosene de 

aviação (QAV). 

20 
 



 

a) Capacidade de pista e estacionamento de aeronaves: capacidade de pousos e 

decolagens de um aeroporto, considerando espaçamento de segurança entre as 

aeronaves e número de posições de estacionamento. 

b) Capacidade de tráfego aéreo: habilidade do controle de tráfego aéreo em 

proporcionar serviço às aeronaves, em condições normais, sendo expressa como número 

máximo de aeronaves que podem entrar em um setor do espaço aéreo em um período 

especificado.  

c) Capacidade do terminal de passageiros: capacidade de espera, embarque e 

desembarque de passageiros, representado em termos de área do terminal, para um dado 

nível de serviço definido. 

 

Figura 10: Três pilares para a definição da capacidade aeronáutica (Fonte: Adaptado de HORONJEFF e 
MCKELVEY, 1993) 

 

Atualmente, na Petrobras, realiza-se o planejamento estratégico da logística a 

partir da análise dos resultados de modelo de localização-alocação de demandas de 

passageiros que é rodado para um horizonte de 20 anos, e atualizado anualmente. Este 

modelo, entretanto, apresenta algumas simplificações em sua formulação que podem 

comprometer a precisão dos resultados gerados. (SENA e FERREIRA FILHO, 2010) 

 

 

 

21 
 



 

3. FUNDAMENTAÇÃO TEÓRICA E REVISÃO 

BIBLIOGRÁFICA 

 

Neste capítulo apresenta-se uma definição de Sistemas de Apoio a Decisão 

(Seção 3.1). Em seguida (seção 3.2), são descritas as redes de distribuição logística e 

discutidos alguns dos principais estudos já realizados sobre o tema. Na seção 3.3 é 

conceituado o modelo de localização e apresentadas as principais metodologias de 

resolução encontradas na bibliografia.  

3.1 SISTEMAS DE APOIO À DECISÃO 

 De acordo com MINTZBERG (1973) apud EIERMAN et. al.(1995), uma das 

principais funções da atividade gerencial é a tomada de decisão. Como as relações das 

empresas com seus stakeholders estão cada dia mais complexas, as variáveis envolvidas 

nos processos de tomada de decisão são crescentes, tornando-se de extrema importância 

encontrar ferramentas que dêem subsídios às decisões dos gestores.  

BIDGOLI (1998) apud BARBOSA e ALMEIDA (2002), define Sistemas de 

Apoio à Decisão (SADs) como aqueles que possuem foco no suporte às decisões através 

de simulações com a utilização de modelos. Segundo o autor, os SADs são construídos 

para dar suporte às decisões gerenciais semi-estruturadas ou não-estruturadas, sobre 

assuntos dinâmicos, que sofrem constantes mudanças de cenário ou que não podem ser 

facilmente especificados. Os SADs apresentam maior capacidade analítica, o que 

permite empregar vários modelos diferentes para análise de informação.  

Segundo GEOFRION et. al. (1995), as ferramentas de suporte à decisão têm 

como propósito detectar oportunidades de ganhos para as empresas em tempo 

consideravelmente curto. Os autores também pontuam que os gestores não são 

propensos a aceitar respostas que eles não compreendam satisfatoriamente. Como os 

modelos são representações simplificadas do problema real, podem gerar resultados 

que, apesar de ótimos para os dados imputados, não o são para o problema geral devido 

à não consideração de algum parâmetro ou restrição importante. Logo, a análise das 

22 
 



 

restrições reais e do impacto nos resultados de simplificações no modelo é etapa 

importante na construção de um SAD. Adicionalmente, a estrutura do SAD deve ser 

validada pelos usuários para que este tenha suporte gerencial e seja efetivamente 

utilizado na empresa. 

A logística está, nos últimos anos, dentre os principais temas na gestão das 

empresas, sendo os SADs ferramentas importantes no auxílio aos gestores para que suas 

decisões sejam acertadas, para que os custos logísticos sejam reduzidos e para que a 

empresa mantenha competitividade. Na Seção 3.2 serão discutidos alguns dos principais 

problemas logísticos aos quais se aplicam os SADs. 

3.2 REDES DE DISTRIBUIÇÃO LOGÍSTICA 

A configuração de redes logísticas de distribuição, incluindo a definição de 

localização das instalações, está entre os principais desafios da logística em geral. Sua 

relevância advém dos elevados investimentos envolvidos e dos consideráveis impactos 

que tais decisões têm sobre os custos da empresa. De acordo com INSTITUTO DE 

LOGÍSTICA E SUPPLY CHAIN - ILOS (2010), em pesquisa realizada em 2009 com 

172 empresas de ramos diversos, chegou-se a uma estimativa de gastos médios com 

logística correspondentes a 8,3% da receita líquida. Em estudo equivalente realizado em 

2005, o percentual de gastos com logística era de 7,5%, demonstrando uma tendência de 

crescimento destes custos. Nesta pesquisa, o custo logístico total contempla transporte, 

estoque e armazenagem, sendo a maior relevância decorrente dos custos de transporte, 

como se pode observar na Figura 11. 

 
Figura 11: Distribuição dos custos logísticos para empresas brasileiras (Fonte: ILOS, 2010) 

23 
 



 

De acordo com BALLOU (1999) apud LOPES e SANTOS (2006), as redes de 

distribuição e localização de instalações foram estudadas inicialmente por THUNEN 

(1875), WEBER (1929), PALANDER (1935), LOSCH (1940), HOOVER (1957), 

GREENHUT (1956) e ISARD (1960). O impulsionador da maior parte destes trabalhos 

foi a influência dos custos de transporte na localização das instalações. Os conceitos 

sugeridos por estes autores são ainda hoje aplicados, mesmo sendo os problemas de 

maior complexidade que os da época. 

SIMCHI-LEVI et. al. (2000) afirmam que a rede logística é formada por 

fornecedores, depósitos, centros de distribuição e pontos de varejo, além de insumos, 

estoques em processo e produtos finais que circulam entre as instalações. CHAPMAN 

(1994) apud LOPES e SANTOS (2006) pontua que para muitas companhias, 

administrar à logística implica gerenciar uma rede complexa de unidades e fluxo de 

materiais e mercadorias finais entre estas unidades. 

A configuração da rede logística passa por algumas decisões fundamentais 

descritas a seguir: determinação do número apropriado de facilidades; localização 

geográfica destas; definição de seu tamanho; alocação de espaço para os produtos em 

cada facilidade; e, determinação de quais produtos os clientes receberão de cada 

facilidade (SIMCH-LEVI et. al., 2000). A seguir (Seção 3.3), será feita uma revisão da 

literatura sobre o problema de localização de facilidades e configuração da rede 

logística. 

3.3 O PROBLEMA DE LOCALIZAÇÃO 

3.3.1  Histórico 

A localização de facilidades é um problema clássico de otimização, que 

representa uma das questões chave na definição de uma rede de operações (SLACK et. 

al., 2002; DUPONT, 2008).   

Embora alguns pesquisadores tenham proposto e solucionado o problema de 

localização já no século XVII, e de não se saber ao certo quem foi o primeiro a formular 

o problema, a Teoria da Localização começou a ser formalmente estudada por Alfred 

Weber em 1909. Entretanto, foi a partir de 1964 que ela ganhou maior interesse dos 

24 
 



 

pesquisadores, após a publicação de HAKIMI (1964), que estudou a localização de 

centrais de chaveamento em uma rede de comunicação e cabines policiais em uma 

malha rodoviária. (FARAHAMI e HEKMATFAR, 2009; DREZNER et. al., 2004) 

O problema de Weber pode ser definido de forma simplificada como o desejo de 

localizar uma facilidade no ponto que  minimize o custo de transporte para os clientes. 

A função objetivo será então de minimização do somatório das distâncias facilidade-

cliente, ponderadas pelos custos unitários de transporte por unidade de distância. 

(DREZNER et. al., 2004) 

3.3.2 Classificação dos problemas de localização 

Um grande volume de generalizações, variações e extensões do problema inicial 

de Weber surgem a cada ano. Portanto, uma sistematização foi necessária para facilitar 

o trabalho dos pesquisadores. Neste sentido, um esforço considerável já foi feito na 

elaboração de classificações e taxonomias para os modelos de localização. FRANCIS e 

WHITE (1974) estão entre os pioneiros nesta linha. Estes autores apresentaram uma 

taxonomia para problemas de layout e localização composta por seis elementos 

principais: (1) Características da nova facilidade; (2) Características de Facilidades 

Existentes; (3) Interação entre Facilidades Existentes e Novas; (4) Características do 

Espaço de Solução; (5) Medida de distância; (6) Objetivo. (TAFAZZOLI e 

MOZAFARI, 2009)  

Posteriormente, DASKIN (1995), apud TAFAZZOLI e MOZAFARI (2009), 

apresentou uma taxonomia bastante abrangente, baseada em 14 critérios que é resumida 

na Tabela 2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25 
 



 

Tabela 2: Taxonomia proposta por DASKIN (1995) apud TAFAZZOLI e MOZAFARI (2009) 

# Critério Classificação 
1 Estrutura Topológica Planar Discreta Rede 
2 Tipo de rede Árvore Grafo 
3 Medida de distância Manhattan Euclidiana Lp 
4 Número de facilidades Única Múltiplas 
5 Dependência do tempo Estático Dinâmico 
6 Nível de certeza Determinística Probabilística 
7 Produtos Único Múltiplos 
8 Setor Público Privado 
9 Número de objetivos Único Múltiplos 
10 Elasticidade da demanda Inelástica Elástica 
11 Capacidade das Facilidades Capacidades Não capacitadas 

Facilidade mais Alocação geral da 
12 Tipo de Alocação da demanda 

próxima demanda 

13 Estrutura Hierárquica Um nível Hierárquica 

14 Facilidade Desejável? Desejável Indesejável 
  

HOLMBERG et. al. (1999) afirma que os modelos de localização podem ser 

segregados em diferentes categorias de acordo com as restrições assumidas. Uma 

divisão possível é entre UFLP (Uncapacited Facility Location Problem) e CFLP 

(Capacited Facility Location Problem). No UFLP, assume-se que as facilidades 

potenciais não apresentam restrição de capacidade. Neste caso, cada cliente será 

atendido por uma única facilidade, que lhe gerar o menor custo. Por outro lado, no 

CFLP, cada facilidade potencial apresenta uma capacidade máxima. Logo, clientes 

podem ser atendidos por mais de uma facilidade. Caso a mais próxima atinja sua 

capacidade máxima, parte da demanda pode ser realocada para a segunda facilidade de 

menor custo. 

Mais recentemente, REVELLE et. al. (2008) identificaram dois grupos de 

problemas de localização: (1) problemas de mediana e localização de plantas; (2) 

problemas de centro e cobertura. O primeiro grupo foca-se em minimização da distância 

ponderada pela demanda, sendo apropriado quando o objetivo é de minimização de 

custos ou maximização de lucros. O segundo grupo é muito utilizado para localização 

de serviços de emergência e nele, a qualidade da solução não é melhor que a da entidade 

com o pior serviço, ou seja, deve-se minimizar a maior distância aos clientes. 

26 
 



 

Os modelos de localização também podem ser divididos em quatro categorias 

(REVELLE et. al., 2008): 

a) Modelos analíticos se baseiam em uma grande quantidade de simplificações 

como: demanda uniformemente distribuída; custos semelhantes de abertura de 

facilidades, não importando a localização; e, custos de transporte por quilometro 

constantes independentemente do trajeto. Eles trazem insights importantes sobre a 

relação entre a quantidade de facilidades, sua localização e os custos totais, entretanto, 

são limitados. 

b) Modelos contínuos consideram que as facilidades podem ser alocadas em 

qualquer localidade dentro da área de serviço, enquanto a demanda está em pontos 

discretos. Estes modelos têm aplicabilidade restrita a problemas onde as facilidades 

realmente podem ser alocadas a qualquer ponto no espaço. 

c) Modelos de rede consideram que o problema de localização está inserido numa 

rede composta por nós e arcos. Há casos em que a demanda se encontra nos nós, nos 

arcos ou em ambos. As pesquisas nesta área, em geral buscam estruturas especiais que 

possam gerar algoritmos de tempo reduzido para grupos particulares de problemas.  

d) Modelos discretos consideram demanda discreta e um grupo finito de pontos 

candidatos a instalação de facilidades. Estes são aplicáveis a diversos contextos 

práticos, havendo vasta bibliografia relacionada.  

Os modelos de rede são discretos, pois consideram que demanda e instalações 

estão localizadas em um conjunto finito de localizações, entretanto a diferenciação entre 

as classes c e d definidas acima, está nos percursos entre facilidades e clientes. Modelos 

discretos são planares, consideram em geral inexistência de restrições de percurso e 

possibilidade de utilização das menores distâncias (distâncias lineares). 

Adicionalmente, o tema localização pode ser dividido em três áreas: o problema 

de localização, o problema de alocação e o problema de locação-alocação. O problema 

de Locação-Alocação consiste em localizar um conjunto de novas facilidades de forma 

a minimizar os custos de transportes, abrindo facilidades suficientes para satisfazer a 

demanda dos clientes. (FARAHAMI e HEKMATFAR, 2009; AZARMAND e JAMI, 

2009) 

 Com relação à modelagem da demanda nos problemas de localização, muitas 

formulações consideram-na estática e determinística. Entretanto, pela natureza 

27 
 



 

estratégica, os problemas de localização de facilidades requerem a consideração de 

alguns aspectos de incerteza futura na modelagem. Afinal, o investimento requerido 

para a abertura de uma facilidade torna-se viável apenas se esta se mantiver operacional 

por um período de tempo extenso. (FARAHANI e HEKMATFAR, 2009) 

Quando a incerteza da demanda é considerada na modelagem, classifica-se o 

modelo de localização como dinâmico.  OWEN e DASKIN (1998), apud FARAHANI 

et. al. (2009), apontam duas causas para as incertezas futuras que dividem em categorias 

os problemas dinâmicos: (1) incerteza relacionada ao planejamento para condições 

futuras; (2) incerteza relacionada ao conhecimento limitado dos parâmetros. No 

primeiro caso, pode-se dizer que o modelo é determinístico e dependente do tempo. Já 

no segundo caso o modelo é estocástico. 

 FARAHANI e HEKMATFAR (2009) aprofundam-se nos modelos dinâmicos 

determinísticos e dependentes do tempo. Estes podem ser classificados de acordo com: 

o número de realocações permitidos às facilidades; o número de facilidades realocáveis; 

tempo de realocação discreto ou contínuo e horizonte de tempo finito ou infinito. 

3.3.3 Métodos de Resolução dos Problemas de Localização 

GALVÃO (2003) apresenta contribuições importantes na resolução do UFLP 

desenvolvidas em 30 anos de carreira acadêmica dedicados ao problema. Dentre elas, 

abordagens baseadas no problema dual, relaxação lagrangeana, heurísticas e meta-

heurísticas. Estruturas de pesquisa em vizinhança utilizadas em busca local e em busca 

tabu na resolução do UFLP foram comparadas por GHOSH (2003). Já o autor MARIĆ 

(2010) apresentou um algoritmo genético para resolução do UFLP de múltiplos níveis, 

ou seja, com depósitos centrais que atendem a depósitos regionais de diversos níveis até 

chegar aos clientes.  

O UFLP, assim como o CFLP, pode ser classificado como NP - Completo 

através da demonstração de sua relação com o problema de empacotamento-cobertura e 

particionamento, conforme KRARUP e PRUZAN (1983), apud VERTER (2011). 

Portanto, métodos exatos de programação inteira, como o branch and bound, podem 

não convergir para soluções razoáveis em tempo computacional adequado, para 

instâncias muito grandes do problema.  

28 
 



 

Com relação ao CFLP, KUEHN e HAMBUERGER (1963), apud VERTER 

(2011), apresentaram a primeira heurística para sua resolução. Esta heurística é 

composta de uma fase construtiva e outra de melhoramento. A primeira fase, de 

avaliação detalhada da solução é sempre realizada para um subgrupo de facilidades 

reduzido e escolhido de forma míope. BORNSTEIN e AZLAN (1998) utilizaram testes 

de redução combinados a simulated annealing para sua heurística de resolução do 

CFLP. Diversas outras heurísticas foram analisadas, entretanto, esta dissertação se 

concentrará na análise de métodos exatos que são o foco do trabalho. 

Métodos exatos para o problema de localização, em geral, utilizam branch and 

bound clássico (com obtenção de limitantes inferiores por relaxação linear) ou 
6

associado à relaxação lagrangeana .  Métodos que utilizam branch and bound clássico, 

em geral, estão restritos a instâncias pequenas do problema devido ao grande 

crescimento do número de soluções viáveis a serem pesquisadas pelo método com o 

aumento do número de variáveis. Para grandes instâncias, alguns autores, como 

GEOFFRION e GRAVES (1974), apud BISSCHOP (2009), têm utilizado 

decomposição de Bender como alternativa para resolução do problema. 

 DUPONT (2008) utiliza branch and bound associado a uma heurística de busca 

local para redução do número de nós a serem pesquisados.  Em um UFLP com custo de 

produção por facilidade que segue curva de crescimento côncava, representando o 

ganho de escala. O autor conclui que o método é conveniente para resolução de 

problemas com até 20-25 facilidades e mais de 250 clientes. Segundo o autor, este 

algoritmo, implementado em Pascal, roda em um PC, não sendo necessários solvers 

comerciais extras.   

 HOLMBERG et. al. (1999) e TRAGANTALERNGSAK et. al. (2000) 

comparam em seus artigos o desempenho de algoritmos convencionais de branch and 

bound, como o do código comercial CPLEX, e deste algoritmo associado à relaxação 

lagrangeana. Com isto, produz-se um problema lagrangeano mais fácil de resolver e 

cujo valor da solução ótima é um limite inferior (em minimização) para o branch and 

bound. O primeiro autor ainda adiciona uma heurística primal forte que gera limitantes 

superiores para o branch and bound. 

                                                     
6
 A relaxação lagrangeana consiste na dualização das restrições difíceis, ou seja, o acréscimo destas à 

função objetivo através de um vetor de multiplicadores, chamados de multiplicadores de Lagrange, e sua 
consecutiva eliminação do conjunto de restrições. 

29 
 



 

 A decomposição de Bender foi aplicada a um problema não capacitado de 

localização de hubs para sistemas de telecomunicação por CAMARGO et. al. (2008). 

Estes autores concluíram que o método é eficiente, tendo encontrado solução para 

instâncias do problema nunca resolvidas antes por outros métodos exatos. Este método 

foi utilizado anteriormente por outros autores, como GEOFFRION e GRAVES (1974), 

apud VERTER (2011), que resolveram um problema de localização de rede contendo 

três escalões (fábricas centros de distribuição e clientes). 

Uma vasta bibliografia sobre modelos de localização, suas diversas variações e 

métodos de resolução pode ser encontrada em HALE (2011), que apresenta mais de 

3400 referências sobre localização de facilidades e assuntos correlatos. Alguns livros 

recentes sobre o tema, como EISELT (2011), FARAHANI e HEKMATFAR (2009) e 

DREZNER e HAMACHER (2004) também são boas fontes bibliográficas. 

30 
 



 

4. PROBLEMA BÁSICO DE LOCALIZAÇÃO DE 

AERÓDROMOS 

Neste capítulo descreve-se o modelo básico de localização de aeródromos e 

planejamento de rede logística de transporte de passageiros e apresentam-se suas 

limitações.  

 

4.1 MODELAGEM CONCEITUAL 

O modelo de passageiros foi desenvolvido pelo Centro de Estudos em Logística 

(CEL) da COPPEAD-UFRJ com o objetivo inicial de auxiliar a Petrobras na tomada de 

decisão de localização de aeródromos para suprir o crescimento da demanda por 

transporte de passageiros para as plataformas de produção, sondas de perfuração e 

completação de poços no longo prazo.   

O problema de locação de aeródromos consiste em uma variante do problema de 

locação-alocação de facilidades.  

Os custos de abertura e manutenção de aeródromos não são considerados neste 

modelo de otimização por serem muito variáveis com a demanda e frota alocada, não 

tendo um comportamento linear que possa ser representado no modelo. Estes custos 

devem ser calculados a partir dos resultados do modelo e comparados para diferentes 

cenários de frota e capacidade mínima e máxima de movimentação de passageiros 

parametrizados. Portanto, a função objetivo do modelo é de minimização dos custos 

fixos e variáveis de helicópteros.  

Considerando que os helicópteros são alugados, os custos logísticos do 

transporte aéreo de passageiros são compostos por: custo fixo de diária dos helicópteros, 

custo variável por hora voada dos helicópteros e custo de Querosene de Aviação 

(QAV).  

Como restrições têm-se a imposição do atendimento a toda demanda e o respeito 

às autonomias de vôo das aeronaves. Cada modelo de aeronave possui características 

31 
 



 

próprias relativas a número de assentos, capacidade dos tanques de combustível, 

consumo de combustível por quilômetro, velocidade de cruzeiro e PBO.  

Como o modelo de localização já apresenta complexidade elevada, considera-se 

o tipo de aeronave utilizado como uma premissa, sendo sua capacidade e custo 

parâmetros de entrada do modelo. Desta forma, é possível testar instâncias com apenas 

um modelo de aeronave na frota ou considerar como parâmetros de entrada as 

características ponderadas de um mix de frota pré-estabelecido. Apesar de mix de frota 

não ser uma saída deste modelo, pode-se analisar o mix mais adequado testando 

configurações diferentes e comparando seus custos. 

Considera-se como capacidade do helicóptero a quantidade média de passageiros 

que ele pode carregar. Esta média contempla um peso médio por passageiro e bagagem. 

Além disto, é embutido um fator de utilização do modal para refletir as variabilidades 

de demanda e operação que impossibilitam a ocupação total dos helicópteros em todos 

os vôos. Esta ocupação é definida a partir de dados históricos de ocupação das 

aeronaves.  

 A autonomia das aeronaves em quilômetros é um parâmetro de entrada que 

funciona como limite máximo de distância para que um aeródromo atenda a uma 

unidade marítima. Em atendimento a aspectos de segurança de vôo, a missão do 

helicóptero só pode ser realizada caso o mesmo tenha combustível suficiente para: 

realizar o trajeto do aeródromo até a unidade marítima, retornar ao aeródromo de 

origem e, adicionalmente, apresentar reserva técnica para vôo, de trinta ou quarenta e 

cinco minutos, a depender do porte da aeronave.  Esta regra está de acordo com a 

instrução para vôos IFR de COMANDO DA AERONÁUTICA (2009) e será a base 

para o cálculo da autonomia do helicóptero utilizado no modelo. Consideram-se, neste 

caso, as regras de vôo IFR por serem mais restritivas que as de vôo VRF com relação à 

reserva de combustível necessária.  

 Na análise da demanda mensal de movimentação de passageiros no ano de 2009 

foi encontrada uma variação em relação à média de -6,00% a + 6,29% e um coeficiente 

de variação de 8,33%, como se pode observar na Figura 12. Como esta variação não foi 

considerada elevada, utiliza-se no modelo, como simplificação, uma demanda anual de 

passageiros uniforme por unidade marítima e tipo de vôo, sendo os tipos de vôo 

considerados: troca de turma, eventual, comitiva e outros, descritos na seção 2.2.5.   

32 
 



 

% Passageiros Transportados por mês

8,00%

6,00%

4,00%

2,00%

0,00%

-2,00%

-4,00%

-6,00%

-8,00%

 

Figura 12: Variação mensal da movimentação de passageiros da Petrobras no Sul-Sudeste em 2009 
(Fonte: SENA e FERREIRA FILHO, 2010) 

 

Os helicópteros possuem como restrição contratual um máximo de horas voadas 

no mês. Como se considera que a demanda mensal é constante, este limite é 

representado no modelo por uma restrição de máximo de horas voadas no ano. 

A localização de um aeródromo é uma decisão de longo prazo, já que os 

investimentos para sua construção ou adequação não trazem retorno em apenas um ano 

de operação. Da mesma forma, em caso de contratação de aeródromos existentes, 

contratos de curto prazo tornam-se muito caros e, portanto, inviáveis. Logo, através do 

modelo de otimização a ser apresentado, deve-se analisar o comportamento da demanda 

por um período de médio a longo prazo para que seja tomada a decisão de localização. 

No caso da Petrobras, foi considerado razoável um horizonte de 20 anos. 

As possíveis localizações mapeadas de aeródromos apresentam capacidades 

máximas (passageiros/ano) devido a limitações de infra-estrutura e capacidade de 

controle do espaço aéreo ou limitação em espaço físico para construção. Aeródromos 

também apresentam capacidades mínimas, referentes ao mínimo de demanda que deve 

ser atendida de forma a viabilizar o investimento em construção ou contratação do 

mesmo, ou mínimos contratuais, para aeroportos em operação. 

 

4.2 MODELAGEM MATEMÁTICA 

Para a modelagem matemática, é utilizado como base o problema de localização 

capacitado com algumas adaptações específicas para a localização de aeródromos. 

33 
 

jan/09

fev/09

mar/09

abr/09

mai/09

jun/09

jul/09

ago/09

set/09

out/09

nov/09

dez/09



 

Segue abaixo, modelagem matemática do problema de localização de aeródromos. Esta 

é uma modelagem simplificada da ferramenta utilizada atualmente pela Petrobras 

(SENA e FERREIRA FILHO, 2010) que foi adaptada para o estudo em questão.  

 

As seguintes notações são utilizadas: 

 

 w=1,2,..., r o conjunto de unidades marítimas;  

 j= 1,2,...,s o conjunto de possíveis aeródromos; 

 t=1,2,...,k o conjunto de anos de análise;  

 m=1,2,...,l o conjunto de modais (aeronaves), e; 

 p= 1,2,...g o conjunto de produtos (tipo de passageiro e unidade de operação a 

qual está associado). 

 

Os parâmetros de entrada são:  

 

 lat_ww a latitude da unidade marítima w em radianos; 

 lon_ww a longitude da unidade marítima w em radianos;  

 lat_jj a latitude do aeródromo j em radianos; 

 lon_jj a longitude do aeródromo j em radianos;  

 cm a capacidade da aeronave m em número de passageiros por vôo; 

 utilm a taxa de utilização da aeronave m em % de assentos ocupados por vôo; 

 CFm o custo fixo anual por tipo de aeronave m; 

 CVm o custo variável por quilômetro percorrido, composto pelo custo da hora 

voada da aeronave m, convertido para custo por quilometro e adicionado ao o 

custo do combustível; 

 vlm a velocidade média da aeronave m no vôo (Considera que durante pouso, 

aproximação e decolagem a aeronave tem velocidade menor que a de cruzeiro); 

 hm o limite de horas voadas por mês por aeronave do tipo m; 

 qwpt a demanda de passageiros do tipo p para a unidade w no ano t; 

 maxjt a capacidade máxima do aeródromo j no ano t, é indexada pelo ano 

para representar a impossibilidade de abertura de aeródromos novos até 

determinado ano ou a mudança de capacidade do aeródromo de um ano para 

outro devido a obras de ampliação; 

34 
 



 

 minjt a capacidade mínima do aeródromo j no ano t, caso seja aberto, este é 

indexada pelo ano pelo mesmo motivo do parâmetro maxjt; 

 lim o número máximo de aeródromos abertos; 

 autm a quilometragem máxima do vôo suportada pelo modelo m de aeronave.  

 t-umm Tempo parado, em horas, em cada UM em cada visita para embarque 

ou desembarque de passageiros do modal m. 

 t-aerm Tempo, em horas, gasto no início/fim da viagem pelo modal m, num 

aeroporto, para embarque ou desembarque de passageiros e preparação da 

aeronave para vôo. 

 BigM  Será igual ao somatório das demandas. Este parâmetro será utilizado 

para penalizar a abertura de um aeródromo novo na função objetivo. 

BigM =                     

 

O modelo tem uma etapa de pré-processamento onde são calculados os seguintes 

parâmetros auxiliares: 

 djw  distância linear da viagem (ida + retorno), saindo o aeródromo j e a unidade 
7

marítima w, considerando a curvatura da terra . 

djw=2*6378*arccos(cos(lon_jj–lon_ww)*cos(lat_jj)*cos(lat_ww)+sen(lat_jj)* 

*sen(lat_ww)) 

Onde: O valor 6378 representa o raio da terra em quilômetros. 

 NVjwpmt número de viagens máximo que uma aeronave consegue realizar no ano, 

caso dedique-se exclusivamente a esta rota, para atendimento da demanda da 

unidade marítima w, partindo do aeródromo j e utilizando o modal m. Este valor 

será utilizado pelo modelo para o cálculo de frota. 

 NVjwpmt= (12*hm)/ (djw/vlm +t-umm+t-aerm) 

 PermiteFluxojwpmt Parâmetro binário que será 1 (um) quando as três condições a 

seguir forem atendidas: houver demanda  qwpt; o aeródromo j apresentar capacidade 

disponível no ano t, ou seja, existir maxjt e; a distância entre a unidade w e o 

aeródromo j estiver na região de cobertura da aeronave m (djw  <= autm). 

                                                     
7
 A longas distâncias, a Geometria Euclidiana (geometria sobre planos) não é adequada, sendo necessário 

considerar a curvatura da Terra para o cálculo da distância entre dois pontos.  

35 
 



 

O modelo tem como variáveis: 

 kjwptmVariável contínua que representa a quantidade da demanda pelo produto p 

da unidade w atendida pelo aeródromo j, através do modal m no ano t. Esta variável  

poderá assumir valores entre 0(zero) e a demanda da unidade w pelo produto p no 

ano t (qwpt). A geração desta variável está condicionada a que o parâmetro 

PermiteFluxojwpmt seja igual a 1. Este artifício de formulação reduz 

consideravelmente o número de variáveis geradas, tornando o modelo mais enxuto e 

conseqüentemente, reduzindo o tempo de processamento. 

 ajwptmVariável contínua que representa a quantidade mínima necessária de frota 

para atendimento da parte da demanda do produto p da unidade w que será 

movimentada pelo aeródromo j no ano t e através do modal m (kjwptm). Também 

está condicionada a que o parâmetro PermiteFluxojwpmt seja igual a 1. Esta 

parâmetro é contínuo pois representa a fração necessária para atendimento a uma 

unidade, sendo que os helicópteros são compartilhados por diversas unidades 

marítimas. Este número é utilizado pelo modelo para o cálculo final da frota inteira. 

 yjt Variável binária indicativa de abertura de aeródromo. Será 1(um) se o 

aeródromo j for aberto no ano t e zero caso contrário. 

 Frotajmt  Variável inteira que representa a frota necessária do modal m para 

atendimento à demanda alocada ao aeródromo j no ano t.  

 

O problema pode então ser formulado como: 

Min   s  k  l (CF s d
j  t  m   Frotajmt )    

r g k  l
j   w    jw  

p  t  m  (C  k
m m jwpmt    

cm   utilm

  BigM   s  k
j  t  y                                                                                                     (1) 

jt

 

Sujeito a: 

Atendimento_Demanda  
wpt      

                                                              (2)  

Dimensionamento_de_frotajwptm                                                                                                                                   

36 
 



 

Autonomiajwptm                                                                             (4) 

Frota_Inteira   
jtm                                                                                (5) 

Capacidade_maxima  
jt  

  
                                                          (6) 

Capacidade_minima    
jt                                                             (7) 

Max_Aerodromos  
t                                                                                       (8) 

Manut_Aerodromo_Abertojtt2                                                                 (9) 

yjt  {0,1}                                                                                                                       (10) 

frotajtm                                                                                                                       (11) 

                                                                                                                     (12) 

  

 Onde (1) representa a função objetivo de minimização dos custos de transporte e 

da quantidade de aeródromos, (2) assegura o atendimento da demanda integral das 

unidades marítimas, (3) assegura que haja frota suficiente para atendimento da 

demanda, (4) garante que a autonomia das aeronaves seja respeitada, (5) calcula a frota 

necessária por aeródromo e modal, considerando ser a frota uma variável inteira. (6) 

garante que a capacidade máxima de um aeródromo seja respeitada, em caso de sua 

abertura, (7) garante que a capacidade mínima de um aeródromo seja respeitada, em 

caso de sua abertura, (8) garante que seja respeitado o limite de aeródromos abertos em 

cada ano, (9) garante que após a abertura, um aeródromo se mantenha em 

funcionamento, (10) expressa a natureza binária da variável yjt, (11) expressa a natureza 

inteira da variável frotajtm, (12) expressa a natureza contínua das variáveis ajwptm e kjwptm. 

 Como o modelo é multiperíodo, as variáveis são indexadas pelo ano. Para o 

CFLP básico, considera-se o custo de se ligar o cliente i a uma facilidade localizada no 

local j. Este é substituído pelos custos fixos por aeronave e variáveis por quilômetro 

percorrido pela aeronave.  

37 
 



 

 Como o modelo é de nível estratégico, tendo como resposta definições de 

localização de aeródromos para longo prazo, por simplificação, não é realizada 

roteirização, sendo admitido que cada vôo atende a uma única unidade marítima. 

Historicamente, conforme informações cedidas pela US-LOG, aproximadamente 70% 

dos vôos são diretos, ou seja, atendem apenas a uma unidade marítima. Logo, a 

aproximação é considerada razoável. Uma alternativa já utilizada nos estudos realizados 

pela empresa é considerar que cada aeronave atenderá a um número médio de UMs, 

maior que 1(um), obtido através do histórico e para isto, incluir em cada vôo uma 

quilometragem percorrida referente a distância média histórica entre UMs visitadas em 

um mesmo vôo, o que elevará os custos e tempos de viagem e conseqüentemente a 

frota. O problema desta abordagem é que se considera a manutenção do fator histórico, 

sendo que o comportamento da demanda se modifica ao longo dos anos já que as 

unidades ficam mais dispersas e distantes da costa na região do pré-sal da Bacia de 

Santos. 

 A demanda anual de passageiros por unidade marítima, dado de entrada do 

modelo, deve ser informada em número de vagas disponibilizadas nos vôos. Cada vaga 

pode movimentar até dois passageiros, sendo que um embarca e outro desembarca.  

 É importante ressaltar que este modelo tem como resultado um 

dimensionamento de helicópteros por aeródromo. Entretanto, este número não deve ser 

utilizado para o planejamento de frota por não considerar as variabilidades de demanda 

ao longo do ano, fatores climáticos, dentre outros que podem alterar a frota. Este 

número deve ser considerado apenas como um pré-dimensionamento, necessário para a 

definição de localização e dimensionamento da infraestrutura dos aeródromos. 

 Devido ao grande número de unidades marítimas e ao fato do modelo ser 

dinâmico, considerando a demanda de 20 anos (nas instâncias testadas), os números de 

variáveis e restrições dos cenários tornam-se muito elevados. Portanto, é de extrema 

importância para a viabilidade do modelo a utilização de técnicas de pré-processamento 

para redução do número de variáveis e restrições. Neste modelo, as técnicas consistem 

principalmente na utilização do parâmetro calculado PermiteFluxojwpmt como domínio 

para as variáveis, que somente são criadas quando este parâmetro assume valor 1 (um). 

 

38 
 



 

4.3 O SOFTWARE UTILIZADO 

O modelo desta dissertação foi desenvolvido no software AIMMS (Advanced 

Integrated Multidimensional Modeling Software) da Paragon Decision Technology, na 

versão 3.11, utilizando-se programação inteira mista.  

O AIMMS, segundo BISSCHOP e ENTRIKEN (2002), é uma ferramenta que 

inclui as duas formas gerais de uso dos modelos matemáticos, já que permite construí-

los ao nível estratégico e ao nível tático operacional, através de ferramentas de apoio à 

decisão iterativas para auxiliar na solução dos problemas. Além disto, de acordo com 

IGNÁCIO e FERREIRA FILHO (2004), o software possibilita ao usuário final uma 

visualização abrangente do problema devido ao conjunto de interfaces gráficas que 

fornece. O AIMMS é utilizado para desenvolvimento do modelo matemático de 

problemas de otimização. Este software funciona de forma integrada com alguns solvers 

comerciais. 

O modelo básico foi desenvolvido para a Petrobras no AIMMS. Como o 

objetivo da dissertação é de aprimorar o modelo de forma que este seja adotado pela 

empresa, utilizou-se o mesmo software, evitando custos de aquisição de software e 

treinamento de pessoal.  

O solver utilizado atualmente pela Petrobras para este modelo é o CPLEX, que 

segundo HUTTER et. al. (2010) é o solver comercial mais extensamente utilizado para 

problemas de programação inteira mista (MIP). 

4.4 ENTRADA E SAÍDA DE DADOS 

A entrada e saída de dados no modelo são realizadas através de interface com 

Banco de Dados Microsoft Office Access. Este formato facilita a geração de cenários 

pelos usuários finais e a análise e armazenamento de resultados, principalmente quando 

se trabalha com volume elevado de informações. Para acesso ao banco de dados utiliza-
8

se fonte de dados ODBC , uma das ferramentas administrativas do Windows. 

                                                     
8
 ODBC (Conectividade Aberta de Banco de Dados) um método padrão de compartilhamento de dados 

entre bancos de dados e programas. 

39 
 



 

4.5 LIMITAÇÕES DO MODELO 

O modelo em questão é aderente ao propósito de otimização e planejamento de 

capacidade da rede logística de transporte de passageiros para trabalho em atividade 

offshore. Porém, apresenta limitações e simplificações que podem comprometer o 

resultado encontrado, já que o custo operacional total é bastante sensível ao perfil da 

frota e localização do aeroporto, sendo que estes variam consideravelmente com os 

parâmetros de entrada do modelo. 

A primeira limitação encontrada é com relação à distância calculada pelo 

modelo entre aeródromos e UMs, que é linear. Como a ferramenta utilizada atualmente 

pela Petrobras foi elaborada entre 2008 e 2009 ela não contempla as alterações nas 

regras de vôo contidas na nova carta aeronáutica da TMA Macaé. Esta simplificação é 

impactante visto que, com as novas regras de vôo, as distâncias entre aeroporto e UM 

aumentam de forma não proporcional entre os aeroportos candidatos a atendimento, o 

que altera para algumas UMs a base mais competitiva de atendimento.  

A consideração da quantidade de passageiros movimentada por cada aeródromo 

e modal como uma variável contínua também é uma aproximação, que se possível deve 

ser retirada. Afinal, não se pode transportar meio passageiro. 

Outra limitação do modelo é com relação aos aeródromos. Estes têm como 

restrição de capacidade apenas o número de passageiros transportados por ano, que está 

relacionada à capacidade de seu terminal de passageiros. Entretanto, os aeródromos 

também apresentam restrições de pátio de estacionamento de aeronaves. A inclusão 

desta restrição trará maior precisão ao modelo. 

Atualmente, o modelo é rodado com um único modal, ou com modais definidos 

por grupo de unidades marítimas. Quando necessário, representa-se no modelo um mix 

pré-definido de aeronaves consolidado num único modal, que possui como parâmetros 

as características ponderadas dos modais contidos no mix. Quando liberado, o modelo 

poderá escolher o modal que apresentar o menor custo-benefício. Entretanto, na 

operação real não é possível operar com apenas um tipo de aeronave, pois algumas 

unidades marítimas possuem restrições de helipontos, ficando impossibilitadas de 

receber determinados tipos de aeronave. Estas restrições devem ser incorporadas ao 

40 
 



 

modelo para torná-lo mais robusto. Sua inclusão contribui para o objetivo desta tese e 

sua implementação encontra-se detalhada no próximo capítulo. 

41 
 



 

5. MODELO APERFEIÇOADO DE LOCALIZAÇÃO DE 

AERÓDROMOS  

 

Neste capitulo são apresentadas as mudanças implementadas na modelagem 

básico do problema de localização de aeródromos com o objetivo de eliminar 

simplificações que geravam incerteza aos resultados obtidos. Estas melhorias estão 

descritas na ordem cronológica em que são implementadas no modelo nas seções a 

seguir. 

5.1 REVISÃO DO CÁLCULO DE DISTÂNCIAS AERÓDROMO-UM PARA 

BACIA DE CAMPOS 

Esta revisão é de grande importância visto que pode alterar a distância relativa 

das UMs a diferentes aeródromos, tornando-os mais ou menos atrativos. Entretanto, 

como o cálculo da distância é realizado no pré-processamento do modelo, através de 

parâmetros calculados, a alteração não causa aumento no tempo de processamento. A 

seguir, são descritas as revisões realizadas no modelo. 

É inclusa a seguinte notação: 

9
n= 1,2 ...,z o conjunto de portais  

Os parâmetros de entrada inseridos são: 

 lat_nn a latitude do portal n em radianos; 

 lon_nn a longitude do portal n em radianos;  

 Indica_UM_Portalwparâmetro binário que será 1 se a unidade  w deve ser 

atendida passando-se pelos portais e 0 caso contrário; 

 Escolha_UM_Portalwnparâmetro binário que será 1 se a unidade for atendida 

pelo portal n e zero caso contrário. Como cada unidade terá um portal de entrada 

                                                     
9
 Portais são pontos definidas na nova carta aeronáutica da TMA Macaé com coordenadas fixas.  Os 

helicópteros devem voar em linha reta do aeródromo de origem até estes pontos. Após a passagem pelo 
portal as aeronaves seguem pelos corredores de vôo até o ponto destes de maior proximidade da unidade 
de destino, de onde devem iniciar o processo de pouso. 

42 
 



 

e outro de saída, o somatório deste parâmetro para um determinado w será 2, 

caso este pertença a região de atendimento por portais e 0 (zero) caso contrário. 

 

Os parâmetros calculados inseridos são: 

 d_nww  É o somatório da distância da unidade ao portal de entrada com a 

distância entre a unidade e o portal de saída; 

d_nw  
w=                                    

         –         

                                                    

 

 d_jnjw somatório das distâncias em quilômetros entre o aeródromo j e os 

portais n, de entrada e saída relacionados a unidade marítima w;  

d_jn  
jw=                                     –                 

                                                    

 

 d_jnwjw distância total da viagem (ida + volta) em quilômetros do aeródromo 

j, passando pelos portais de entrada e saída até a UM w; 

d_jnwjw =  d_jnjw + d_nww 

 

O parâmetro calculado alterado é  djw, que passa a ter a seguinte equação: 

djw=(1-Indica_UM_Portalw)*2*6378*arccos(cos(lon_jj–lon_ww)*cos(lat_jj)* 

*cos(lat_ww)+sen(lat_jj)*sen(lat_ww)) + Indica_UM_Portalw*d_jnwjw 

 

5.2 TRANSFORMAR VARIÁVEL CONTÍNUA K EM INTEIRA 

A variável kjwptm  é definida no modelo base como contínua. Isto significa que a 

demanda pode ser dividida de forma que ½ passageiro seja enviado por um aeródromo e 

a outra metade por outro. Como isto não é possível, e pode gerar incertezas e soluções 

sub-ótimas, foi feita a alteração no modelo.  A única mudança necessária no modelo a 

trasnformação da variável contínua em inteira. Entretanto, esta continua podendo variar 

de 0 (zero) até qwpt. 

43 
 



 

Esta revisão aumentou consideravelmente a complexidade do modelo devido ao 

volume de variáveis inteiras geradas. 

5.3 RESTRIÇÃO DE VAGAS 

Conforme mencionado na seção 4.4, além de restrições relativas ao número de 

passageiros, que representam a capacidade do terminal de passageiros, os aeródromos 

apresentam restrições de capacidade de pátio para estacionamento de aeronaves. Para 

representar esta limitação, foi inclusa a restrição de máximo de vagas por aeródromo 

por ano. A seguir são apresentadas as modificações necessárias na modelagem. 

Parâmetro incluído: 

 Max_Vagasjt   número máximo de vagas de estacionamento de aeronaves que 

o aeródromo j poderá suportar no ano t. 

Restrição incluída: 

 Restricao_Vagasjt  assegura que o número máximo de vagas por aeródromo 

será respeitado. 

 

                          
   

 

5.4 RESTRIÇÕES DE HELIPONTOS DE ALGUMAS UNIDADES MARÍTIMAS 

Algumas unidades marítimas, em geral muito antigas, possuem helipontos com 

restrições de dimensões e peso, não tendo condições de receber helicópteros de grande 

porte com toda sua ocupação. Na prática, estas unidades são visitadas na maior parte 

dos atendimentos por helicópteros de médio porte, pois não é financeiramente vantajoso 

supri-las com aeronaves de grande porte, que apresenta um custo maior, com baixa 

ocupação de seus assentos. 

 A forma encontrada de representar esta restrição no modelo foi incluindo uma 

restrição para estas UMs de recebimento apenas de aeronaves de médio porte, ou seja, 

44 
 



 

com capacidade menor ou igual a 12 assentos. As modificações realizadas no modelo 

serão apresentadas a seguir. 

Parâmetros incluídos: 

 R_Helipontow Parâmetro binário que será 1 se a unidade marítima w 

apresentar restrições em seu heliponto, recebendo apenas aeronaves de médio porte. O 

parâmetro terá valor 0 (zero) caso o heliponto da unidade marítima seja irrestrito. 

 PermiteModalUMwm Parâmetro binário, calculado pelo modelo para o qual 

será atribuído o valor 1 se cm <12 e (1- R_Helipontow), caso contrário. 

Parâmetros alterados: 

 PermiteFluxojwpmt Foi adicionada uma condição para que o parâmetro receba 

o valor 1. Para isto, além das três condições apresentadas na seção 4.2, o parâmetro 

PermiteModalUMwm deverá ser igual a 1. 

Não foi realizada nenhuma inclusão ou alteração de variáveis ou parâmetros. 

Entretanto, estes são indiretamente influenciados pela alteração do parâmetro 

PermiteFluxojwpmt . 

A inclusão desta restrição permite que o modelo faça a escolha do mix de frota.  

Como a inclusão desta restrição aumenta consideravelmente o volume de 

informação processada pelo modelo, sendo necessário um trabalho de pré-

processamento de dados para possibilitar sua utilização.  

As variáveis Frotajtm e yjt foram condicionadas à existência de capacidade no 

aeródromo j, ou seja, foi incluído em seu domínio, maxjt.  

As restrições também tiveram seus domínios condicionados, conforme descrito a 

seguir: Atendimento_Demandawpt será criada apenas quando houver demanda, ou seja, 

qwpt>0; Dimensionamento_de_frotajwptm  e Autonomiajwptm só existirão quando 

PermiteFluxojwpmt for igual a 1; Frota_Inteirajtm, Manut_Aerodromo_Abertojtt2 e 

Capacidade_maximajt  serão criadas quando maxjt for maior que zero e; 

Capacidade_minimajt existirá apenas quando minjt for maior que zero.  

45 
 



 

Sem este trabalho de pré-processamento, que reduz o número de variáveis 

geradas, o modelo estoura o limite de capacidade da máquina utilizada antes que se 

encontre a primeira solução viável, não terminando a otimização. 

5.5 INCLUSÃO DOS INVESTIMENTOS EM CONSTRUÇÃO E ADEQUAÇÃO 

DE AERÓDROMOS E DE SEUS CUSTOS OPERACIONAIS 

No modelo original, utilizado atualmente pela empresa, optou-se por não 

representar o investimento para abertura de novos aeródromos por ser este um valor de 

difícil estimação e dependente de alguns resultados do modelo.  

São fatores determinantes no montante investido em um aeródromo: custos de 

aquisição ou arrendamento do terreno; terraplenagem, construção do terminal de 

passageiros, construção de pista de pousos e decolagens ou de helipontos, hangares, 

estacionamento de aeronaves, torre de controle, sistemas de controle de incêndio, 

aquisição de equipamentos, licenciamento ambiental, dentre outros.  

Em caso de aeródromos operados por terceiros, que possam vir a serem 

utilizados pela companhia, estes investimentos necessários são, em geral, diluídos nos 

custos operacionais, durante o período de contrato. Desta forma, os custos operacionais 

costumam ser maiores quando o aeródromo é de propriedade de terceiros. 

Portanto, para representar a diferença de custos entre um aeródromo já utilizado 

pela empresa, a contratação de um aeródromo já existente, operado por terceiros, e a 

construção de um novo aeródromo, são considerados na função objetivo do modelo, 

para minimização, os seguintes custos e investimentos: 

 I_Fj Montante fixo de investimento para abertura de um aeródromo. Este 

valor existirá apenas para áreas potenciais onde não há aeródromos atualmente ou em 

caso de obras de ampliação da capacidade de aeródromos atuais. A diferença de 

investimento necessária para construção de aeródromos com capacidades diferentes 

poderá ser representada através da inclusão de aeródromos na mesma localização 

porém, com maxjt e I_Fj diferentes. 

46 
 



 

 C_Oj Custos operacionais por passageiro movimentado, que poderão ser 

diferentes em função do aeródromo. O objetivo deste custo é representar as diferenças 

de tarifa oferecidas por um aeródromo contratado e um próprio. 

O parâmetro calculado a seguir foi acrescido ao modelo: 

 IndicaAerodromoAbertoj Será 1 se o somatório das variáveis yjt for maior 

que 0 (zero), e será 0(zero), caso contrário. Ou seja, será 1 se o aeródromo abrir em 

algum ano. 

 A função objetivo tem, nesta versão do modelo, a seguinte forma: 

Min   s  k  l (CF s k l djw  
j  t  m   Frota

m jmt )    
r g

j   w    
p  t   m  (C  k     

m jwpmt cm   utilm

    s
j                            

s g l
     j      

k
    

r
w    

p  t   m  k m     

          
                 

 O investimento necessário está profundamente ligado a questões que são 

resultados do modelo, como o porte do aeródromo, ou seja, a quantidade de passageiros 

que irá passar por seu terminal e a quantidade de vagas para aeronaves que deverá 

possuir. Para a inclusão na função de minimização de custos variáveis com o montante 

de passageiros transportados por um aeródromo o modelo se torna não linear, saindo do 

escopo inicial da dissertação. Como alternativa para representar as diferenças no custo 

total de aeródromos maiores ou menores deve-se incluir nos dados de entrada mais de 

um aeródromo potencial, estando na mesma coordenada, mas com custos operacionais, 

capacidades máximas e investimentos necessários diferentes.  

                                                                                   

5.6 INCLUSÃO DO CÁLCULO DE OCUPAÇÃO MÁXIMA DA AERONAVE 

DE ACORDO COM A DISTÂNCIA, RESPEITANDO SUA AUTONOMIA 

O Peso Básico Operacional de uma aeronave, conforme definido na seção 2.2.4, 

varia conforme a quilometragem do percurso a ser realizado. De forma simplificada, 

quanto maior a distância a ser percorrida, maior o volume de combustível necessário e 

menor o peso disponível para passageiros e bagagens.  

47 
 



 

Esta redução na capacidade da aeronave é representada no modelo atual através 

de um percentual histórico de ocupação por tipo de modal. Entretanto, com a mudança 

do perfil das unidades marítimas atendidas e do perfil de frota no médio e longo prazos, 

a utilização do histórico de ocupação pode gerar um erro expressivo.  

 Com o intuito de representar estas variações na capacidade da aeronave com 

maior precisão, foi incluído no modelo o cálculo de capacidade de transporte do modal 

de acordo com a distância em que se encontra a unidade marítima a ser visitada. 

 Parâmetros de entrada incluídos: 

 assentosm Quantidade de assentos disponíveis nas aeronaves do modal m. 

 cmm Capacidade máxima de combustível do modal m em quilogramas. 

 PMDm Peso máximo de decolagem do modal m. 

 PBOm Peso Básico Operacional do modal m.  

 t_extram Tempo adicional em minutos para cada viagem decorrente de 

pousos, decolagens, embarque e desembarque de passageiros na plataforma e 

taxiamento das aeronaves no aeródromo na partida e no retorno.  Substitui t_umm e 

t_aerom. 

É importante ressaltar que na definição de PBO, na seção 2.2.4, estão 

contemplados os pesos de tripulação, equipamentos, aeronave e combustível para a 

missão.  Este parâmetro, entretanto, representa apenas a parte fixa do PBO. O consumo 

de combustível será calculado pelo modelo e acrescido ao PBO posteriormente para o 

cálculo da capacidade. 

 Consumom Consumo médio de combustível em kg de QAV por hora voada. 

 TReservam Tempo médio de vôo em minutos, para o qual o modal m deve 

possuir combustível sobressalente, seguindo as normas de segurança e considerando que 

os vôos seguirão as regras de vôo IFR, que são mais restritivas que as regras de vôo 

visual no que se refere a quantidade de combustível sobressalente. 

 Ppax Peso médio a ser considerado por passageiro, somado a sua bagagem, 

em quilogramas. 

48 
 



 

 Conversao_KM_Milha Valor fixo, utilizado pelo modelo para conversões 

entre quilômetros e milhas. 

Parâmetros calculados incluídos: 

 CombMissaojwmCombustível necessário para a missão de atendimento da 

unidade marítima w a partir do aeródromo j utilizando o modal m, e retorno ao 

aeródromo j, incluindo também o combustível de reserva exigido (Ver seção 4.1). 

   
           

                      
             

                     
     

 PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque jwmSerá 1 desde que todas as condições a 

seguir forem atendidas: o parâmetro PermiteModalUMwm for igual a 1;  cmm for maior 

que CombMissaojwm; excluindo-se do PMDm , o PBOm e o  combustível necessário 

para a missão ainda haja capacidade disponível para transporte de passageiros pelo 

menos 1 passageiro (PMDm - PBOm - CombMissaojwm - Ppax>=0). 

 FolgaPesojwmEste parâmetro será calculado apenas quando 

PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque jwm for igual a 1. Seguirá a equação lógica abaixo: 

FolgaPeso jwm= PMDm -PBOm- CombMissaojwm 

Parâmetros alterados: 

 cm A capacidade por modal, que na versão anterior era um dado de entrada do 

modelo tornou-se um parâmetro calculado, dependente do modal, aeródromo e unidade 

marítima (cjwm). Este parâmetro será calculado apenas quando 

PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque jwm for igual a 1. Esta medida reduz o número de 

parâmetros e variáveis gerados, deixando o modelo mais enxuto e rápido. Seu valor é 

obtido a partir da seguinte equação lógica: 

Se (FolgaPeso jwm/Ppax < assentosm), então cjwm corresponderá ao maior valor 

inteiro menor ou igual a divisão de FolgaPesojwm por Ppax. Caso contrário, (cjwm = 
10

assentosm).  

                                                     
10

 Esta expressão lógica é necessária pois nem sempre a capacidade máxima em peso da aeronave 
corresponde exatamente ao número de assentos disponíveis. Sendo assim, mesmo que o modal possua 

49 
 



 

 PermiteFluxojwpmt  Nesta versão do modelo, este parâmetro estará 

condicionado as seguintes afirmações para que seja igual a 1: existe demanda qwpt; 

existe capacidade no aeródromo j e ano t (maxjt); o parâmetro PermiteModalUMwn é 

igual a 1; e PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque jwm é igual a 1.  

Como a partir destes parâmetros calculados, restringe-se o atendimento às 

distâncias para as quais a aeronave possua autonomia, o parâmetro de entrada autm  e a 

restrição Autonomiajwptm se tornam desnecessários. Não faz mais sentido também a 

utilização do parâmetro utilm como a ocupação histórica, para representar casos em que 

devido à distância da unidade marítima, a aeronave não seja capaz de realizar a missão 

com todos os assentos ocupados. Entretanto, este parâmetro continuará sendo utilizado 

para representar possíveis ineficiências devido à falta de passageiros ou ajuste da 

demanda à capacidade da frota.  

                                                                                                                                                           
folga em peso, não poderá transportar  passageiros além do número máximo de assentos disponibilizados 
na configuração utilizada da aeronave. 

50 
 



 

6. ESTUDO DE CASO 

 

Neste capitulo é apresentado o estudo de caso de atendimento à movimentação 

de passageiros para trabalho em bacias petrolíferas marítimas da Petrobras na região 

Sul-Sudeste da costa brasileira. O objetivo deste estudo de caso é de validação do 

modelo aperfeiçoado de localização de aeródromos e quantificação das melhorias 

obtidas com a revisão do modelo. 

 

6.1 CASO LOGÍSTICO 

O processo decisório sobre o transporte de passageiros para trabalho em bacias 

petrolíferas marítimas ocorre atualmente como representado na Figura 13.  

 

Figura 13: Metodologia de Planejamento de Rede Logística (Adaptado de SENA et. al. 2010) 

 

É importante ressaltar que os aspectos quantitativos não são os únicos 

considerados no processo de tomada de decisão. Questões qualitativas, representadas na  

Figura 13 como aspectos externos, também são levadas em conta pelos decisores. 

Dentre os aspectos qualitativos encontra-se a avaliação ambiental, de extrema 

51 
 



 

relevância para a localização de aeródromos já que o licenciamento ambiental pode 

atrasar ou mesmo inviabilizar um projeto. Além disto, são analisados: facilidade de 

acesso ao local, características do solo, comportamento climático e carta aeronáutica do 

local, dentre outros. 

Apesar da relevância das questões qualitativas, as respostas do modelo 

quantitativo auxiliam na escolha entre as alternativas aprovadas qualitativamente, na 

definição do porte que cada aeródromo deve possuir e na configuração da rede de 

atendimento, além de mostrar aos gestores qual o impacto em custos que diferentes 

alternativas podem gerar.   

O escopo deste estudo de caso se resume à análise quantitativa dos resultados e, 

mais especificamente, à análise do desempenho da ferramenta de apoio a decisão 

desenvolvida.  

 

6.1.1 Demanda 

 A demanda primária corresponde à quantidade de unidades marítimas (UMs), 

por tipo, que estarão operando em cada mês do ano, ou seja, UMs em operação no mês 

anterior + UMs novas - UMs que saem de operação. A demanda secundária, dado de 

entrada do modelo de otimização, corresponde à quantidade de passageiros por 

plataforma e por tipo de vôo, calculada a partir do histórico por tipo de passageiro e 

UM, multiplicado pela projeção de entrada em operação de UMs nos próximos 20 anos. 

 Para este estudo de caso, será considerada uma demanda fictícia. Essa demanda 

foi baseada na projeção de crescimento de produção de óleo e gás natural da Petrobras, 

divulgada no Plano de Negócios 2010-2014 (Figura 14) e no histórico de movimentação 

de 2010. 

52 
 



 

264b01o0e/0dia
Projeção da Produção de Óleo e Gás da Petrobras no Brasil

5000
10,4% 

a.a. 1109
6,7% 

4000 a.a.

5,2% 
a.a. 623

3000
11,3% 

384 a.a.
2000 77 273 321 316

3950
274 2

252 251 265
2980

1000
1500 1540 1493 1684 1778 1792 1855 1971 2100 Pré-Sall

1079

241
0

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2014 2020

Produção de Óleo Produção de gás
 

Figura 14: Metas de produção de óleo e gás natural 2010-2020 (GABRIELLI e BARBASSA, 2011) 

 

Os dados de entrada do modelo são detalhados por ponto de demanda, tipo de 

passageiro e ano. O crescimento médio anual do número de passageiros movimentados 

foi de 8% entre 2011 e 2020. A partir deste ano considerou-se demanda constante, 

mudando apenas a locação de algumas demandas, para representar as movimentações de 

sonda ao fim de cada poço perfurado. Este crescimento é sensivelmente menor que o 

apresentado no Plano de Negócios da empresa, pois se supôs que haverá redução do 

número de funcionários a bordo ao longo dos anos devido ao desenvolvimento 

tecnológico. 

Outra informação relevante sobre a demanda é sua localização geográfica. Em 

linha com a informação do Plano de Negócios 2010-1014, o crescimento se concentra 

principalmente da Bacia de Santos na região do Pré-Sal. A participação desta bacia nos 

volumes totais movimentados triplica ao longo dos primeiros 10 anos de análise (Figura 

15).  

53 
 



 

Demanda (Mil Passageiros/Mês)
800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

Outras Bacias Bacia de Santos
 

Figura 15: Estimativa de demanda de passageiros utilizada no estudo de caso. (Fonte: Valores arbitrados 
para teste do modelo não representando a demanda real) 

 

Foram considerados no total 1098 pontos de demanda (w). As unidades de 

produção, que são instaladas e se mantêm numa mesma localização apresentam sempre 

o mesmo índice w. Entretanto, as sondas, que se movimentam para a locação de cada 

poço em que realizam alguma atividade, apresentam um novo valor w para cada 

alocação, o que eleva o número de variáveis e a complexidade da resolução do modelo. 

Todas as localizações consideradas também foram arbitradas, não tendo relação com os 

dados reais da Petrobras. 

6.1.2 Aeródromos 

Os aeródromos considerados neste estudo de caso serão os operados atualmente 

pela Petrobras, acrescidos de alguns pontos intermediários, na costa brasileira, 

totalizando quatorze localidades analisadas. Buscou-se localizar estes pontos onde se 

observou uma maior região descoberta na parte da costa brasileira em que se encontram 

as Bacias do Espírito Santo, Campos e Santos. Foram incluídos: um ponto acima de 

Vitória, um entre Vitória e São Tomé, dois pontos entre Jacarepaguá e Itanhaém, dois 

ponto entre Itanhaém e Navegantes e 1 ponto após Navegantes, como se pode visualizar 

no mapa da Figura 16. Estes pontos foram definidos aleatoriamente para este estudo de 

caso, não representando alternativas reais para as quais são necessários: mapeamento de 

áreas disponíveis e análises qualitativas.   

54 
 

2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
2030



 

 

Figura 16: Mapa ilustrativo dos aeródromos em operação e dos pontos considerados como potenciais para 
novas bases aeroportuárias no estudo de caso. 

 

6.1.3 Helicópteros 

 Foram selecionados para este estudo de caso, dois modelos de aeronave de asa 

móvel, dentre os mais modernos contidos na frota atual em operação para a Petrobras, 

sendo uma de médio e outra de grande porte.  

 A autonomia considerada para estas aeronaves foi calculada considerando-se que 

os vôos levarão à fração inteira da quantidade de assentos disponíveis multiplicada pela 

utilização das aeronaves. Considera-se também que o peso médio de cada passageiro 

acompanhado de sua bagagem será de 107 kg. 

 A seguir, serão apresentados em detalhes os modelos de aeronave utilizados e os 

parâmetros relacionados. São eles:  

a) AW 139 : 

Esta aeronave de médio porte biturbina é produzida pela AgustaWestland. De 

acordo com o fabricante, esta aeronave é apropriada para o transporte offshore. 

Possui cabine com capacidade para 12 a 15 passageiros. A configuração deste 

55 
 



 

helicóptero utilizada para a Petrobras, que segue os padrões internos de 

Segurança, Meio Ambiente e Saúde (SMS), possui 12 assentos de passageiros. 

 

Figura 17: Aeronave AW 139 da empresa AgustaWestland 

 

A velocidade de cruzeiro máxima desta aeronave é de 306 km/h. Na Tabela 3, 

pode-se visualizar os parâmetros considerados nos cenários deste estudo de caso. 

b) EC225 

A EC225 é uma aeronave de grande porte do fabricante Eurocopter. Na 

configuração utilizada pela Petrobras, seguindo as normas de Segurança, Meio 

Ambiente e Saúde vigentes na empresa, esta aeronave apresenta 18 assentos de 

passageiros. O modelo, entretanto, pode levar até 25 passageiros e dois pilotos, 

de acordo com o fabricante. 

 

Figura 18: Aeronave EC225 da empresa Eurocopter 

56 
 



 

Esta aeronave de asa móvel apresenta velocidade de cruzeiro máxima de 324 

km/h quando em peso máximo, que é de 11.000 kg.  

Tabela 3: Parâmetros considerados para as aeronaves AW 139 e EC 225 

Parâmetro AW 139 EC 225 
util (%) 75% 90% 

11
v (ktas)  152 140 

12
aut (km)  584 812 

13
CF (R$/ano)  5.464.740 9.061.344  

14
CV (R$/km)  21,24 31,22 

h (h/mês) 120 120 
t_um (h) 0,13 0,15 
t_aero (h) 0,24 0,25 

t_extra(min) 23 28 
c/Assentos(un) 12 18 

15
cm(kg)  1254 2742 
PMD(kg) 6800 10520 
PBO(kg) 4595 6997 

Consumo(kg/h) 528 797 
TReserva(min) 30 45 

 

 As aeronaves de grande porte, que há poucos anos atrás apresentavam custos 

muito mais elevados que as de médio porte, atualmente, vêm se tornando 

financeiramente competitivas. Estas aeronaves apresentam, em geral, maior autonomia, 

possibilitando vôos para unidades mais distantes da costa, como as localizadas no Pólo 

Pré-Sal da Bacia de Santos. Outra importante vantagem das aeronaves de grande porte é 

relativa à gestão de transportes e capacidade dos aeródromos, pois sua utilização 

proporciona um transporte de mais passageiros com menos vôos e desta forma, são 

necessários menos helicópteros e vagas de estacionamento nos aeródromos, além de 

facilitar o processo de gerenciamento do tráfego aéreo.  

                                                     
11

 A velocidade de cruzeiro considerada é inferior à real, pois dilui-se nesta a velocidade inferior que é 
praticada nos momentos de pouso e decolagem. 
12

 A autonomia considera todas as regras relativas a combustível de reserva e a utilização de tanque extra. 
A distância considerada é a de toda a viagem (aeródromo – unidade marítima – aeródromo). 
13/13 

Os custos fixo e variável das aeronaves são valores fictícios, apenas para teste e validação do modelo 
desenvolvido. 
14

 A capacidade do tanque de combustível calculada para os modais dos cenários avaliados não 
considerou a utilização de tanque extra já que é possível atender a todos os pontos de demanda sem sua 
utilização. As aeronaves que possuem tanque extra representam um pequeno percentual da frota atual, 
que será desprezado para planejamento de longo prazo. 
 

57 
 



 

6.2 AMBIENTE COMPUTACIONAL 

Este estudo de caso é realizado utilizando-se computador com as seguintes 

configurações: processador Intel Core™2 Duo CPU E6750 @ 2,66 GHz, 7,93 GB de 

memória RAM, e sistema operacional Microsoft Windows Server 2003 R2 Enterprise x 

64 Edition Service Pack 2. 

Conforme informado na seção 4.3, o software utilizado foi o Aimms 3.11. O 
16

AIMMS possui interface com diversos solvers , sendo o IBM ILOG CPLEX, na versão 

12.1 e o GUROBI 2.0, os solvers testados para o problema em questão.  

O CPLEX apresenta um conjunto de algoritmos poderosos de otimização para 

produzir decisões lógicas e precisas. O algoritmo de branch and bound presente no 

solver utiliza técnicas modernas de planos de corte e heurísticas de forma a possibilitar a 

resolução de problemas com número elevado de variáveis em tempo computacional 

adequado. Além disto, o solver, acessado através do software AIMMS é facilmente 

configurado para a utilização das diversas possibilidades de estratégia de busca do 

método branch and bound, técnicas de geração de cortes, heurísticas auxiliares, opções 

de pré-processamento etc.  

O solver GUROBI, desenvolvido mais recentemente, assim como o CPLEX, 

apresenta diversas funcionalidades de pré-processamento, heurísticas auxiliares e outras 

técnicas para agilizar o processamento que possibilitam a manutenção do número de 

decisões em um nível razoável (KOPANOS et. al., 2010). MITTELMANN (2011) 

realizou estudos de benchmarking entre solvers para problemas de programação inteira 

mista. O GUROBI apresentou vantagens em relação ao CPLEX tanto no tempo para 

obtenção da solução ótima (otimalidade) quanto na quantidade de problemas para o qual 

obteve solução viável (viabilidade), em tempo de processamento limitado a 2 horas, 

conforme Figura 19.   

A aceitação do modelo revisado pelos usuários será bastante sensível ao tempo 

de processamento do modelo novo. Portanto, a manutenção do tempo de processamento 

próximo ao do modelo básico contribuirá para a aceitação do modelo aperfeiçoado pelos 

usuários finais. Levando em conta os resultados dos estudos de benchmark de 

MITTELMAN que indicam para um grupo de problemas de programação inteira mista 
                                                     
16

 Solver é um solucionador de programações matemáticas de alto desempenho. 

58 
 



 

que o solver GUROBI apresentou melhor desempenho que o CPLEX, adotou-se o 

GUROBI para a execução dos cenários analisados no estudo de caso.  

Taxas de Performance - Gurobi versus CPLEX

4 3,6 x
3,5

3
2,5

2
1,3 x

1,5
1

0,5
0

Otimalidade Viabilidade
 

Figura 19: Taxas de desempenho do solver GUROBI versus CPLEX na resolução de MIPs de acordo com 
estudo de benchmark de solvers (Adaptado de MITTELMANN, 2011) 

A utilização deste conjunto de softwares, AIMMS e GUROBI, facilita a 

construção do modelo, sua utilização pelos usuários finais e a alteração das 

configurações do solver de acordo com a instância do problema a ser otimizada, pelo 

próprio usuário final, de forma que os resultados sejam obtidos com maior rapidez e o 

modelo revisado tenha alta aceitação pela empresa. 

Foram testadas algumas configurações internas da ferramenta sendo adotadas as 

configurações default do software, exceto para a tolerância relativa à otimalidade (MIP 
-13

Relative Optimality Tolerance). Este parâmetro, cujo valor default é 10 , foi testado 

também com o valor 0,03. Isto significa que, se em 100 iterações consecutivas a 

diferença percentual encontrado entre a melhor solução inteira e o melhor limitante 

inferior, proveniente de relaxação linear, for menor ou igual a 3%, o modelo será 

interrompido e a solução considerada ótima.  

 

6.3 CENÁRIOS 

Os conjuntos de cenários analisados têm como principais características os 

números presentes na Tabela 4, que mostram as dimensões do problema. 

 

59 
 



 

Tabela 4: Dimensões dos cenários rodados  

Item Valor 

Variáveis 2.324.241 

Variáveis Inteiras 1.162.540 

Aeródromos 14 

Modais 2 

Horizonte de Planejamento (anos) 20 

Unidades Marítimas 1098 

 

Para testar a eficiência do modelo e entender sua resposta a mudanças na 

demanda serão testados seis conjuntos de cenários, descritos nas subseções a seguir. 

Deseja-se com estes cenários comprovar tanto a coerência dos resultados gerados como 

a convergência do modelo para um resultado ótimo em tempo computacional aceitável 

para diferentes instâncias. 

Para cada conjunto de cenários foram realizadas quatro rodadas descritas a 

seguir: 

a) Parâmetros default do AIMMS e função objetivo com penalização pela abertura 

de aeródromos. 

b) Parâmetros default do AIMMS e função objetivo sem penalização. 

17
c) MIP Relative Optimality Tolerance  = 0,03, demais parâmetros do AIMMS 

default e com penalização da função objetivo pela abertura de aeródromos. 

d) MIP Relative Optimality Tolerance = 0,03, demais parâmetros do AIMMS 

default e função objetivo sem penalização. 

6.3.1 Cenário livre e sem custos 

Neste conjunto de cenários, todos os aeródromos têm suas capacidades máximas 

de passageiros e vagas infinitas e capacidades mínimas zeradas de forma que possam 

ser abertos para atender a qualquer volume de demanda que seja competitivo 

movimentar por ele. 

 Adicionalmente, todos os custos e investimentos relativos a aeródromos foram 

anulados. 

                                                     
17 -13

 O valor default do AIMMS 3.11 para MIP Relative Optimality Tolerance é de 10 . 

60 
 



 

 O objetivo destas rodadas é de verificação da configuração ideal de atendimento 

caso não houvesse diferenças de custo nem limites de capacidade dos aeródromos. Eles 

possibilitam identificar o potencial de utilização de cada aeródromo relativo apenas a 

sua localização em relação à demanda  

A comparação dos resultados deste cenário com os demais irá mostrar quanto os 

custos e limites de capacidade influenciam nos resultados. 

 

6.3.2  Capacitado e sem custos  

Este conjunto de cenários diferencia-se do anterior (Seção 6.3.1) por apresentar 

limites de passageiros transportados e vagas para aeronaves para alguns aeródromos. 

Estes limites representam as restrições de capacidade dos aeródromos existentes e de 

espaço para construção no caso das alternativas de construção de novos aeródromos. Os 

valores contidos neste estudo de caso foram arbitrados, não representando as 

capacidades reais. 

Sua comparação com o conjunto de cenários anterior possibilita identificar o 

quanto as limitações de capacidade elevam os custos de operação. Diferenças de custos 

muito grandes entre estes grupos de cenários devem motivar estudos sobre a 

possibilidade da expansão dos aeródromos que mais atraem demanda. 

 

6.3.3 Livre e com custos; 

Este conjunto de cenários diferencia-se do primeiro grupo (Seção 6.3.1) por 

apresentar custos de instalação para os aeródromos existentes e não utilizados pela 

empresa ou para os não existentes e também custos de operação diferenciados por tipo 

de aeródromos.  

Todos os valores utilizados foram arbitrados para este estudo de caso tendo 

como critério que aeródromos próprios devem possuir custo de operação por passageiro 

menor que os contratados. Em contrapartida, no caso de construção de novos 

aeródromos, os investimentos serão consideravelmente maiores que aqueles necessários 

para se adequar um aeródromo já existente para utilização.  

61 
 



 

A comparação deste com o primeiro grupo possibilita analisar a influência dos 

custos de instalação e operação na configuração da rede logística e o impacto destes 

custos e investimentos no custo de operação total. 

 

6.3.4 Capacitado e com custos; 

Este é o conjunto de cenários completo, com demanda integral, aeródromos com 

restrições de capacidade ativas, investimentos na abertura de aeródromos e seus custos 

de operação considerados. 

 

6.3.5 Capacitado, com custos e com demanda aumentada em 25% 

Este conjunto de cenários diferencia-se do anterior por ter sua demanda por 

movimentação de passageiros aumentada em 25% (uniformemente entre as unidades).  

O objetivo destas rodadas é verificar a sensibilidade dos resultados (aeródromos 

abertos e custo de operação) ao aumento da demanda.  

Cenários de aumento da demanda também são interessantes para analisar a 

robustez da solução encontrada, ou seja, até que volume de demanda a solução adotada 

poderia atender sem ultrapassar os limites de capacidade dos aeroportos. 

 

6.3.6 Capacitado, com custos e com demanda reduzida em 25% 

Este conjunto de cenários tem, assim como o anterior, o objetivo de verificar a 

sensibilidade dos resultados (aeródromos abertos e custo de operação) a variações na 

demanda. Neste caso, a variação é para baixo. A demanda de passageiros é reduzida em 

25%, também de forma uniforme entre as unidades marítimas, ou seja, não foram 

retiradas unidade marítimas demandantes, mas o volume de passageiros por unidade foi 

reduzido. 

 

62 
 



 

6.4 RESULTADOS 

Os principais números dos resultados obtidos nas rodadas do modelo estão 

resumidos na Tabela 5. Como se pode observar, apesar de um aumento considerável na 

complexidade do modelo, resultados satisfatórios foram obtidos em todas as rodadas 

com tempo de processamento menor que 2 horas. Este tempo é aceitável para o 

horizonte de planejamento de 20 anos. Mesmo se considerado que o planejamento é 

revisto anualmente, o aumento no tempo de processamento não causa impacto 

significativo. 

Tabela 5: Resumo dos Resultados Computacionais 

Tempo 
Gap 

Cenário Rodada 18 Iterações Processamento Custo Total Penalização Custo Real 
%  

(h) 
a 1,35 215.861 1,34 18.449.064.385 1.728.723.684 16.720.340.701 
b 0,94 181.624 1,12 16.478.306.850                      -  16.478.306.850 

1 
c 2,91 143.119 0,13 18.741.637.600 2.098.221.876 16.643.415.724 
d 2,67 73.248 0,01 16.724.543.800                      -  16.724.543.800 
a 1,75 556.543 0,97 20.645.234.769 2.652.469.164 17.992.765.605 
b 1,14 212.898 0,73 17.683.453.594                      -  17.683.453.594 

2 
c 2,37 234.154 0,14 20.776.007.390 2.692.058.256 18.083.949.134 
d 2,56 102.317 0,05 17.938.222.362                      -  17.938.222.362 
a 1,72 164.477 0,22 18.927.012.140 1.728.723.684 17.198.288.456 
b 1 205.320 1,25 16.937.135.336                      -  16.937.135.336 

3 
c 2,68 139.940 0,16 19.086.563.085 1.768.312.776 17.318.250.309 
d 2,97 73.145 0,05 17.232.450.827                      -  17.232.450.827 
a 2,36 522.598 1,42 21.362.129.103 2.718.450.984 18.643.678.119 
b 1,68 196.236 1,89 18.441.895.037                      -  18.441.895.037 

4 
c 2,75 226.967 0,09 21.447.647.899 2.692.058.256 18.755.589.643 
d 2,39 105.411 0,18 18.501.620.055                      -  18.501.620.055 
a 1,66 326.024 1,58 27.908.367.881 3.397.710.646 24.510.657.235 
b 1,84 251.128 0,59 24.240.130.724                      -  24.240.130.724 

5 
c 2,54 136.846 0,02 28.109.830.859 3.744.079.207 24.365.751.652 
d 2,18 136.485 0,08 24.325.350.252                      -  24.325.350.252 
a 2,46 527.494 1,51 15.555.090.134 1.653.130.829 13.901.959.305 
b 1,73 316.513 1,67 13.533.337.093                      -  13.533.337.093 

6 
c 2,83 546.616 1,65 15.641.466.990 1.653.130.829 13.988.336.161 
d 2,06 177.205 0,44 13.605.388.360                      -  13.605.388.360 

 

Em todos os conjuntos de cenários, as rodadas a e b foram finalizadas por falta 

de memória. Entretanto, todas obtiveram uma solução viável de boa qualidade, com 

diferença % em relação ao limitante inferior de relaxação linear de no máximo 2,62%.  

                                                     
18

 Diferença percentual entre a melhor solução inteira encontrada e o limitante inferior proveniente de 
relaxação encontrado pelo solver. 

63 
 



 

Posteriormente, foram alteradas as configurações do software para uma tolerância 

relativa de 3%. Com esta configuração foram realizadas as rodadas c e d de cada grupo 

de cenários sem problemas de falta de memória do software. 

A penalização da função objetivo pela abertura de um aeródromo é um item do 

modelo básico que foi inclusa com o objetivo de evitar a abertura de um número 

excessivo de aeródromos. Este controle é necessário porque o modelo básico não 

considera o investimento em construção/adequação dos aeródromos. Portanto, a 

tendência é abrir muitos aeródromos atendendo a poucos passageiros.  

O modelo aperfeiçoado considera o investimento nos aeródromos. Portanto, a 

utilização da penalização perde parte de sua utilidade. Para analisar o impacto desta 

penalização nos resultados, foram feitas rodadas com e sem penalização, sendo as de 

letra b e d, de cada cenário, as que não apresentam penalização da função objetivo. 

Como se pode observar na Tabela 6 a penalização reduz consideravelmente o número 

de aeródromos (até 43%). Entretanto, a diferença no montante total gasto (custos + 

investimentos) é percentualmente pouco significativa (até 3%).  Caso todos os custos, 

diretos e indiretos, com a operação de transporte de pessoas estejam considerados no 

modelo, não é necessário utilizar a penalização. Entretanto, custos de difícil mensuração 

como o gerenciamento de contratos e mão de obra podem não estar contemplados no 

modelo. Neste caso, as rodadas com e sem penalização são válidas e podem servir de 

embasamento para as decisões gerenciais. 

Tabela 6: Comparativo de rodadas com e sem penalização da função objetivo. 

19
Quantidade de Aeródromos  Custo Total + Investimento 

Cenário 
a b % Dif a b % Dif 

1 7 10 43%   16.720.340.701    16.478.306.850  -1% 
2 12 13 8%   18.125.055.777    17.683.453.594  -2% 
3 7 10 43%   17.198.288.456    16.937.135.336  -2% 
4 11 12 9%   18.643.678.119    18.441.895.037  -1% 
5 11 14 27%   24.510.657.235    24.240.130.724  -1% 
6 10 12 20%   13.901.959.305    13.533.337.090  -3% 

 

Nos cenários sem restrição de custos e capacidade, cada unidade marítima é 

atendida pelo aeródromo mais próximo, que representará menor distância percorrida e 

                                                     
19

 Este número representa o total de aeródromos que esteve durante algum período aberto, não 
representando necessariamente que estejam operando durante todo o período de análise. Algumas 
localidades potenciais para aeródromos foram considerados com capacidade nula nos primeiros anos de 
análise já que precisariam ser construídas ou adequadas, não estando imediatamente disponíveis. 

64 
 



 

conseqüentemente menor custo.  Neste estudo de caso, os cenários livres apresentaram 

as menores quantidades de aeródromos abertos.  A explicação para este resultado é que 

as unidades marítimas estão geograficamente distribuídas em clusters, onde se 

encontram as reservas de petróleo, e não distribuídas de forma equilibrada ao longo da 

costa do sul e sudeste. Portanto, dos 14 pontos potenciais para localização de 

aeródromos, apenas 10 se encontram mais próximos de pelo menos uma das unidades 

marítimas. Os demais poderão ser utilizados devido a custos operacionais ou 

investimentos mais competitivos ou a restrições de capacidade. 

A Tabela 7 apresenta o comparativo de custos médios entre os grupos de 

cenários. Por ser menos restritivo, o grupo de cenários 1 apresentou os menores custos 

totais. O grupo de cenários 2 foi em média 8% mais caro que o 1 representando o 

incremento nos custos devido a limitações de capacidade de alguns aeródromos. O 

grupo três foi 3% mais caro que o 1, demonstrando que, ao menos neste estudo de caso, 

os resultados são mais sensíveis aos limites de capacidade que aos custos operacionais 

dos aeródromos e investimentos em construção e adequação.  O grupo de cenários 4, 

que representa o cenário base, com todas as restrições, é em média 12% mais caro que o 

cenário sem as restrições.  

Tabela 7: Comparativo de custos médios dos grupos de cenários em relação ao cenário 1.  

Cenário % Dif Médio versus Cenário 1 

2 8% 
3 3% 
4 12% 
5 46% 
6 -17% 

 

A sensibilidade dos resultados às variações na demanda pode ser observada na 

Tabela 8, onde se compara os custos médios do grupo de cenários 4 aos grupos 5 e 6 

onde a demanda é perturbada em 25% para cima e para baixo respectivamente.  

Tabela 8: Análise de sensibilidade de custos dos cenários a variações na demanda 

Cenário % Dif Médio versus Cenário 4 
5 31% 
6 -26% 

 

65 
 



 

Pode-se concluir que na instância deste estudo de caso, a perturbação de 25% 

para cima é mais impactante do que a redução da demanda. Esta diferença deve-se à 

necessidade de investimento em novos aeródromos no cenário de aumento de demanda. 

No grupo de cenários 5, com demanda expandida, o total de aeródromos varia de 11 a 

14, sendo que varia de 11 a 12 no  grupo de cenários 4 e de 10 a 12 no grupo de 

cenários 6. 

Em todos os cenários analisados, houve um crescimento gradativo da utilização 

dos helicópteros de grande porte, conforme ocorreu o crescimento da demanda nos 

blocos exploratórios mais distantes da costa. Nos cenários rodados, o percentual de 

grande porte na frota variou de 8 a 19%.  

Para este estudo de caso, o helicóptero de grande porte teve como parâmetros de 

entrada arbitrados, custo fixo 66% maior que o do médio porte e custo variável 47% 

maior. Este modal leva, em sua ocupação máxima, 50% mais passageiros que o médio 

porte. Esta relação custo-benefício, entretanto, varia ponto a ponto de acordo com a 

alteração nas capacidades dos modais. 

Cabe ressaltar que os custos, o volume demandado e a localização das unidades 

marítimas demandantes presentes na instância deste estudo de caso também são 

fictícios. Logo, o percentual ideal de grande porte na frota pode ser maior ou menor no 

cenário real, dependendo da localização da demanda e da relação custo/benefício dos 

modais. No modelo básico, era estabelecido como parâmetro de entrada uma ocupação 

média da frota por tipo de modal proveniente do histórico. Este parâmetro poderia 

ocasionar um erro de dimensionamento com a mudança na distribuição da demanda, 

que se distanciará da costa ao longo do horizonte de planejamento e reduzirá a ocupação 

da frota gradativamente, conforme se pode observar na Figura 20. Esta figura apresenta 

para o cenário 4, rodada b, a evolução até o ano de 2020 (em que se atinge o pico de 

demanda) do número médio por helicóptero de vagas disponibilizadas em vôos dentro 

de um ano.  

66 
 



 

11.500

11.000 11.080 

10.816 
10.500

10.162 
10.000 10.013 

9.664 
9.747 

9.500 9.274 9.144 
9.254 

9.000 9.025 

8.500

8.000

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
 

Figura 20: Evolução do número médio de passageiros por aeronave até 2020  para a rodada b do cenário 4. 

 

Na Figura 21 pode-se visualizar a projeção de frota para o Cenário 4B. Pode-se 

observar um pequeno acréscimo percentual de EC225, aeronave de grande porte, na 

frota ao longo do horizonte de planejamento analisado. Entretanto, como demonstrado 

na Figura 20, a utilização das aeronaves não aumentou. Isto é explicado pelo 

crescimento da demanda na Bacia de Santos, caracterizada por apresentar campos 

petrolíferos e blocos exploratórios mais distantes da costa que os encontrados na Bacia 

de Campos e Espírito Santo. Consequentemente, para atendimento a esta demanda, 

haverá um aumento das distâncias percorridas pelas aeronaves que também farão menos 

vôos por dia e levarão menos passageiros por vôo.  

100%
5 3 5 5 8 10 7 7 10 11 11 9 12 11 11 11 10 11 10 10

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
35 41 43 47 51 58 67 71 65 69 68 72 67 68 69 69 71 70 71 70

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP  

Figura 21: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4B 

67 
 

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030



 

Na Figura 22 pode-se visualizar a mudança na distribuição da demanda entre os 

aeroportos, para o cenário 4B. Nos primeiros 3 anos, em torno de 80% da demanda é 

atendida pelos 5 aeródromos mais ao Norte (Arbitrado 1, Vitória, Arbitrado 2, São 

Tomé e Macaé). Conforme aumenta a demanda ao sul, esta proporção se reduz, 

estabilizando-se em pouco mais de 50%. O aeroporto de Cabo Frio eleva 

consideravelmente seu percentual de atendimento, ficando em torno de 20%. Os 

aeroportos arbitrados 3 e 4, que no modelo só foram liberados para utilização após 

2017, representando áreas potenciais que necessitassem de construção de infraestrutura, 

virão a absorver juntos em torno de 10% do atendimento. 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 22: Distribuição dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4B 

 

Na Figura 23 pode-se visualizar as regiões de atendimento dos aeródromos ao 

longo do horizonte de planejamento analisado, também para o cenário 4B. A mudança 

mais significativa ocorreu em 2017, quando o modelo passou a alocar passageiros aos 

locais Arbitrado 3 e 4. Outra alteração significativa ocorreu em 2020, em que a 

demanda atinge seu máximo, passando-se a alocar um volume maior ao local Arbitrado 

3. Pode-se observar nos mapas que nem sempre a demanda é atendida pelo aeródromo 

68 
 

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030



 

mais próximo, como ocorre para alguns pontos mais próximos de Jacarepaguá que 

foram alocados a Arbitrado 3. Isto ocorre devido aos limites de capacidade de alguns 

aeródromos colocados no modelo.  

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen4B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen4B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
-18,0 Vitoria

Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
Macae -22,0

-22,0
Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0 -24,0

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-26,0 -26,0
Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-28,0 Itanhaem
-28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 -32,0
Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen4B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen4B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 23: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 
20

Cenário 4B  

Pode-se observar também, que o aeródromo de Jacarepaguá a partir de 2017 está 

atendendo a unidades mais distantes da costa enquanto outras mais próximas a este 

aeródromo são atendidas por outros locais. Isto ocorre pois este aeródromo encontra-se 

bem localizado para atendimento às unidades mais distantes da costa, para as quais a 

mudança de aeródromo pode significar a redução da capacidade de transporte devido a 

maior necessidade de combustível. Este tipo de decisão não ocorreria no modelo básico, 

que considera apenas a quilometragem máxima que o helicóptero e uma ocupação 

média para todos os vôos realizados. 

Os gráficos e mapas incluídos nesta seção para o cenário 4B podem ser 

visualizados nos anexos para todos os cenários apresentados neste estudo de caso. 

                                                     
20

 Mapas ilustrativos da alocação de demandas aos aeródromos feitos em Excel podendo apresentar 
pequenos erros de escala. 

69 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

-36,6
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6

-32,6
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

-32,6
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6



 

Os resultados obtidos, mostrados acima, indicam que as revisões no modelo 

trouxeram benefícios significativos à qualidade das soluções, mantendo os tempos de 

processamento aceitáveis.  

 

70 
 



 

7. CONCLUSÕES E RECOMENDAÇÕES  

 

As descobertas de petróleo dos últimos anos apontam para um grande 

crescimento da exploração e produção de petróleo no Brasil. Conseqüentemente, haverá 

aumento da demanda por movimentação de passageiros e da complexidade deste 

transporte devido ao aumento da distância média entre os campos e a costa brasileira.  

Nesta dissertação, com base em uma ferramenta utilizada atualmente pela 

Petrobras, nas deficiências que apresenta e na revisão da bibliografia sobre o assunto, 

foi desenvolvido um modelo de otimização de rede logística. Este modelo apresenta 

grande potencial de utilização pela Petrobras como ferramenta de apoio à decisão para 

planejamento de rede logística de movimentação de seus funcionários para trabalho 

offshore.  

Esta dissertação também representa contribuição acadêmica relevante, já que na 

pesquisa bibliográfica realizada não foram encontradas referências sobre modelos para 

planejamento estratégico de rede logística aplicados a transporte aéreo de passageiros 

para atividade offshore. 

No trabalho foram descritas uma a uma as revisões realizadas no modelo e a sua 

importância, e também foi analisada a consistência do modelo revisado através de um 

estudo de caso de atendimento à demanda das bacias petrolíferas marítimas do Sul e 

Sudeste brasileiros. Os resultados apresentados foram positivos, destacando 

principalmente a importância da inclusão do cálculo de capacidade das aeronaves pelo 

modelo de acordo com a distância de cada trajeto a ser realizado, o que possibilitou 

também a escolha do mix de frota ideal pelo modelo. 

A utilização do modelo revisado apresenta-se como uma oportunidade para a 

Petrobras, pois trará informações mais precisas para auxiliar os gestores nas tomadas de 

decisão no planejamento da rede logística de transporte de passageiros para trabalho 

offshore. Por informações mais precisas para os gestores entende-se:  

a) Possibilidade de definição do mix ideal de frota, inexistente no modelo básico; 

b) Possibilidade de cálculo anual da ocupação das aeronaves, em vez de 

consideração de parâmetro histórico estático; 

71 
 



 

c) Representação mais realista das distâncias percorridas na Bacia de Campos, 

considerando as regras da nova Carta Aeronáutica da região; 

d) Representação no modelo dos custos de operação e investimentos nos 

aeródromos, não considerados no modelo básico; 

e) Alocação mais inteligente dos pontos de demanda aos aeródromos, levando em 

consideração a capacidade das aeronaves para cada ponto de demanda em vez de 

parâmetros históricos médios para todas as unidades marítimas; e  

f) Resultados mais precisos de localização ótima de aeródromos, levando-se em 

conta que os itens de a até e descritos acima influenciam no cálculo da função objetivo 

do problema. 

A realização de estudos futuros para aprofundamento deste modelo de 

localização e planejamento de rede logística de movimentação de passageiros para 

trabalho em unidades de exploração e produção de petróleo offshore é recomendada. 

Uma sugestão é a inclusão de investimento variável com o número de aeronaves 

máximo alocadas a um aeródromo, de forma a representar a parcela do investimento que 

varia com o porte da infraestrutura montada. Este refinamento, entretanto, tornará o 

modelo não-linear.   

Ainda referindo-se à modelagem utilizada, indica-se para estudos futuros a 

consideração de demanda estocástica, já que esta é dependente de parâmetros com 

elevado grau de incerteza como a quantidade e localização de sondas de perfuração em 

operação em cada período de tempo.  

Outras possibilidades de estudos futuros envolvem a associação de heurísticas ao 

modelo de programação inteira de forma a possibilitar a obtenção do ótimo, já que neste 

estudo de caso assumiu-se como aceitáveis soluções sub-ótimas (MIP Relative 

Optimality Tolerance = 3,00%, conforme descrito na seção 6.2). A utilização de 

heurísticas associadas ao modelo de otimização possibilitará a ampliação das instâncias 

rodadas, viabilizando rodadas integradas para o planejamento de rede logística offshore 

da Petrobras para todo o Brasil, não apenas o Sul-Sudeste. 

A adaptação do modelo para estudo de caso em outras regiões onde haja 

operações offshore também será academicamente relevante, além de representar ganhos 

72 
 



 

potenciais para empresas que venham a se beneficiar do estudo. 

Adicionalmente, enxerga-se como possibilidade de contribuição acadêmica, a 

realização de estudos de benchmark para diversas instâncias deste modelo entre 

diferentes solvers, em especial CPLEX e GUROBI, tanto utilizando processamento em 

série como em paralelo, de forma a apontar qual o solver comercial mais adequado para 

este tipo de problema. 

Por fim, como complemento ao trabalho realizado, recomenda-se realização de 

estudos futuros para definição das configurações internas do AIMMS e do solver 

associado que proporcionam o melhor desempenho deste modelo. Este estudo dará 

continuidade ao trabalho de HUTTER et. al. (2010), que desenvolveram uma 

ferramenta de configuração automática de solvers de MIP, obtendo melhorias 

expressivas de desempenho para os conjuntos de problemas testados. 

 

73 
 



 

8. REFERÊNCIAS BIBLIOGRÁFICAS 

 

AGÊNCIA NACIONAL DO PETRÓLEO, GÁS NATURAL E BICOMBUSTÍVEIS. 
Anuário Estatístico Brasileiro do Petróleo, Gás Natural e Bicombustíveis. Rio de 
Janeiro, RJ, 2009, 218 p. 

AIS/DECEA: Carta Aeronáutica da TMA Macaé. Outubro de 2009                      
(Disponível em:  http://www.aisweb.aer.mil.br)  Acessado em: 24/01/2011. 

AZARMAND, Z., JAMI, E. N.: Location allocation Problem. In: FARAHANI, R. Z., 
HEKMATFAR, M. (Editores). Facility Location: Concepts, Models, Algorithms and 
Case Studies: Contributions to Management Science. Physica-Verrlag Heidelberg. 
2009. Páginas 93-109 

BARBOSA, G.R., ALMEIDA, A.T.: Sistema de Apoio a Decisão sob enfoque de 
profissionais de TI e Decisores. Curitiba - Abepro, 2002. 

BISSCHOP, J, ENTRIKEN, R.: AIMMS the Modeling System. Paragon Decision 
Technology. 2002 (Disponível no endereço: http://www.aimms.com). 

BISSCHOP, J. : AIMMS Optimization  Modeling . Paragon Decision Technology. 2009 
( Disponível no endereço: http://www.aimms.com). 

BORNSTEIN, C. T., AZLAN, H. B.: The use of reduction tests and simulated 
annealing for the capacitated plant location problem. Location Science, Volume 6, 
Número 1-4, Maio-Dezembro 1998, Páginas 67-81. 

BRITTAN, D., DOUGLAS, S.: Offshore Crew Supply - Modern Marine Options 
Challenge Helicopters. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Setembro de 2009 

CAMARGO, R.S., MIRANDA JR, G., LUNA, H.P.: Benders decomposition for the 
uncapacitated multiple allocation hub location problem. Computers & Operations 
Research, Volume 35, Número 4, Abril de 2008, Páginas 1047-1064. 

COMANDO DA AERONÁUTICA. ICA 100-12 - Tráfego Aéreo - Regras do Ar e 
Serviços de Tráfego Aéreo. Ministério da Defesa, 2009. 

DUPONT, L.: Branch and bound algorithm for a facility location problem with concave 
site dependent costs. International Journal of Production Economics, Volume 112, 
Número 1, Março 2008, Páginas 245-254.  

DREZNER, Z., HAMACHER, H. W. (Editores). Facility Location: Applications and 
Theory. Springer. New York, 2004. 

DREZNER, Z., KLAMROTH, K., SCHÖBEL, A. WESOLOWSKY, G. O.: The Weber 
Problem. In: DREZNER, Z., HAMACHER, H. W. (Editores). Facility Location: 
Applications and Theory. Springer. New York, 2004. Páginas 1-36. 

EIERMAN, M.A., NIEDERMAN, F., ADAMS, C.: Decision Support Systems. Volume 
14, Número 1, Maio de 1995, Páginas 1-26 

74 
 



 

FARAHANI, R. Z., HEKMATFAR, M. (Editores). Facility Location: Concepts, 
Models, Algorithms and Case Studies: Contributions to Management Science. Physica-
Verrlag Heidelberg. 2009. 

FARAHAMI, R. Z., ABEDIAN, M., SHARAHI, S.: Dynamic Location Problem. In: 
FARAHANI, R. Z., HEKMATFAR, M. (Editores). Facility Location: Concepts, 
Models, Algorithms and Case Studies: Contributions to Management Science. Physica-
Verrlag Heidelberg. 2009. Páginas 347-372 

GABRIELLI, S.J., BARBASSA, A.: Plano de Negócios 2010-2014. Petrobras, 2010 
(Disponível em: http://www.petrobras.com.br/ri) Acessado em 05/02/2011 

GALVÃO, R. D.: Uncapacitated facility location problems: contributions.Pesquisa 
Operacional, Volume 24, Número 1, Janeiro a Abril de 2004, Páginas 7-38  

GALVÃO, R. D., GUIMARÃES,J.: The control of helicopter operations in the 
Brazilian oil industry: Issues in the design and implementation of a computerized 
system. European Journal of Operational Research, Volume 49, Número 2, 1990, 
Páginas 266-270. 

GEOFRION, A.M., MORRIS, J., WEBSTER, S.: Distribution System Design. In: 
DREZNER, Z. (Editor): Facility Location: A Survey of Applications, Z. Drezner 
(Editor). Springer-Verlag, New York. 1995. Páginas 190-191 

GHOSH, D.: Neighborhood search heuristics for the uncapacitated facility location 
problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 2003. Páginas 150–162. 

HALE, T.: Trevor Hale’s location science references. Disponível em: 
<http://gator.dt.uh.edu/~halet/>. Acessado em 13/01/2011. 

HERMETO, T. S.: A utilização do Sistema de Apoio à Decisão para escolha de Bases 
Aeroportuárias Offshore. Rio de Janeiro. Dezembro de 2009 - MTBI – UFRJ 

HOLMBERG, K., RÖNNQVIST, M., YUAN, D.: An exact algorithm for the 
capacitated facility location problems with single sourcing. European Journal of 
Operational Research, Volume 113, Número 3, 16 de Março de 1999, Páginas 544-559. 

HORONJEFF, R.; MCKELVEY, F.: Planning and Design of Airports. New York. 
MacGraw-Hill, 4ª Edição,1993. 

HUTTER, F., HOOS, H., LEYTON-BROWN, K.: Automated Configuration of Mixed 
Integer Programming Solvers. CP-AI-OR 2010. 

IGNÁCIO, A.A.V., FERREIRA FILHO, V.J.M.: Seção de Software: o uso de software 
de modelagem AIMMS na solução de problemas de programação matemática. Pesquisa 
Operacional. Volume 24, Número 1, Janeiro a Abril de 2004, Páginas 197-210. 

INSTITUTO DE LOGÍSTICA E SUPPLY CHAIN : Panorama “Custos Logísticos no 
Brasil 2010”. Rio de Janeiro, 2010 

INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION (ICAO): Aeródromos, 
Anexo 14, Volume 1, 3ª edição, Julho de 1999. 

75 
 



 

LAUX, P.F.: S-61 O Pioneiro Offshore . Aeromagazine.  Edição 197. 2010 (Disponível 
em: http://aeromagazine.uol.com.br/revista/197/s-61-o-pioneiro-do-offshore/) Acessado 
em 25/01/2011 

LOPES, P.H.M., SANTOS, W.E.D.: Considerações sobre tributos e estoques na 
modelagem de redes logísticas, DEI-POLI/UFRJ, Dezembro de 2006 

MARIĆ, M.: An efficient genetic algorithm for solving the multi-level uncapacitated 
facility location problem. Computing and Informatics, Volume 29, Número 2, 2010, 
Páginas 183-201  

MARINHA DO BRASIL: Norma da Autoridade Marítima 01 – Embarcações 
Empregadas na Navegação em Mar Aberto. Capitulo 6. 2010 (Disponível em: 
https://www.dpc.mar.mil.br/normam/tabela_normam.htm) Acessado em: 25/01/2011. 

MENEZES, F., PORTO, O., REIS, M.L., MORENO, L., ARAGÃO, M.P., UCHOA, E., 
EBELEDO, H., NASCIMENTO, N.: Optimizing Helicopter Transport of Oil Rig Crews 
at Petrobras. Interfaces, Volume 40, Número 5, Setembro-Outubro de 2010, Páginas 
408-416. 

MITTELMANN, H.: Mixed Integer Linear Programming Benchmark. (Disponível em: 
http://plato.asu.edu/ftp/milpc.html) Acessado em 04/04/2011 

REVELLE, C.S., EISELT, H.A., DASKIN, M.S.: A bibliography for some fundamental 
problem categories in discrete location science. European Journal of Operational 
Research, Volume 184, Número 3, 1 de Fevereiro de 2008, Páginas 817-848 

ROCHA, P.P.F.: Modelo de Dimensionamento de Frota de Helicópteros para um 
sistema de distribuição física de pessoas voltada às atividades offshore de exploração e 
produção de uma bacia petrolífera: Estudo de Caso. Dissertação de Mestrado - UFSC. 
Florianópolis, SC, 2001.  

ROMERO, M., SHEREMETOV, L., SORIANO, A.,: A Genetic Algorithm for the 
Pickup and Delivery Problem: An Application to the Helicopter Offshore 
Transportation.  Theoretical Advances and Applications of Fuzzy Logic and Soft 
Computing. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, Volume 42, 2007.  

SENA, N. S., FERREIRA FILHO, V. J. M.: Localização de aeroportos para transporte 
de pessoas para atividades de exploração e produção de petróleo offshore. Anais do IX 
Simpósio de Transporte Aéreo, Sociedade Brasileira de Transporte Aéreo. Manaus, 
Novembro de 2010. Páginas 129-142. 

SENA, N.S, LEITE, R.P, MASSUDA, E.T., PRALLON, E.D.: Plano Diretor Logístico 
do E&P. 5º Seminário de Planejamento, Controle e Avaliação de Desempenho no E&P. 
Setembro de 2010. (Artigo publicado em Seminário Interno da PETROBRAS) 

SHERALI, H.D., BAE, K., HAOUARI, M.: Integrated Airline Schedule Design and 
Fleet Assignment: Polyhedral Analysis and Benders’ Decomposition Approach. 
INFORMS Journal of Computing. Volume 22, Número 4, 2010. Páginas 500-513. 

SIERKSMA, G., TIJSSEN, G.A.,: Routing helicopters for crew exchanges on off-shore 
locations. Annals of Operations Research 76, 1998, Páginas 261 – 286. 

76 
 



 

SIMCHI-LEVI, D., KAMINSKY, P., SIMCHI-LEVI, E.: Cadeia de Suprimentos – 
Projeto e Gestão. Bookman. São Paulo, 2000, Páginas 41-42. 

SLACK, N., CHAMBERS, S., JOHNSTON R. Administração da Produção. 2ª edição. 
São Paulo: Atlas, 2002. 742 p. 

SPOUGE, J.R., SMITH, E.J., LEWIS, K.J.: Helicopter or Boats- Risk Management 
options for transport offshore.  Society of petroleum engineers, 1994. 

STRONG, P. A.: Reducing Incidents in Marine Personnel Transfer. Society of 
petroleum engineers, Reflex Marine Ltd, 2008 

TAFAZZOLI, S., MOZAFARI, M.: Classification of Location Models and Location 
Softwares. In: FARAHANI, R. Z., HEKMATFAR, M. (Editores). Facility Location: 
Concepts, Models, Algorithms and Case Studies: Contributions to Management 
Science. Physica-Verrlag Heidelberg. 2009. Páginas 505-521 

TAM, B., EHRGOTT, M., RYAN, D., ZAKERI, G.: A comparison of stochastic 
programming and bi-objective optimisation approaches to robust airline crew 
scheduling. OR Spectrum. Volume 33, Número 1, Janeiro de 2011. Páginas 49-75. 

TRAGANTALERNGSAK, S., HOLT, J. RÖNNQVIST, M.: An exact method for the 
two-echelon, single-source, capacitated facility location problem. European Journal of 
Operational Research, Volume 123, Número 3, 16 de Junho de 2000, Páginas 473-489. 

VERTER, V.: Uncapacited and Capacited Facility Location Problems. In: EISELT, 
H.A., MARIANOV, V. (Editores): Foundations of Location Analysis. International 
Series in Operational Research & Management Science. Springer. Volume 155. New 
York, 2011. Páginas 25-37. 

YAN, S., TU, Y.: A network model for airline cabin crew scheduling. European Journal 
of Operational Research. Volume 140, Número 3, Agosto de 2002. Páginas 531-540. 

 

77 
 



 

ANEXO I – RESULTADOS COMPLETOS 

 

 Neste anexo serão apresentados os resultados de todos os cenários rodados 

compostos por distribuição da demanda entre aeroportos ao longo dos anos, distribuição 

da frota por tipo de modal ao longo dos anos e mapas de alocação de demandas aos 

aeródromos. 

a) Cenário 1A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 3 4 4 6 6 7 6 7 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 10 9 9 10

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
34 39 40 45 49 59 63 67 65 67 66 67 67 66 65 66 66 67 67 66

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 24: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

78 
 

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos:  

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 4 Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 25: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 - Cen1A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 - Cen1A

-18,0 -18,0
Arbitrado 1

Arbitrado 1
-20,0 -20,0 Vitoria

Vitoria
Abritrado 2

-22,0 Abritrado 2 -22,0
Macae

Macae
-24,0 -24,0 São Tome

São Tome
Jacarepagua

-26,0 Jacarepagua -26,0
Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 3
-28,0 -28,0 Arbitrado 4

Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

-30,0 Itanhaem -30,0
Navegantes

AEROPORTOS
-32,0 -32,0 AEROPORTOS

-34,0 -34,0

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 - Cen1A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 - Cen1A

Arbitrado 1
-18,0 Arbitrado 1 -18,0

Vitoria
Vitoria

-20,0 -20,0 Abritrado 2
Abritrado 2

Macae
-22,0 Macae -22,0

São Tome
São Tome

-24,0 -24,0 Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0

Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 4

-28,0 -28,0 Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

Itanhaem
-30,0 Navegantes -30,0

Navegantes
Arbitrado 7

-32,0 -32,0 Arbitrado 7
AEROPORTOS

AEROPORTOS
-34,0 -34,0

 

Figura 26: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 1A 

79 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2011
-42,6 -42,6

2012
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2013
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6 2014
-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 2015-30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2016

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 2020
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6 2021

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6 2022

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

2024
-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2025
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2026
-36,6 -36,6

2027
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2028
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2029

2030



 

b) Cenário 1B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 3 4 4 5 5 7 6 8 9 9 10 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
32 38 40 44 49 60 62 66 64 66 66 65 66 66 66 66 66 66 66 66

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 27: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1B 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 28: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1B 

 

80 
 

2011

2011 2012

2012 2013

2013 2014

2014 2015

2015 2016

2016 2017

2017 2018

2018 2019

2019 2020

2020 2021

2021 2022

2022 2023

2023 2024

2024 2025

2025 2026

2026 2027

2027 2028

2028 2029

2029 2030

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 - Cen1B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 - Cen1B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2
-20,0 Abritrado 2

-20,0
Macae

Macae
-22,0 São Tome -22,0

São Tome
Cabo Frio

-24,0 -24,0 Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
Arbitrado 4

-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem
Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 - Cen1B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 - Cen1B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 São Tome -22,0 São Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 4 -26,0 Arbitrado 4

Itanhaem Itanhaem
-28,0 -28,0

Navegantes Navegantes

-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0 Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 29: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 1B 

c) Cenário 1C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
3 4 7 5 5 7 8 7 8

90% 11 10 10 11 10 10 12 11 10 11 10

80%
70%
60%
50%

34 38
40% 35 43 49 59 62 66 65 65 66 66 65 66 66 64 65 66 65 66

30%
20%
10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 30: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1C 

81 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

2012 -42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6

2013 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2014 -34,6 -34,6
-32,6 -32,6

2015
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,62016

2017

2018

2019
-58,6

2020 -58,6
-56,6

-56,6

2021 -54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6

2022 -50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6

2023 -46,6
-46,6

-44,6

2024 -44,6
-42,6

-42,6
-40,6

2025 -40,6
-38,6

-38,6

2026 -36,6
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6

2027 -32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6

2028 -28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 4 Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 31: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 - Cen1C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 - Cen1C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 São Tome -22,0 São Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4
-28,0 -28,0

Itanhaem Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 - Cen1C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 - Cen1C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1
-18,0 Vitoria

-18,0 Vitoria
Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2

-20,0
Macae -20,0

Macae

-22,0 São Tome
-22,0 São Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Itanhaem

-28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
Arbitrado 7

Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 32: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 1C 

 

82 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 2011-44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2012
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2013
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 2014-34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2015
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2016

2017

2018

2019

2020
-58,6

-58,6
-56,6

-56,6 2021
-54,6

-54,6
-52,6 2022

-52,6
-50,6

-50,6 2023
-48,6

-48,6

-46,6
-46,6 2024

-44,6
-44,6

-42,6 2025
-42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2026
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2027
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2028
-30,6 -30,6 2029
-28,6 -28,6

2030



 

d) Cenário 1D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
5 3 4 5 5 6 7 7 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
35 41 43 47 51 62 63 67 66 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 33: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 1D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 34: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 1D 

 

83 
 

2011
2011

2012
2012

2013
2013

2014
2014

2015

2016 2015

2017 2016

2018 2017

2019 2018

2020 2019

2021 2020

2022 2021

2023 2022

2024 2023

2025 2024
2026 2025
2027 2026
2028

2027
2029

2028
2030

2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 - Cen1D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 - Cen1D

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4
-28,0 -28,0

Itanhaem Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 -34,0
AEROPORTOS AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 - Cen1D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 - Cen1D

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 35: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 1D 

e) Cenário 2A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
5 4 5 4 7 6 7 8 7 10 9 9 11 9 10 9 11 10 9 10

90%

80%

70%

60%
50%

37 43 43 49 52 64 66 70 69 71 72 72
40% 71 72 71 72 71 71 72 71

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 36: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2A 

84 
 

-58,6

-58,6
-56,6

-56,6
-54,6

-54,6
-52,6

-52,6
-50,6

-50,6
-48,6

-48,6
-46,6

-46,6

2011 -44,6 -44,6
-42,6

-42,6
2012 -40,6

-40,6

-38,6
2013 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

2014 -34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6

2015 -30,6 -30,6
-28,6 -28,6

2016

2017

2018

2019
-58,6

2020 -58,6
-56,6

-56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2023
-46,6 -46,6

2024 -44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

2025 -40,6
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6

2026 -36,6
-36,6

-34,6

2027 -34,6
-32,6

-32,6
-30,6

2028 -30,6 -28,6

-28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 37: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen2A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen2A

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
-18,0 Vitoria

Vitoria
-20,0 Abritrado 2

-20,0
Macae Macae

-22,0
-22,0

Sao Tome Sao Tome
-24,0

-24,0 Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-26,0 Jacarepagua
-26,0

Jacarepagua
-28,0 Itanhaem

-28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0
-30,0 Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen2A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen2A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 -24,0 Jacarepagua
Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3
-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

Navegantes
-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 6

-32,0 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 38: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 2A 

85 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6 2011
-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6 2012
-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2013
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2014
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6 2015
-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6 2016
-28,6 -28,6

2017

2018

2019

2020
-58,6

-58,6
-56,6

-56,6 2021
-54,6

-54,6
-52,6

-52,6 2022
-50,6

-50,6
-48,6

-48,6 2023
-46,6

-46,6
-44,6

-44,6 2024
-42,6

-42,6
-40,6

-40,6 2025
-38,6

-38,6
-36,6

-36,6 2026
-34,6

-34,6

-32,6
-32,6 2027

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6 2028

2029

2030



 

f) Cenário 2B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
3 3 4 4 5 7 9 8 8 9 10 9 10 9 9 10 9 10 9 9

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
38 41 42 47 53 63 62 67 69 71 70 70 71 70 71 70 71 70 71 71

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 39: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2B 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae
Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem

 

Figura 40: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2B 

 

 

86 
 

2011 2011

2012 2012

2013 2013
2014 2014
2015 2015
2016 2016
2017 2017
2018

2018
2019

2019
2020

2020
2021

2021
2022

2022
2023

2023
2024

2024
2025

2025
2026

2026
2027

2027
2028

2029 2028

2030 2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen2B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen2B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
Vitoria -18,0

Vitoria
-20,0 Abritrado 2 -20,0 Abritrado 2

-22,0 Macae
-22,0 Macae

-24,0 Sao Tome
-24,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
-26,0 Cabo Frio

-26,0
Jacarepagua

-28,0 Jacarepagua
-28,0

Itanhaem
Itanhaem

-30,0
Navegantes -30,0

Navegantes
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen2B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen2B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4
-28,0 -28,0

Itanhaem Itanhaem

-30,0 -30,0
Navegantes Navegantes

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 -34,0
AEROPORTOS AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 41: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 2B 

g) Cenário 2C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 5 4 5 5 8 9 8 7 10 9 9 10 9 10 10 10 9 9 11

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
40 43 44 49 56 61 67 72 71 73 73 72 72 73 72 71 72 72 73 71

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 42: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2C 

87 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2012
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6
2013 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2014 -36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

2015 -32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6

2016 -28,6 -28,6

2017

2018

2019
-58,6

2020 -58,6
-56,6

-56,6
-54,6

2021 -54,6
-52,6

-52,6

2022 -50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6

2023 -46,6
-46,6

-44,6
-44,6

2024 -42,6-42,6

-40,6
-40,6

2025 -38,6-38,6

-36,6
-36,6

2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6

2027
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6

2028

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae
Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4

 

Figura 43: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen2C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen2C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0
Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

-20,0 Abritrado 2 Abritrado 2
-20,0

Macae
Macae

-22,0 -22,0
Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0 -24,0 Cabo Frio

Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua

-26,0 Jacarepagua -26,0
Arbitrado 3

-28,0 Arbitrado 3 -28,0 Itanhaem
Itanhaem

-30,0 -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 5

-32,0 -32,0
Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen2C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen2C

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0

-20,0
Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0 Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0
Arbitrado 4

Itanhaem
-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes
Navegantes

-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0
Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

-32,0
Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 -34,0
AEROPORTOS AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 44: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 2C 

88 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6

-46,6 2011
-46,6

-44,6
-44,6

-42,6 2012
-42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2013
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2014
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2015
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 2016-28,6

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 2020
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6 2021
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6 2022

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2024
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2025
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 2026-36,6

-34,6 -34,6 2027
-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6 2028
-28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

h) Cenário 2D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
6 5 6 4 8 8 11 8 9 14 11 14 12 11 11 14 11 13 10 10

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
34 39 41 47 50 63 63 70 69 66 70 67 70 69 69 67 69 69 71 70

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 45: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 2D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome
Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3

 

Figura 46: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 2D 

89 
 

2011 2011

2012 2012

2013 2013

2014 2014
2015 2015
2016 2016
2017 2017
2018 2018
2019

2019
2020

2020
2021

2021
2022

2022
2023

2023
2024

2024
2025

2025
2026

2027 2026

2028 2027

2029 2028

2030 2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen2D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen2D

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Vitoria Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae Macae
-22,0 -22,0

Sao Tome Sao Tome

-24,0 -24,0
Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-26,0 -26,0
Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 -32,0
Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen2D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen2D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Itanhaem

-28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7
Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 47: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 2D 

i) Cenário 3A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 4 4 5 5 5 7 6 8 9

% 10 9 10 9 10 9 9 9
90 12 9

80%
70%
60%
50%

34 38 40 43 50 61 63 67 64 67 66 67 66 67 66 67 67 67
40% 64 67

30%
20%
10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 48: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3A 

90 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2012
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6
2013

-38,6 -38,6

2014 -36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

2015 -32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6

2016 -28,6 -28,6

2017

2018

2019

2020 -58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2023 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2024 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2025 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6
2027

-30,6 -30,6

2028 -28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 4 Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 49: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen3A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen3A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0 Vitoria
Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0

Macae
Macae

-22,0 -22,0
Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0 -24,0 Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 -26,0
Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Arbitrado 4 -28,0 Itanhaem

Itanhaem
-30,0 -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen3A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen3A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua

-24,0 -24,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 3
-26,0 Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

Navegantes
-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6
-32,0 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 50: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 3A 

91 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6
2011

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6
-44,6 2012

-42,6
-42,6

-40,6
-40,6 2013

-38,6
-38,6

-36,6
-36,6 2014

-34,6
-34,6

-32,6 2015
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6 2016
-28,6

2017

2018

2019

2020
-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6 2021
-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6 2022
-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

2024
-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2025
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2026
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6 2027
-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6 2028
-28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

j) Cenário 3B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
3 3 4 4 5 5 7 6 7 9 9 9 9 10 9 9 9 9 9 9

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
34 38 39 43 49 60 61 66 64 67 66 67 67 66 67 67 66 67 66 66

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 51: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3B 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 52: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3B 

92 
 

2011

2012 2011

2013 2012

2014 2013

2015 2014

2016 2015

2017 2016

2018 2017

2019 2018

2020 2019

2021 2020

2022 2021

2023 2022

2024 2023

2025 2024

2026 2025

2027 2026

2027
2028

2028
2029

2029
2030

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen3B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen3B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

-20,0
Macae

-22,0 Macae
Sao Tome -22,0

Sao Tome
-24,0 Cabo Frio

-24,0 Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua

-26,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem
-30,0 Navegantes

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 6 -32,0

Arbitrado 6
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen3B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen3B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0

Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 3
-26,0

Itanhaem Arbitrado 4
-28,0

Navegantes -28,0 Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5

-30,0
Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6
-32,0

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
Arbitrado 7

Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 53: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 3B 

k) Cenário 3C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 4 4 6 7 7 8 8 8 10 10 10 11 11 10 10 9

90% 11 12 11

80%

70%

60%

50%
34 39 41 43 48 59 63 66 65 67 67 67 66 67 67 67 68

40% 67 65 65

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 54: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3C 

93 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6
2011

-46,6 -46,6

2012 -44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

2013 -40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2014 -36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

2015 -32,6 -32,6
-30,6 -30,6

2016 -28,6 -28,6

2017

2018

2019

2020 -58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2023 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2024 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2025 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2026 -34,6 -34,6
-32,6 -32,6

2027
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6
2028

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 4 Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 55: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen3C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen3C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2

-20,0 Macae -20,0 Macae

Sao Tome Sao Tome
-22,0 -22,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua
-24,0 -24,0

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 4 -26,0 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen3C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen3C

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Arbitrado 2
-18,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
-20,0 Macae

Sao Tome -20,0
Sao Tome

-22,0
Jacarepagua -22,0 Cabo Frio

-24,0 Arbitrado 3 Jacarepagua
-24,0

Arbitrado 4
-26,0 Arbitrado 3

Itanhaem -26,0 Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Navegantes Itanhaem

-28,0
-30,0 Arbitrado 5 Navegantes

Arbitrado 6 -30,0 Arbitrado 5
-32,0

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 6
-32,0

-34,0 AEROPORTOS Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 56: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 3C 

 

94 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6
2011

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2012
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6
-44,6 2013

-42,6
-42,6

-40,6
-40,6 2014

-38,6
-38,6

-36,6
-36,6 2015

-34,6
-34,6

-32,6
-32,6 2016

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6 2017

2018

2019

2020

-58,6 -58,6 2021
-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6 2022
-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6 2023
-48,6 -48,6

2024
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6
2025

-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2026
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2027
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2028
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2029

2030



 

l) Cenário 3D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 3 4 4 5 5 7 6 7 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
36 42 43 48 52 63 65 68 67 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 69 69

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 57: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 3D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Sao Tome Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 58: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 3D 

 

95 
 

2011
2011

2012
2012

2013
2013

2014
2014

2015
2015

2016
2016

2017 2017

2018 2018

2019 2019

2020 2020

2021 2021

2022 2022

2023 2023

2024 2024

2025 2025
2026 2026
2027 2027
2028 2028
2029

2029
2030

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen3D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen3D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria
Arbitrado 2

-20,0 Arbitrado 2
-20,0

Macae Macae
-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 3

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4
-28,0 -28,0

Itanhaem Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes -30,0 Navegantes

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen3D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen3D

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Itanhaem

-28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
Arbitrado 7

Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 59: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 3D 

m) Cenário 4A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 5 4 5 5 6 8 8 8 9 9 9 10 10 10 9 9 10 10 11

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
39 41 43 49 55 65 68 72 69 72 73 73 72 73 72 73 73 72 72 71

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 60: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4A 

96 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

2012 -42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6

2013 -38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

2014 -34,6 -34,6

-32,6
-32,6

2015 -30,6
-30,6

-28,6
2016 -28,6

2017

2018

2019

2020 -58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6
-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6
2024

-42,6 -42,6

2025 -40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2026 -36,6 -36,6
-34,6 -34,6

2027 -32,6 -32,6

-30,6
-30,6

2028 -28,6-28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae
Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4

 

Figura 61: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen4A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen4A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Vitoria Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
-22,0 Macae -22,0

Sao Tome
-24,0 Sao Tome

-24,0
Cabo Frio

Cabo Frio
-26,0 -26,0 Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem

Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 -30,0
Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0

Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen4A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen4A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 62: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 4A 

 

97 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2011
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2012
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2013
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2014
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2015
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020
-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6 2021
-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6 2022
-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2024
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 2025-40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2026
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6
2027

-32,6 -32,6

-30,6
-30,6 2028

-28,6
-28,6

2029

2030



 

n) Cenário 4B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
5 3 5 5 8 10 7 7 10 11 11 9 12 11 11 11 10 11 10 10

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
35 41 43 47 51 58 67 71 65 69 68 72 67 68 69 69 71 70 71 70

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP  

Figura 63: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4B 

 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 64: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4B 

98 
 

2011
2011

2012
2012

2013
2013

2014
2014

2015 2015

2016 2016

2017 2017

2018 2018

2019 2019

2020 2020

2021 2021

2022 2022
2023 2023
2024

2024
2025

2025
2026

2026
2027

2027
2028

2028
2029

2029
2030

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen4B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen4B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
-18,0 Vitoria

Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
Macae -22,0

-22,0
Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0 -24,0

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-26,0 -26,0
Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 -32,0
Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen4B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen4B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 65: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 4B 

o) Cenário 4C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
5 5

90% 7 5 5 6 9 8 8 9 9 11 12 10 10 10 10 11 11 11

80%

70%

60%

50%
37 42

40% 43 49 55 65 68 73 71 73 73 71 70 72 72 73 73 71 71 71

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 66: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4C 

99 
 

-58,6
-58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2012
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,62013
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6
2014 -36,6

-34,6
-34,6

2015 -32,6
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

2016 -28,6
-28,6

2017

2018

2019
-58,6 -58,6

2020
-56,6 -56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2023 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2024 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2025
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6
2027 -32,6

-30,6
-30,6

2028 -28,6
-28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 67: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen4C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen4C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1
-18,0

Vitoria -18,0
Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0 Arbitrado 2

-22,0 Macae Macae
-22,0

-24,0 Sao Tome Sao Tome
-24,0

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-26,0

-26,0 Jacarepagua
Jacarepagua

-28,0
-28,0 Itanhaem

Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0

Arbitrado 6
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen4C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen4C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 -22,0 Sao Tome
Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 -24,0 Jacarepagua
Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3
-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

Navegantes
-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 6

-32,0 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 68: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 4C 

100 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2011
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6
-44,6 2012

-42,6
-42,6

-40,6 2013
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6

-36,6 2014
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6

-32,6 2015
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6 2016
-28,6

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 2020
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6 2021

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6 2022

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6 2023

-46,6
-46,6

-44,6
-44,6 2024

-42,6
-42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2025
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 2027-32,6

-30,6 -30,6
2028

-28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

p) Cenário 4D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
6 5 5 6 9 10 9 7 11 10 12 10 12 13 11 12 10 11 11 10

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%
35 42 43 46 50 59 66 71 65 72 69 71 68 68 69 69 71 70 70 71

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 69: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 4D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 70: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 4D 

 

101 
 

2011
2011

2012
2012

2013
2013

2014
2014

2015
2015

2016
2016

2017
2017

2018
2018

2019
2019

2020
2020

2021
2021

2022
2022

2023
2023

2024
2024

2025
2025

2026
2026

2027
2027

2028
2028

2029
2029

2030
2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen4D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen4D
Arbitrado 1

Arbitrado 1
-18,0

Vitoria -18,0
Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
-22,0 Macae

-22,0
Sao Tome Sao Tome

-24,0 -24,0
Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-26,0 Jacarepagua -26,0 Jacarepagua

-28,0 Itanhaem
-28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen4D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen4D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 4 -26,0

Arbitrado 4
-28,0 Itanhaem

-28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
Arbitrado 7

Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 71: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 4D 

q) Cenário 5A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
7 7 8 5

90% 15 14 16
17 23 21 21 22 21 20 21 21 20 20 22

28
80%

70%

60%

50%
48 51 54 62

40% 81 86 83
57 79 81 82 81 79 83 81 82 83 82 79

64
30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 72: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5A 

102 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6
2011

-50,6 -50,6

2012 -48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

2013 -44,6 -44,6
-42,6 -42,6

2014 -40,6 -40,6
-38,6 -38,6

2015 -36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

2016 -32,6
-32,6

-30,6
2017 -30,6

-28,6
-28,6

2018

2019

2020

2021
-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6
2022

-54,6 -54,6

2023 -52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

2024 -48,6
-48,6

-46,6
-46,6

2025 -44,6
-44,6

-42,6
-42,6

2026 -40,6
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6

2027 -36,6
-36,6

-34,6

2028 -34,6
-32,6

-32,6
-30,6

2029 -30,6 -28,6

-28,6

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 73: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen5A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen5A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Vitoria Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
-22,0 Macae -22,0

Sao Tome
-24,0 Sao Tome

-24,0
Cabo Frio

Cabo Frio
-26,0 -26,0 Jacarepagua

Jacarepagua
-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem

Itanhaem
Navegantes

-30,0 -30,0
Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0

Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen5A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen5A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome
-22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3
-26,0 Arbitrado 3

-26,0
Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem
Navegantes Navegantes

-30,0
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 74: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 5A 

103 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6 2011
-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2012
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2013
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6
2014

-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6 2015
-28,6 -28,6

2016

2017

2018

2019
-58,6 -58,6 2020
-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6 2021
-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6 2022
-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6 2023
-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2024
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2025
-36,6 -36,6

2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6
2027

-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2028

2029

2030



 

r) Cenário 5B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
7 5 5 7 12 14

90% 15
16 22 19 20 20 19 21 21 23 21 22 21

30
80%

70%

60%

50%
45 52 55 58 84 84

40% 82
56 81 83 82 81 83 80 81 78 81 79 80

63
30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 75: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5B 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae
Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem

 

Figura 76: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5B 

104 
 

2011

2011 2012
2012

2013
2013

2014
2014

2015
2015

2016 2016

2017 2017

2018 2018
2019 2019
2020

2020
2021

2021
2022

2022
2023

2024 2023

2025 2024

2026 2025

2027 2026
2028

2027
2029

2028
2030

2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen5B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen5B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Vitoria Vitoria

-20,0 -20,0
Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2

-22,0 -22,0
Macae Macae

-24,0 -24,0
Sao Tome Sao Tome

-26,0 -26,0
Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-28,0 Jacarepagua -28,0 Jacarepagua

-30,0 Itanhaem -30,0 Itanhaem

-32,0 Navegantes -32,0 Navegantes

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen5B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen5B

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1
-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

-20,0
Macae Macae

-22,0 -22,0
Sao Tome Sao Tome

-24,0 Cabo Frio -24,0 Cabo Frio

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-28,0 Arbitrado 4 -28,0 Arbitrado 4

-30,0 Itanhaem -30,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 77: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 5B 

s) Cenário 5C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
8 5 8 7

90% 15
17 19 17 23 21 22 23 21 21 21 21 22 25 24

80% 31

70%

60%

50%

40% 47 55 52 58 82
56 79 81 78 80 80 78 80 82 82 80 79 77 77

30% 60

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 78: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5C 

105 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2011 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2012 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2013 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2014
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

2015
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6
2016 -32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
2017 -28,6

2018

2019

2020
-58,6 -58,6

2021
-56,6 -56,6

2022 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2023 -50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2024 -46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

2025 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2026 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2027 -34,6 -34,6
-32,6 -32,6

2028 -30,6 -30,6
-28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome
Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3

 

Figura 79: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen5C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen5C

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
Vitoria -18,0

Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae
-22,0 Macae

-22,0
Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0

Cabo Frio -24,0
Cabo Frio

-26,0 Jacarepagua -26,0 Jacarepagua

-28,0 Itanhaem
-28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen5C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen5C

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2

-20,0 -20,0
Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Sao Tome

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio

-24,0 -24,0
Jacarepagua Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 4

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0 -30,0

Arbitrado 5 Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 80: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 5C 

106 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 2011-48,6

-46,6 -46,6
2012

-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6 2013
-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6 2014
-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6 2015
-32,6

-32,6

-30,6
-30,6 2016

-28,6
-28,6

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 2020
-58,6

-56,6
-56,6 2021

-54,6
-54,6

-52,6
-52,6 2022

-50,6
-50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2024
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2025
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2027
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2028

2029

2030



 

t) Cenário 5D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
7 5 8 7 13

90% 14 16
19 23 19 20 21 21 21 22 22 21 22 22

28
80%

70%

60%

50%
47 52 53 59 83

40% 84 83 83 84
54 79 80 80 82 80 80 80 79 79

65
30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 81: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 5D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae
Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem

 

Figura 82: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 5D 

107 
 

2011

2011 2012
2012 2013
2013 2014
2014 2015
2015

2016
2016

2017
2017

2018
2018

2019
2019

2020
2020

2021
2021

2022 2022

2023 2023

2024 2024

2025 2025

2026 2026

2027 2027

2028 2028
2029 2029
2030 2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen5D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen5D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0
Vitoria -18,0

Vitoria
-20,0

Arbitrado 2 -20,0
Arbitrado 2

-22,0
Macae -22,0

Macae
-24,0 Sao Tome -24,0 Sao Tome

-26,0 Cabo Frio -26,0 Cabo Frio

-28,0 Jacarepagua -28,0 Jacarepagua

-30,0 Itanhaem -30,0 Itanhaem

-32,0 Navegantes -32,0 Navegantes

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen5D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen5D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0 Vitoria
Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Arbitrado 2 Macae

-22,0 -22,0
Macae Sao Tome

-24,0 -24,0 Cabo Frio
Sao Tome

Jacarepagua
-26,0 -26,0

Cabo Frio
Arbitrado 3

-28,0 Jacarepagua -28,0 Arbitrado 4

-30,0 Itanhaem -30,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes
-32,0 Navegantes -32,0

Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 83: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 5D 

u) Cenário 6A 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4

90% 5 5 4 5 7 7 6 9 9 9 11 9 10 10 8 8 9 8 8

80%
70%
60%
50%

28
40% 30 32 36 39 46 49 52 48 51 51 49 52 50 51 53 54 52 52 52

30%
20%
10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 84: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6A 

108 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

2011 -46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

2012 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2013 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2014
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6
2015 -32,6

-30,6
-30,6

2016 -28,6
-28,6

2017

2018

2019
-58,6 -58,6

2020
-56,6 -56,6

2021 -54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

2022 -50,6 -50,6
-48,6 -48,6

2023 -46,6 -46,6
-44,6 -44,6

2024
-42,6 -42,6

2025 -40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2026 -36,6 -36,6
-34,6 -34,6

2027 -32,6 -32,6
-30,6 -30,6

2028
-28,6 -28,6

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 85: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6A 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen6A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen6A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0 Vitoria
Vitoria

-20,0 -20,0 Macae
Macae

Sao Tome
-22,0

Sao Tome -22,0
Cabo Frio

-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0
Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 3

-28,0 Itanhaem -28,0 Itanhaem

-30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5 -30,0

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0

Arbitrado 6
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen6A Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen6A

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Macae Macae
-20,0 -20,0

Sao Tome Sao Tome

-22,0 -22,0 Cabo Frio
Cabo Frio

Jacarepagua
-24,0 Jacarepagua -24,0

Arbitrado 3
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 -26,0 Arbitrado 4
Itanhaem

Itanhaem
-28,0 Navegantes -28,0

Navegantes

-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0 Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-32,0 -32,0
Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 86: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 6A 

 

109 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6 2011
-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6 2012
-44,6

-44,6

-42,6
-42,6 2013

-40,6
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6 2014

-36,6
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6 2015

-32,6
-32,6

-30,6 2016
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 -58,6 2020
-56,6 -56,6

2021
-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6
2022

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2024
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2025
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2026
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2027
-30,6

-30,6

-28,6
-28,6 2028

2029

2030



 

v) Cenário 6B 

Projeção de Frota: 

100% 2
4 3 3 4 5 5 5 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 8 8

90%

80%

70%

60%

50% 32
25 33 36 40 48 50 52 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 51 52 51

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 87: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6B 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio
Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7

 

Figura 88: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6B 

 

110 
 

2011
2011

2012

2013 2012

2014 2013

2015 2014

2016 2015

2017 2016

2018 2017

2019 2018

2020 2019

2021 2020

2022 2021

2023 2022

2024 2023

2025 2024

2026 2025

2027 2026

2028 2027

2029 2028

2030 2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen6B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen6B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

-20,0 Arbitrado 2

-22,0 Macae
-22,0 Macae

Cabo Frio
-24,0 Cabo Frio

-24,0
Jacarepagua

-26,0 Jacarepagua
-26,0

Itanhaem
Itanhaem

-28,0
-28,0

Navegantes Navegantes
-30,0

Arbitrado 5 -30,0
Arbitrado 5

-32,0 Arbitrado 6 -32,0 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen6B Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen6B

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Cabo Frio
-22,0 Cabo Frio

Jacarepagua
-24,0 Jacarepagua

Arbitrado 3 -24,0
Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 4
-26,0 Arbitrado 4

Itanhaem
-28,0 Itanhaem

Navegantes -28,0
Navegantes

-30,0 Arbitrado 5
-30,0 Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 7 -32,0

-34,0 Arbitrado 7
AEROPORTOS

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 89: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 6B 

w) Cenário 6C 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
4 4 5 3 5 6 7

90% 9 8 11 10 9 9 9 9 10 10 9 9 10

80%
70%
60%
50%

28 31 34 37 41 47 48
40% 50 50 50 50 53 53 53 53 52 52 53 53 52

30%
20%
10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 90: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6C 

111 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6
2011

-46,6 -46,6

2012 -44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

2013 -40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

2014 -36,6 -36,6
-34,6 -34,6

2015 -32,6 -32,6
-30,6 -30,6

2016 -28,6 -28,6

2017

2018

2019
-58,6

2020 -58,6
-56,6

-56,6

-54,6
2021 -54,6

-52,6
-52,6

2022 -50,6
-50,6

-48,6
-48,6

2023 -46,6
-46,6

-44,6 -44,6

2024 -42,6 -42,6
-40,6 -40,6

2025 -38,6 -38,6
-36,6 -36,6

2026 -34,6 -34,6
-32,6 -32,6

2027
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6
2028

2029

2030



 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Vitoria Sao Tome Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
Arbitrado 4 Itanhaem Navegantes Arbitrado 7  

Figura 91: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6C 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen6C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen6C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0 Vitoria
Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0

Macae
-22,0 Macae -22,0 Sao Tome

Sao Tome
-24,0 -24,0 Cabo Frio

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua
-26,0 -26,0

Arbitrado 3 Arbitrado 3

-28,0 -28,0 Itanhaem
Itanhaem

-30,0 -30,0 Navegantes
Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 5
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6

-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen6C Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen6C

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria -18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2 Arbitrado 2
-20,0 -20,0

Macae Macae

-22,0 Sao Tome -22,0 Cabo Frio

Cabo Frio Jacarepagua
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3

-26,0 Arbitrado 3 -26,0 Arbitrado 4

Itanhaem Itanhaem
-28,0 -28,0

Navegantes Navegantes

-30,0 Arbitrado 5 -30,0 Arbitrado 5

Arbitrado 6 Arbitrado 6
-32,0 -32,0

Arbitrado 7 Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 92: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 6C 

 

112 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6 2011
-44,6 -44,6

2012
-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6 2013
-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6 2014
-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6 2015
-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6 2016

2017

2018

2019

-58,6 2020-58,6

-56,6 -56,6 2021
-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6 2022
-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6 2023
-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6 2024
-42,6

-42,6

-40,6 2025
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6 2026

-36,6
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6 2027

-32,6
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6 2028

-28,6
-28,6

2029

2030



 

x) Cenário 6D 

Projeção de Frota: 

100%
5 6 5 6 6 6 8 8 8 8

8 9 8 8 8 8 9 8 8
90% 9

80%

70%

60%

50%

40% 29 31 36 39 47 52
32 46 50 52 52 51 52 53 52 51 52 53 51 50

30%

20%

10%

0%

AW 139-MP EC225-GP
 

Figura 93: Projeção de frota por tipo de aeronave no Cenário 6D 

Distribuição das demandas entre aeródromos: 

100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Arbitrado 1 Vitoria Arbitrado 2 Sao Tome
Macae Cabo Frio Jacarepagua Arbitrado 3

 

Figura 94: Distribuição da dos passageiros nos aeroportos no Cenário 6D 

 

113 
 

2011 2011

2012 2012

2013 2013

2014 2014

2015 2015
2016 2016
2017 2017
2018 2018
2019

2019
2020

2020
2021

2021
2022

2022
2023

2023
2024

2024
2025

2025
2026

2026
2027

2028 2027

2029 2028

2030 2029

2030



 

Alocação de pontos de demanda aos aeródromos: 

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2011 – Cen6D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2014 – Cen6D

Arbitrado 1 Arbitrado 1

-18,0 -18,0
Vitoria Vitoria

-20,0 Arbitrado 2 -20,0 Arbitrado 2

-22,0 Macae -22,0 Macae

Cabo Frio Cabo Frio
-24,0 -24,0

Jacarepagua Jacarepagua
-26,0 -26,0

Itanhaem Itanhaem

-28,0 -28,0
Navegantes

Navegantes
-30,0

-30,0 Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 5

-32,0
-32,0 Arbitrado 6

Arbitrado 6
-34,0 AEROPORTOS

-34,0 AEROPORTOS

Distribuição de Atendimentos 2017 – Cen6D Distribuição de Atendimentos 2020 – Cen6D

Arbitrado 1
Arbitrado 1

-18,0 Vitoria
-18,0 Vitoria

Arbitrado 2
-20,0 Arbitrado 2

Macae -20,0
Macae

-22,0 Cabo Frio
-22,0

Jacarepagua Cabo Frio
-24,0

Arbitrado 3 -24,0 Jacarepagua

-26,0 Arbitrado 4 Arbitrado 3
-26,0

Itanhaem Arbitrado 4
-28,0

Navegantes -28,0 Navegantes
-30,0 Arbitrado 5

-30,0 Arbitrado 5
Arbitrado 6

-32,0 Arbitrado 6
Arbitrado 7 -32,0

Arbitrado 7
-34,0 AEROPORTOS -34,0 AEROPORTOS

 

Figura 95: Regiões de Atendimento dos Aeródromos ao Longo do Horizonte de Planejamento para 

Cenário 6D 

 

 

 

 

 

114 
 

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6
-44,6

-42,6
-42,6

-40,6
-40,6

-38,6
-38,6

-36,6
-36,6

-34,6
-34,6

-32,6
-32,6

-30,6
-30,6

-28,6
-28,6

-58,6 -58,6

-56,6 -56,6

-54,6 -54,6

-52,6 -52,6

-50,6 -50,6

-48,6 -48,6

-46,6 -46,6

-44,6 -44,6

-42,6 -42,6

-40,6 -40,6

-38,6 -38,6

-36,6 -36,6

-34,6 -34,6

-32,6 -32,6

-30,6 -30,6

-28,6 -28,6



 

ANEXO II – PROGRAMA FONTE 

 Neste anexo é apresentado o programa fonte na linguagem do AIMMS 3.11. 

MAIN MODEL Main_Planejamento_de_Rede_Logistica_de_Passageiros 
  SECTION Inputs 
    DECLARATION SECTION Entrada_de_Dados 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_UO 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_UO (u)" 
         mapping     :  "u"  --> u, 
                        "UO" --> nome_UO( u ) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Portal 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Portais(n)" 
         mapping     :  "n"         --> n, 
                        "Lat_n"     --> lat_n, 
                        "Long_n"    --> long_n, 
                        "Portal"    --> nome_portal, 
                        "Nome_Tipo" --> nome_tipo_portal ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Aerodromo 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Aeroporto (j)" 
         mapping     :  "j"      --> Aerodromo, 
                        "lat_j"  --> lat_j(j), 
                        "long_j" --> long_j(j), 
                        "Nome"   --> nome_aerodromo( j ), 
                        "I_F"    --> I_F(j), 
                        "C_O"    --> C_O(j) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_UM 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "aux_Coordenadas_UMs" 
         mapping     :  "w"      --> UM, 
                        "lat_w"  --> lat_w( w ), 
                        "long_w" --> long_w( w ) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Ano 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Ano (t)" 
         mapping     :  "t"   --> t, 
                        "Ano" --> nome_ano( t ) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Modal 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Aeronaves (m)" 

115 
 



 

         mapping     :  "m"                 --> m, 
                        "Taxa Utilização"   --> util(m), 
                        "Velocidade (nm)" --> vl(m), 
                        "Nome"              --> nome_modal(m), 
                        "CF"                --> CF( m ), 
                        "CV"                --> CV( m ), 
                        "h"                 --> h( m ), 
                        "t_extra"           --> t_extra( m ), 
                        "assentos"          --> assentos(m), 
                        "cm"                --> cm(m), 
                        "PMD"               --> PMD(m), 
                        "PBO"               --> PBO(m), 
                        "Consumo"           --> Consumo(m), 
                        "TReserva"          --> TReserva(m) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Cap_Aerodromo 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Aux_CapAeroporto" 
         mapping     :  "J_Capacidade_Min" --> Minimo(j,t), 
                        "j_Capacidade_Max" --> Maximo(j,t), 
                        "Max_Vagas"        --> Max_Vagas( j, t ) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Demanda 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Aux_Demanda_Traduzida" 
         mapping     :  "Dw" --> q(w,p,t), 
                        "u"  --> u ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Produto 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Produtos (p)" 
         mapping     :  "p"            --> p, 
                        "Nome_Produto" --> nome_produto(p) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Nome_UM 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Index_Unidades marítimas (w)" 
         mapping     :  "UM"               --> nome_UM(w), 
                        "Indica_UM_Portal" --> Indica_UM_Portal(w), 
                        "R_Heliponto"      --> R_Heliponto( w ) ; 
      DATABASE TABLE: 
         identifier  :  In_Matriz_nw 
         data source :  "Inputs.dsn" 
         table name  :  "Matriz_nw" 
         mapping     :  "w"          --> w, 
                        "n"          --> n, 
                        "Associação" --> Escolha_UM_Portal ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
  ENDSECTION Inputs ; 
  SECTION Modelo 

116 
 



 

    DECLARATION SECTION Constantes 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier :  Raio_da_terra 
         text       :  "Raio da Terra em quilômetros." 
         definition :  6378 ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier :  Conversao_KM_Milha 
         definition :  1.852 ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier :  Ppax 
         text       :  "Peso médio do passageiro juntamente com sua bagagem" 
         definition :  107 ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier :  BigM ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier :  lim 
         text       :  "Quantidade máxima de aeródromos abertos." 
         definition :  14 ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION Entidades 
      SET: 
         identifier :  Portal 
         index      :  n ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  UO 
         index      :  u ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  UM 
         text       :  "Conjunto de Unidades Marítimas" 
         index      :  w ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  Aerodromo 
         text       :  "Conjunto de possíveis aeródromos" 
         index      :  j ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  Ano 
         text       :  "Conjunto de anos de análise" 
         indices    :  t, t2 ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  TipoPax 
         text       :  "Conjunto de Produtos" 
         index      :  p ; 
      SET: 
         identifier :  Modal 
         text       :  "Conjunto de modais (Modelos de helicóptero)" 
         index      :  m ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION Parametros_de_Entrada 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_portal 

117 
 



 

         index domain :  (n) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_tipo_portal 
         index domain :  n ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_UO 
         index domain :  (u) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_aerodromo 
         index domain :  (j) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_UM 
         index domain :  (w) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_produto 
         index domain :  (p) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_modal 
         index domain :  (m) ; 
      STRING PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  nome_ano 
         index domain :  t ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  lat_w 
         index domain :  w 
         text         :  "Latitude da unidade marítima " 
         range        :  free ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  long_w 
         index domain :  w 
         text         :  "Longitude da unidade marítima" 
         range        :  free ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  long_j 
         index domain :  j 
         text         :  "Longitude do aeródromo j" 
         range        :  free ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  lat_j 
         index domain :  j 
         text         :  "Latitude do aeródromo j" 
         range        :  free ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  lat_n 
         index domain :  n ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  long_n 
         index domain :  (n) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  util 

118 
 



 

         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Taxa de utilização dos assentos do modal m por viagem" 
         range        :  [0, 1] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CF 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Custo Fixo Anual por modal" ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  vl 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Velocidade de cruzeiro do modal m. Foi considerado valor menor 
que a velocidade de cruzeiro para representar os tempos perdidos com pouso e 
decolagem." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  h 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Limite de horas voadas no ano por aeronave. Para representar o 
limite mensal de horas vôadas presentes nos contratos de aeronaves." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  q 
         index domain :  (w,p,t) 
         text         :  "Quantidade de passageiros por tipo (p a serem transportados para a 
unidade marítima w no ano t." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Maximo 
         index domain :  (j,t) 
         text         :  "Capacidade máxima de movimentação de passageiros no aeródromo j 
no ano t." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Minimo 
         index domain :  (j,t) 
         text         :  "Capacidade Mínima de Movimentação no Aeródromo j no ano t." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CV 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Custo Varfiável Anual poor modal" ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  aut 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Autonoma máxima, em quilometros do modelo de aeronave m." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  t_extra 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Tempo parado, em horas, em cada UM em cada visita para embarque 
ou desembarque de passageiros, por modal." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Indica_UM_Portal 
         index domain :  w ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Escolha_UM_Portal 

119 
 



 

         index domain :  (w,n) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Max_Vagas 
         index domain :  (j,t) 
         range        :  integer ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  R_Heliponto 
         index domain :  (w) 
         range        :  binary ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  I_F 
         index domain :  (j) 
         text         :  "Parcela fixa do investimento na abertura do aeródromo j." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  C_O 
         index domain :  (j) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  assentos 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Quantidade de assentos disponíveis para utilização em uma perna do 
vôo pelo modal m." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  cm 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Capacidade do Tanque de combustível do modal m em kg. O 
dimensionamento é realizado sem consideração de tanque extra por simplificação. O 
quantidade de aeronaves com tanque extra na frota não é significativa (XX %)." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  PMD 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Peso Máximo de Decolagem do modal m em kg. Representa o peso 
máximo que a aeronave pode apresentar, juntamente com combustível e passageiros 
para que consiga decolar. Além da restrição de fabricação da aeronave este pode 
representar uma restrição da estrutura do heliponto da plataforma. A parte da 
plataforma não será representada no modelo pois esta considerada através da restrição 
de tipo de modal que cada plataforma recebe (MP ou GP)" ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  PBO 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "consumo do modal m em sua velocidade de cruzeiro considerada." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Consumo 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Consumo de combustível em kg/hora" ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  TReserva 
         index domain :  (m) 
         text         :  "Tempo médio de vôo para o qual a aeronave deve possuir 
combustível, sobressalente, seguindo as normas de segurança e considerando que os 
vôos são todos IFR." ; 

120 
 



 

    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION Parametros_calculados 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  IndicaAerodromoAberto 
         index domain :  (j) 
         definition   :  if sum[t,y(j,t)]>0 then 1 else 0 endif  ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  d 
         index domain :  (j,w) 
         text         :  "Distância entre o aeródromo j e a unidade marítima w. Fórmula 
considerando a curvatura da Terra." 
         range        :  nonnegative 
         definition (1 - Indica_UM_Portal(w)) * 2 * Raio_da_Terra * ArcCos( cos( 
Radians( (long_j(j) - long_w(w) ))) * Cos( Radians(lat_j(j))) * Cos( 
Radians(lat_w(w))) + Sin(Radians(lat_j(j))) * Sin(Radians(lat_w(w)))) + 
Indica_UM_Portal(w) * d_jnw(j,w) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  d_nw 
         index domain :  (w) 
         text         :  "Distância entre o portal n e a unidade marítima w. Fórmula 
considerando a curvatura da Terra." 
         range        :  nonnegative 
         definition   :  sum[ n, Escolha_UM_Portal(w,n) * Raio_da_Terra * ArcCos( 
cos(Radians( (long_n(n) - long_w(w)))) * Cos( Radians(lat_n(n))) * Cos(Radians( 
lat_w(w))) + Sin(Radians( lat_n(n))) * Sin(Radians( lat_w(w))))] 
         comment      :  "Na distância aeródromo-UM, multiplica-se por 2 pois a aeronave 
fará o cliclo completo. Neste caso, a aeronave ira por um portal e retornará por outro e 
esta distância será somada posteriormente." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  d_jn 
         index domain :  (j,w) 
         range        :  nonnegative 
         definition   :  sum[ n, Escolha_UM_Portal(w,n) * Raio_da_Terra * ArcCos( cos( 
Radians((long_n(n) - long_j(j)))) * Cos( Radians(lat_n(n))) * Cos( Radians(lat_j(j))) + 
Sin( Radians(lat_n(n))) * Sin( Radians(lat_j(j))))] 
         comment      :  "Na distância aeródromo-UM, multiplica-se por 2 pois a aeronave 
fará o cliclo completo. Neste caso, a aeronave ira por um portal e retornará por outro e 
esta distância será somada posteriormente." ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  d_jnw 
         index domain :  (j,w) 
         definition   :  d_jn(j,w)+d_nw(w) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  NV 
         index domain :  (j,w,p,m,t) 
         text         :  "Número de viagens possíveis para atendimento da demanda de w no 
ano t pelo modal m partindo do aeroporto j." 
         definition   :  (h(m)*12)/(d(j,w)/(vl(m)*Conversao_KM_Milha)+ t_extra(m)/60) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  PermiteFluxo 

121 
 



 

         index domain :  (j,w,p,m,t) 
         definition   :  1 $ [q(w,p,t) 
                         and Maximo(j,t) 
                         and PermiteModalUM(w,m) 
                         and PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque(m,j,w)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque 
         index domain :  (m,j,w) 
         definition   :  1 $ PermiteModalUM(w,m) 
                         and cm(m)>CombMissao(j,w,m) 
                         and (PMD(m)-PBO(m)-CombMissao(j,w,m)-Ppax)>=0 ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  PermiteModalUM 
         index domain :  (w,m) 
         definition   :  if assentos(m)<=12 then 1 else (1- R_Heliponto(w)) endif  ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CombMissao 
         index domain :  (j,w,m) 
         text         :  "Combutível necessário na aeronave para realização de uma missão, 
seguindo os padrões de segurança." 
         definition   :  Consumo(m) * (((d(j,w)/ Conversao_KM_Milha)/ vl(m))+ 
(t_extra(m) + TReserva(m))/ 60) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CombConsumo 
         index domain :  (j,w,m)|PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque(m,j,w) 
         definition   :  Consumo(m) * (((d(j,w)/Conversao_KM_Milha)/ vl(m))+ 
(t_extra(m))/60) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  FolgaPeso 
         index domain :  (m,j,w)|PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque(m,j,w) 
         definition   :  (PMD(m) -PBO(m)- CombMissao(j,w,m)) ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  c 
         index domain :  (m,j,w)|PermiteFluxoAutonomiaTanque(m,j,w) 
         text         :  "Capacidade disponível em número de assentos da aeronave por vôo, 
por par origem destino." 
         definition   :  if FolgaPeso(m,j,w)/Ppax < assentos(m) 
                         then Floor[FolgaPeso(m,j,w)/Ppax] 
                         else assentos(m) 
                         endif ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION Variaveis 
      VARIABLE: 
         identifier   :  Frota 
         index domain :  (j,t,m)| Maximo(j,t) 
         text         :  "Frota por aeroporto e modal. Deve ser inteira." 
         range        :  integer ; 
      VARIABLE: 
         identifier   :  a 
         index domain :  (j,w,p,t,m)|PermiteFluxo(j,w,p,m,t) 

122 
 



 

         text         :  "Frota" 
         comment      :  "Quantidade de helicópteros necessária para atender a demanda do 
passageiro p da unidade w pelo aeródromo j no ano t. Esta variável é contínua pois 
representa a fração necessária para atendimento a uma unidade, sendo que os 
helicópteros são compartilhados por diversas unidades marítimas. Este número é 
utilizado pelo modelo para o cálculo final da frota inteira." ; 
      VARIABLE: 
         identifier   :  k 
         index domain :  (j,w,p,t,m)|PermiteFluxo(j,w,p,m,t) 
         text         :  "Quantidade da demanda pelo produto p da unidade w atendida pelo 
aeródromo j e modal m no ano t." 
         range        :  {0..q(w, p, t)} ; 
      VARIABLE: 
         identifier   :  y 
         index domain :  (j,t) | Maximo(j,t) 
         text         :  "Variável indicativa de abertura de aeródromo." 
         range        :  binary 
         comment      :  "Será 1(um) se o aeródromo j estiver aberto no ano t e zero caso 
contrário." ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION Restricoes 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Manut_Aerodromo_Aberto 
         index domain :  (j,t,t2)|t2>t and Maximo(j,t) 
         definition   :  y(j,t)<=y(j,t2) ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Frota_Inteira 
         index domain :  (j,t,m)|Maximo(j,t) 
         definition   :  Frota(j,t,m) >= sum[(w,p), a(j,w,p,t,m)] ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Dimensionamento_de_frota 
         index domain :  (j,w,p,t,m)| PermiteFluxo(j,w,p,m,t) 
         definition   :  a(j,w,p,t,m) >= (k(j,w,p,t,m))/(c(m,j,w)*util(m)*NV(j,w,p,m,t)) ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Atendimento_Demanda 
         index domain :  (w,p,t)|q(w,p,t) 
         definition   :  sum [(j,m),k(j,w,p,t,m)] >= q(w,p,t) ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Max_Aerodromos 
         index domain :  t 
         definition   :  sum[(j), y(j,t)]<=lim ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Capacidade_maxima 
         index domain :  (j,t)| Maximo(j,t) 
         definition   :  sum[(w,p,m), k(j,w,p,t,m)]<= Maximo(j,t)*y(j,t) ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 
         identifier   :  Capacidade_minima 
         index domain :  (j,t)| Minimo(j,t) 
         definition   :  sum[(w,p,m), k(j,w,p,t,m)]>= Minimo(j,t)*y(j,t) ; 
      CONSTRAINT: 

123 
 



 

         identifier   :  Restricao_Vagas 
         index domain :  (j,t)|Maximo(j,t) 
         text         :  "Garante que a restrição de quantidade de vagas disponíveis no 
aeródromo para estacionamento de aeronaves seja respeitada." 
         definition   :  sum[m, Frota(j,t,m)]<=Max_Vagas(j,t)*y(j,t) ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
    DECLARATION SECTION FO 
      VARIABLE: 
         identifier  :  Custo_Total 
         definition  :  sum[(j,t,m),CF(m) * frota(j,t,m)] + sum[(j,w,p,t,m), CV(m) * 
k(j,w,p,t,m) * d(j,w)/ (c(m,j,w) * util(m))] + sum[j, I_F(j) * 
IndicaAerodromoAberto(j)] + sum[j,C_O(j) * sum[(w,p,t,m),k(j,w,p,t,m)]]  + BigM * 
sum[(j,t), y(j,t)] ; 
      SET: 
         identifier  :  Habilitar_Restricoes 
         subset of   :  AllConstraints 
         definition  : data{Manut_Aerodromo_Aberto, Frota_Inteira, 
Dimensionamento_de_frota, Atendimento_Demanda, Max_Aerodromos, 
Capacidade_maxima, Capacidade_minima, Restricao_Vagas} ; 
      MATHEMATICAL PROGRAM: 
         identifier  :  Funcao_Minimizacao 
         objective   :  Custo_Total 
         direction   :  minimize 
         constraints :  AllConstraints 
         variables   :  AllVariables 
         type        :  MIP ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
  ENDSECTION Modelo ; 
  PROCEDURE 
    identifier :  MainInitialization 
    body       :   
      !Antes de iniciar o input de dados, exclui-se todas as informações armazenadas nas 
entidades, parâmetros, restrições e variáveis para evitar erros e deixar o arquivo mais 
leve. 
            empty AllSets, AllParameters, AllVariables, AllConstraints; 
            read from table In_Aerodromo; 
            read from table In_UM; 
            read from table In_Ano; 
            read from table In_Modal; 
            read from table In_Portal; 
            read from table In_UO; 
            read   Maximo(j,t),Minimo(j,t),Max_Vagas(j,t)  from table In_Cap_Aerodromo; 
            read q(w,p,t), u                         from table In_Demanda; 
            read p, nome_produto(p)                  from table In_Produto; 
            read nome_UM(w),Indica_UM_Portal(w), R_Heliponto(w)      from table 
In_nome_UM; 
            read Escolha_UM_Portal(w,n)              from table In_Matriz_nw; 
            BigM:= sum((w,p,t), q(w,p,t)); 
  ENDPROCEDURE  ; 
  SECTION Resultados 

124 
 



 

    DECLARATION SECTION Tabelas_de_Resultados 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  InvestimentoTotal 
         definition   :  sum[j, I_F(j)*IndicaAerodromoAberto(j)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CustoOperacional 
         definition   :  sum[j,C_O(j)*sum[(w,p,t,m),k(j,w,p,t,m)]] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CustoVariavel 
         definition   :  sum[(j,w,p,t,m), CV(m)*k(j,w,p,t,m)*d(j,w)/(c(m,j,w)*util(m))] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  CustoFixo 
         definition   :  sum[(j,t,m),CF(m)*frota(j,t,m)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Penalizacao 
         definition   :   BigM*sum[(j,t), y(j,t)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Fluxo 
         index domain :  (j,t) 
         definition   :  sum[(w,p,m),k(j,w,p,t,m)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  FrotaTot 
         index domain :  (j,t) 
         definition   :  sum[m, Frota(j,t,m)] ; 
      PARAMETER: 
         identifier   :  Investimento 
         index domain :  j 
         definition   :  I_F(j)*IndicaAerodromoAberto(j) ; 
    ENDSECTION  ; 
  ENDSECTION Resultados ; 
  PROCEDURE 
    identifier :  MainExecution 
    body       :   
      !MainInitialization; 
      showProgressWindow; 
      solve Funcao_Minimizacao; 
  ENDPROCEDURE  ; 
  PROCEDURE 
    identifier :  MainTermination 
    body       :   
      if ( CaseSaveAll( confirm:2 ) = 1 ) then 
          return 1; 
      else 
          return 0; 
      endif ; 
  ENDPROCEDURE  ; 
ENDMODEL Main_Planejamento_de_Rede_Logistica_de_Passageiros ; 

 

125 
 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

Proposing safety performance indicators for helicopter offshore on the 
Norwegian Continental Shelf  

 
Ivonne A. Herreraa*  , Erik Hollnagelb and Solfrid Håbrekkea 

aSINTEF Technology and Society, Safety Research, Trondheim, Norway  
bMINES ParisTech, Sophia Antipolis, France 

 
 

Abstract: Over last 10-years period there has been just one helicopter accident (with no fatalities) in 
the Norwegian sector of helicopter offshore operations. In this case, safety monitoring cannot be based 
on the absence of accidents. The main objective of this paper is to suggest a combination of leading 
and lagging indicators to monitor safety performance for helicopter offshore operations. An approach 
is described to identify indicators using different perspectives: a Risk Influence Model, the Functional 
Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM), and lessons learned from previous studies. The approach uses 
accident and incident data, as well as normal operations (when nothing goes wrong). The suggested 
indicators were evaluated through observations and interviews/workshop with helicopter operators, air 
traffic controllers, helicopter deck operators and regulators. The paper discusses the approach and 
proposes a set of domain specific safety performance indicators. The work was carried out under the 
Norwegian Helicopter Safety Study 3 (HSS-3).  
 
Keywords: Resilience Engineering, Risk Analysis, Safety Management, Leading and Lagging Safety 
Indicators 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1. Background 
 
Measurements of safety performance in aviation traditionally rely on lagging indicators such as 
accident rates, which may be further decomposed to identify particular safety issues. This 
categorization of accidents has enabled several improvements on specific issues. However, there is a 
growing concern that this information does not provide the required basis for the prevention of future 
accidents. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) recommended the establishment of 
an effective Safety Management System (SMS) [1]. Indicators are therefore needed to provide an 
adequate understanding of the current state of the system, and to predict possible future events or 
consequences of changes; i.e., leading rather than lagging indicators. Yet despite the benefit of a 
proactive SMS, the aviation industry generally still focuses on the reactive part of safety management.  
 
Helicopter transport is essential for petroleum activities in the North Sea, since there is no other 
effective way to transport personnel. Over the last 10-years period there has been just one helicopter 
accident (with no fatalities) in the Norwegian sector of helicopter offshore operations. In this case, 
monitoring of safety cannot be based on the absence of accidents. This paper presents the results of 
work carried out under the Helicopter Safety Study -3 (HSS-3) [2], which had the overall objectives to 
contribute to improve safety and to set a reference standard for methodologies to analyse risk of 
offshore helicopter transportation. The HSS-3 project was a follow-up of previous studies: HSS-1 
(period 1966-1990) [3] and HSS-2 (period 1990-1998) [4]. For the development of indicators, an 
important mandate for HSS-3 is to use experience from previous helicopter studies [3, 4, 5]. To 
complement this approach, HSS-3 incorporates development within safety thinking using a resilience 
engineering perspective to identify safety indicators. 
 

                                                 
* ivonne.a.herrera@sintef.no 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

1.2. Purpose of the paper 
 
The main objective of this paper is to suggest a combination of leading and lagging indicators to 
monitor safety performance for helicopter offshore operations. An approach is described that identifies 
indicators, using different perspectives: (1) the Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM), (2) a 
Risk Influence Model, and (3) lessons learned from previous studies. Data from normal operations 
(when nothing goes wrong), were used together with accident and incident data. The paper discusses 
the approach and proposes a set of domain specific safety performance indicators.  
 
1.3. Delimitations 
 
The main focus is the indicators within aviation safety in relation to major accidents, hence excludes 
occupational accidents. The FRAM method was used for the identification of indicators in relation to a 
specific scenario landing on helicopter deck. Several publications have described the use of risk 
influence models [2, 3, 4]. The paper emphasized indicators identified through monitoring normal 
operations.  
  
 
2. APPROACH 
 
2.1. Combining perspectives to identify indicators 
 
Different perspectives were used to identify safety indicators as illustrated in Figure 1. The literature 
survey enabled a theoretical understanding of safety indicators, identification of relevant criteria and 
indicators from other studies. Resilience Engineering represents an alternative perspective on safety 
that takes into account successes and failures [6]. Resilience is defined as the intrinsic ability of a 
system to adjust its functioning prior to, during, or following changes and disturbances, so that it can 
sustain required operations under both expected and unexpected conditions. Resilience Engineering 
aims to develop theories, tools and methods to support resilient organizations. The FRAM method is 
based on resilience engineering principles and was used to identify leading indicators. The HSS-3 RIF 
model is an update of previous HSS-2 model. The RIF model was explored to identify lagging 
indicators. In combination with a literature survey, this provided candidates for indicators that were 
assessed in close consultation with the industry using indicators criteria, leading to a final set of 
leading and lagging indicators. 
 
2.2. Data gathering 
 
The identification of indicators was based on an iterative process: 

 An initial set of indicators was identified based on literature review, application of RIF and 
FRAM method. 

 A workshop assessed indicators against indicator criteria. 
 Interviews with operational staff (pilots, engineers, training, helicopter deck, air traffic 

controllers, petroleum representatives and regulator) assessed indicators against indicator 
criteria. 

 Observations of helicopter landing on helicopter deck during simulator session helped to 
improve modeling and improved analyst understanding of the context of operations. 

 
2.3. Important lessons from literature survey 
 
Baseline for HSS-3 was the recommendations in the public report “Helicopter Safety on the on the 
Norwegian Continental Shelf, Part 2: Trends, objectives, risk influencing factors and recommended 
measures” [5]. The indicators that can be used to monitor risk were:   

 number of deaths per million flight hours;  
 number of accidents per million flight hours;  



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

 number of deaths per year due to helicopter transport;  
 number of serious accidents and incidents per year or million flight hours;  
 number of occurrences per year or million flight hours,  
 number of technical and operational reports per year or per million flight hours; and  
 subjective risk (questionnaire) 
 

Figure 1: HSS-3 overall approach to propose lagging and leading indicators 
 

 

 
 

Over the last 10-years period there has been just one helicopter accident (with no fatalities) in the 
Norwegian sector. In addition, changes in regulations contribute to a reclassification of incidents and 
an increased of number of reports. An increased number of reports do not necessarily provide an 
indication of poor safety performance. Fatality rate and increased number of reports are therefore not 
suitable as sole indicators for safety performance. To complement this view, it is necessary to look for 
accident precursors to assess safety performance. In general, leading indicators are defined as 
conditions, events or measures that can be used to predict the future occurrence of an event, e.g., as 
accident precursors. The literature shows that there is no consistency between the definition of 
indicators and their application [9]. Special attention should therefore be given to the definition of 
indicators each time they are addressed.  
 
Based on literature review, discussion in international forums and author’s experience the following 
definitions are used: 
 

 Lagging indicators measure results after unwanted events.  
 Leading indicators refer to current system status and their interpretation may be used to say 

something about future performance  



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

 
The literature presents an extensive list of characteristics for indicators. There is a need for a realistic 
approach for the selection. The following characteristics are adopted: 
 

 Meaningful: the value can be correlated to accident frequency or consequence, a RIF for the 
risk model on accidents, or with FRAM functions for the risk model for normal operations. 

 Available or affordable: it is possible to gather data with a reasonable cost. 
 Reliable: The data should as far as possible be either objective or intersubjectively verifiable. 
 Operational: It is possible to use the indicator to identify specific improvement measures in an 

operational context. 
 Ownership: The indicators are “owned” by the personnel which performance is measured. 

 
The Accident Investigation Board/Norway (AIBN) presents a study regarding the relation between 
concurrent organizational changes and safety [11]. In this study 5 outcome-based and 38 activity-
based performance indicators for flight safety were proposed [11, 12]. The development of indicators 
and determination of importance for flight safety are based on safety audit checklists and discussions 
with experienced people from the Norwegian and Swedish civil aviation authorities. These indicators 
are considered as candidates for HSS-3 recommended indicators. Another significant finding in the 
study showed is that there is a strong focus on learning from rare accidents and failures. There is no 
tradition to analyze successes (normal operations with no delays) [13]. This trend has changed for 
flight operations and air traffic management with the introduction of Line Operations Safety Audit 
(LOSA) and Normal Operations Safety Survey (NOSS) respectively. These safety management tools 
are mainly based on managing errors and threats. 
 
2.4. Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM) 
 
Resilience Engineering provides a practical basis for the development of systemic models in order to 
describe the characteristic performance of a system as a whole. It can therefore also be used as the 
starting point for developing a systemic or functional risk model (FRM). The purpose of a systemic 
model is to describe the dynamic and non-linear nature of what happens within a system. This should 
be seen as a complement to the traditional view where accidents are described either as sequences or 
as concatenation of latent conditions. Hollnagel presents a new method to perform accident 
investigation and safety assessment, called the Functional Resonance Analysis Method (FRAM) [7].  
 
Resilience engineering sees success is as a consequence of the ability of groups, individuals, and 
organizations to anticipate the changing shape of risk before damage occurs; failure is simply the 
temporary or permanent absence of that. Adopting this view means that there is a need for models that 
can represent the variability of normal performance and methods that can use this both to provide 
more comprehensive explanations of accidents and to identify the possible risks. The helicopter safety 
study adopts this view to identify leading indicators. 
 
In its present form, FRAM comprises the following five steps [8]: 
 
Define the purpose of the analysis, since FRAM can be used for both accident investigation and safety 
assessment. 
 
Identify and describe system functions. The result of the second step is the model. Every function can 
be characterized by six basic aspects: Input (I, that which the function uses or transforms), Output (O, 
that which the function produces), Preconditions (P, conditions that must be fulfilled to perform a 
function), resources (R, that which the function needs or consumes), Time (T, that which affects time 
availability), and Control (C, that which supervises or adjusts the function). A FRAM function is 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

Figure 2: The six aspects of a FRAM function 
 

 

 
 
Assess and evaluate the potential variability of each function. This evaluation should be integrated 
with the retrospective information extracted from accident databases to the extent that data are 
available.  
 
Identify functional resonance by means of instantiations. An instantiation illustrates aspects and the 
potential links among the functions in a defined context [10]. Figure 3 shows an instantiation for 
approach planning. The aim of this step is to determine the possible ways in which the variability from 
one function could spread in the system and how it may combine with the variability of other 
functions. This may result in situations where the system loses its capability safely to manage 
variability. The propagation may be both indirect via the effects that the variability may have on the 
general conditions or direct via the output from a function.  
 
Identify effective countermeasures or barriers that can be introduced in the system. In FRAM, 
prospective countermeasures aim at dampening performance variability in order to maintain the 
system in a safe state. But it is consistent with the principle of Resilience Engineering to consider also 
measures that can sustain or amplify functional resonance that leads to desired or improved outcomes. 
Besides recommendations for countermeasures or barriers, FRAM can also be used to specify 
recommendations for the monitoring of performance and variability, in order to be able to detect 
undesired variability at an early stage. Performance indicators may thus be developed for individual 
functions and for the couplings among functions.  
 

Figure 3: Instantiation landing on helicopter deck – flight planning (1 hour before departure) 
 

 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

2.5. Risk Influence Modeling (RIF) 
 
The risk influence model in the HSS-3 project is an update of the model developed in the previous 
helicopter safety study [4]. This approach assumes that accidents and incidents can be described as the 
result of cause-effect relations, sometimes as a single cause-effect chain but more often as a 
combination of multiple cause-effect chains.  
 
The risk influence model is based on a number of Risk Influencing Factors (RIFs) arranged in 
influence diagrams. A RIF is defined as a set of conditions that influence the risk, either positively or 
negatively. The RIFs are likely to have a varying degree of importance for the different categories of 
accidents. Eight different accident categories are defined in the model. These categories are: accident 
by take-off or landing on heliport, accident by take-off or landing on helicopter deck, accident 
following critical aircraft system failure during flight, near miss or mid-air collision with other aircraft, 
collision with terrain, sea or building structure, accident exposing passengers inside the helicopter, 
accident exposing passengers outside the helicopter and other/unknown (i.e. lightening). The status of 
a RIF may be improved by specific actions or become worse due to changes and threats.  
 
The RIFs are split into two categories; risk frequency influencing factors (as shown in Figure 4) and 
risk consequence influencing factors, and are organized in three levels. Operational RIFs (Level 1) are 
risk influencing factors related to activities directly influencing the risk and that are necessary to 
provide safe helicopter operations on a day-to-day basis. These activities include conditions related to 
technical dependability, operational dependability, provision of necessary external services and 
surroundings. Organisational RIFs (Level 2) are defined as risk influencing factors related to the 
organizational basis, support and control of running activities in the helicopter transport. These factors 
are related to helicopter manufacturers or design organizations, helicopter operators, maintenance 
organizations, air traffic and navigation services, heliport and helicopter deck operators. Regulatory 
and customer related RIFs (Level 3) are defined as risk influencing factors related to requirements and 
controlling activities from international organizations, authorities and customers. 
 

Figure 4: Risk Influence Model HSS-3 for the frequency of accidents  
 

 
 

 
 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

3. MAIN RESULTS 
 
3.1. Leading indicators identified applying FRAM 
 
The scenario described in this paper is an approach to and landing on a floating platform during night 
with good visibility and no unusual events. Results from the application of FRAM referred to the five 
steps described in section 2.2. In the first step FRAM was used as safety assessment looking into 
normal operations to identify relevant indicators. In the second step a corpus of 21 functions was 
identified as relevant for the scenario landing on helicopter deck, e.g., Table 1.  
 
 

Table 1: Example of FRAM functions for scenario landing on helicopter deck 
Landing on helicopter deck FRAM functions 

Manage contracts Manage competence 
Perform weight & balance calculations Manage procedures 
Approach planning Fix approach on GPS 
Do pre-landing preparations Arrive to minimum descend 
Approach near by obstruction  Establish visual 
Decide approach type (see Table 2) Verify position 
Land  Support helicopter landing  

 
Each function was characterized in terms of six aspects (an example is shown on table 2). The 
granularity of the description of functions was based on iterative assessment of the scenario and the 
functions between the analyst and pilot. 
 

Table 2: FRAM function characterization 
FRAM Function Decide Approach type 
Input Helicopter deck personnel on helicopter deck 
Input Helicopter deck obstacles report 
Input Cockpit display information: wind and position 
Output Decision 
Precondition Helicopter airworthy 
Precondition Company message “ Over deck & over circle” 
Time Visual 
Control Approach procedures 

 
The third step was the assessment of the potential variability for each singular function. Landing on 
helicopter deck was analyzed in relation to landing on fixed and floating oil and gas installation during 
day and night. In this way, it was possible to determine variability related to normal operations. The 
fourth step is the determination of the ways in which variability is spread through the system. 
Instantiations were used to illustrate the combinations of variability. Then indicators were determined 
based on significant combinations of variability (bold letters illustrated on Figure 5).  
 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

Figure 5: FRAM instantiation for landing on helicopter deck during night 
 
 

 
 

It was necessary to have operational indicators (shown in Table 3). This was achieved through 
discussions with operational and management personnel.  
 

Table 3: Example of indicators identified for normal operations  
Indicator Operationalization 
Helicopter airworthy Indicators related to maintenance performance, Vibration Health 

Monitoring and Minimum Equipment List 
Quality of communication helicopter There are individual differences in relation to installation type i.e. fixed 
crew and helicopter deck personnel or floating. Use of observations to provide a qualitative evaluation.  
Procedures quality and compliance Use of audits and/or observations to provide an assessment of procedures 

revision and compliance 
Manage contracts – use of penalties Number of free days that have been negotiated, use of overtime 
Visual references  Helicopter deck status in relation to regulation and recognized guidelines 
 
3.2. Lagging indicators identified using RIF approach 
 
The indicators are based on number of incidents and are mainly related to the operational level. 
Examples of identified indicators are: 

 Technical RIF: Windshield cracking, chip warning, oil leakage detected by walk-around 
 Operational RIF: Overload of cargo, incorrect marking or improper handling of dangerous 

goods, fuelling event, wrong charts in flight folder 
 Helicopter deck RIF: Crane or other obstacles on rig near to helicopter deck, incorrect 

helicopter deck position, incorrect information of pitch/roll/heave from moving helicopter 
decks 

 Weather and other RIF: Incorrect weather information, bird strikes 
 

 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 
Helicopter safety is a result of something that the system does and not a passive property of the 
system. Safety is a dynamic characteristic and the result of interaction between several organizations. 
This view guides the indicators that are identified in the study. Each method represents different ways 
of understanding, it is necessary to be aware of their advantages and limitations. The paper 
demonstrates how a combination of several approaches provides a set of lagging and leading 
indicators. Since we are addressing a dynamic characteristic, it is recommended periodically to review 
the indicators to see if they are still relevant or whether new indicators should be considered.  
 
The literature review show that the majority of indicators are selected from check lists or because they 
are easy to collect. This approach does not necessarily support indicators relevance towards safety. 
The FRAM modeling provides a more dynamic approach to helicopter operations. The use of 
instantiations enables to illustrate how variability spreads and which variability is significant to a 
successful landing. The main advantage of FRAM is that this approach considers the influence of the 
context on actual performance. Indicators identified using FRAM are leading, these indicators show a 
correlation to a successful operation. Indicators identified using RIF model are mainly lagging, these 
indicators are based on incidents and accidents information. The RIF model provides an static picture 
of the overall helicopter offshore operations. The recommended set of indicators represents a 
combination of quantitative and qualitative data. Experience from previous studied show that 
quantitative information does not provide enough information towards the quality aspect. This 
shortcoming is compensated emphasizing the importance of observations and use qualitative data. 
 
This study represents a step forward from mainly learning from failures to consider also normal 
operations without failures. This approach has helped to identify alternative indicators. The 
identification of indicators using FRAM and the modeling enhanced understanding of the system. The 
indicator discussions with the industry helped to identify recommended measures to improve safety 
relevant to actual performance. The RIF approach allows a perspective of helicopter performance 
during the last 30 years. The FRAM approach represents a step forward in using new methods to 
improve aviation safety. While RIF method is widely recognized for risk assessment. The FRAM 
approach will require more applications to demonstrate its capability and have wider acceptance 
within the safety community.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The Helicopter Safety Study 3 is sponsored by the A/S Norske Shell, BP Norway, Civil Aviation 
Authority Norway, ConocoPhillips Norge, Eni Norge, GDF SUEZ E&P Norge AS, Marathon, Nexen 
Exploration Norge AS, Statoil and Total E&P Norge AS. We thank Norwegian technical, operative 
and administrative personnel from helicopter operators, air navigation providers, helicopter deck 
personnel and emergency preparedness organizations for their participation, as well as petroleum and 
civil aviation (Norway and UK) authorities for their constructive comments and openness in the best 
interest to improve helicopter safety. The authors acknowledge Eduardo Runte for his contribution in 
the initial phase of FRAM functional modelling. We thank the other members of the project team Lars 
Bodsberg, Per Hokstad, Erik Jersin and Tony Kråkenes for their valuable comments. The work 
presented in this paper has also benefit from discussions on indicators during the 3rd symposium on 
Resilience Engineering in 2008 and information from the European Helicopter Safety Team. We are 
grateful to John Wreathall and Teemu Reiman for sharing their knowledge and publications regarding 
the identification of leading safety indicators for the Nuclear Industry. Finally, we thank Andrew 
Hopkins for his views on safety indicators for the process industry presented during a visit to Norway 
(2009). 
 



 
Paper presented at PSAM 10, June 7-11 2010, Seattle, USA

References 
 
[1] International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). ICAO Safety Management Manual. Second 
Edition - 2008 (Advance edition-unedited) Doc 9859, Montréal, Canada, (2009). 
[2] I. A Herrera, S. Håbrekke, T. Kråkenes and P.R. Hokstad. Helicopter Safety Study 3. SINTEF 
report no. A14973. (Report in Norwegian / Executive Summary in English), Trondheim, Norway, 
(2010). 
[3] O. Ingstad, R. Rosness, T. Sten, T. Ulleberg, M. Rausand and S. Lydersen. Helicopter Safety 
Study. Main Report. SINTEF Report no. STF75 A90008, Trondheim, Norway, (1990). 
[4] P. Hokstad, E. Jersin, G.K. Hansen, J. Sneltvedt and T. Sten. Helicopter Safety Study 2. SINTEF 
Report no. STF38 A99423, Trondheim, Norway, (1999). 
[5] Samferdselsdepartementet. NOU 2002: 17 Helikoptersikkerheten på norsk kontinentalsokkel. 
Delutredning nr. 2: Utviklingstrekk, målsettinger, risikoinfluerende faktorer og prioriterte tiltak, 
Ministry of Transport (Report in Norwegian / Executive Summary in English, Oslo, Norway, (2002). 
[6] E. Hollnagel, D. Woods, N. Leveson. Resilience Engineering: Concepts and precepts. Ashgate, 
Aldershot, UK, (2006). 
[7] E. Hollnagel. Barriers and accident prevention. Ashgate, Aldershot, UK, (2004). 
[8] EUROCONTROL. A White paper on Resilience Engineering for ATM. EUROCONTROL, 
(2009). 
[9] A. Hale et al. Special Issue on Process Safety Indicators. Safety Science Volume 47, Issue 4, 
Elsevier, doi:10/1016/j.ssci.2008.07.016, pp 459-510, (2009). 
[10] I.A. Herrera, R. Woltjer. Comparing a multi-linear (STEP) and systemic (FRAM) method for 
accident analysis. Safety, Reliability and Risk Analysis: Theory, Methods and Applications. 
Proceedings of the European Safety and Reliability Association Annual Conference (ESREL), pp 19-
26, Valencia, Spain, (2008). 
[11] Accident Investigation Board / Norway (AIBN). “Safety in Nowegian Aviation during the 
Process of Change”. AIBN. Lillestrøm, Norway, (2005). 
[12] R. K. Tinmannsvik. “Ytelsesindikatorer for flysikkerhet - noen resultater fra svensk luftfart”, 
(Performance based indicators for flight safety - some results from Swedish aviation). SINTEF, 
(2005). 
[13] I.A. Herrera, A.O. Nordskag, G. Myhre, K. Halvorsen. Aviation safety and maintenance under 
major organizational changes, investigating non-existing accidents. Journal of Accident Analysis & 
Prevention. Vol 41 pp. 1155-1163, (2009). 
 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          129 
 

PSICOLOGIA NO CONTEXTO DA AVIAÇÃO: BREVE RETROSPECTIVA 

Selma Leal de Oliveira Ribeiro1 
 

RESUMO: A aviação é um dos setores da atividade humana que mais se 
desenvolveu neste último século. Ciências de diferentes áreas do conhecimento 
humano contribuíram para fazer com que esse setor tivesse um progresso 
significativo. A Psicologia teve uma participação significativa nesse 
desenvolvimento, buscando adaptar o conhecimento nela gerado às necessidades 
da aviação. O objetivo deste material é apresentar, do ponto de vista histórico, a 
evolução da participação da Psicologia no ambiente da aviação e suas principais 
conquistas alcançadas. 
 

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Psicologia e Aviação. Segurança de Voo. Fator Humano. 
Aspecto Psicológico. 
 
 

1 INTRODUÇÃO 

A aviação é um dos setores da atividade humana que mais se desenvolveu 

nesse último século. Desde o voo do primeiro mais pesado que o ar, o 14 Bis, em 

outubro de 1906, muitas foram as contribuições de diferentes áreas do 

conhecimento humano para fazer com que esse setor tivesse um progresso 

significativo. Tais contribuições, que não foram apenas em termos tecnológicos, 

mas, também, e principalmente, relacionadas à compreensão e adequação das 

limitações e capacidades humanas, apresentam-se como avanços de extrema 

importância, pois auxiliam o ser humano a lidar com as exigências que o ambiente 

aéreo impõe. 

A Psicologia, assim como outras ciências, teve uma participação 

significativa nesse desenvolvimento, buscando adaptar o conhecimento nela gerado 

às necessidades da aviação. Assim como as demais ciências e profissionais que 
                                                        

1 Psicóloga; Mestre em Educação; Doutora em Engenharia de Produção. Atualmente é Diretora 
Técnica do Instituto Nacional para o Desenvolvimento Espacial e Aeronáutico - IDEA e Docente da 
Universidade Estácio de Sá, do Curso de Ciências Aeronáuticas. selma.ribeiro@idea-br.org. 

 



130           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

oferecem sua parcela de contribuição para o crescimento da aviação, o objetivo dos 

estudos realizados no campo da Psicologia está voltado para a promoção 

incondicional da segurança aérea. 

Desta forma, o objetivo deste material é apresentar, do ponto de vista 

histórico, a evolução da participação da Psicologia no ambiente da aviação e suas 

principais conquistas alcançadas. 

 

2 DEFINIÇÃO 

Uma definição apresentada no XV Simpósio Internacional em Psicologia da 

Aviação, realizado em 2009, na cidade de Dayton (Ohio), aponta como um campo 

de estudo relativo ao papel do operador humano inserido nos sistemas da aviação. 

O principal objetivo deste fórum, que acontece bianualmente desde 1981, é o de 

examinar o impacto das tecnologias sobre o papel, a responsabilidade, a autoridade 

e o desempenho dos operadores humanos em modernas aeronaves e sistemas de 

controle de tráfego aéreo (WRIGHT STATE UNIVERSITY, 2009). 

Segundo a Associação Austríaca de Psicologia da Aviação, a Psicologia da 

Aviação está relacionada aos processos do comportamento, da ação, da cognição e 

da emoção dos seres humanos no ambiente de sistemas complexos na aviação e 

no espaço, incluindo as diferenças transculturais, e as inter/intraindividuais 

(AUSTRIAN AVIATION PSYCHOLOGY ASSOCIATION, 2009). 

A West Chester University of Pennsylvania apresenta uma descrição das 

possibilidades de atuação do psicólogo que procura a aviação como campo de 

atuação. Enfatiza que este profissional, além do conhecimento implícito sobre a 

Psicologia, deve ter conhecimento sobre as características que envolvem o 

desenvolvimento da atividade aérea, incluindo as tarefas do piloto, habilidades de 

tomada de decisão e memória, seleção, projetos de cabines, interação homem-

computador, projetos de fatores humanos, desenvolvimento de sistemas de 

treinamento, gerenciamento de programas e pesquisa em desempenho humano 

(WEST CHESTER UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, 2009). 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          131 
 

Barbarino (2006), por ocasião da comemoração do 50º aniversário da 

European Association for Aviation Psychology, refere-se à Psicologia da Aviação 

como uma ciência aplicada, que se concentra na atividade humana da aviação civil 

e militar. Baseia-se no conhecimento acadêmico e na pesquisa básica em 

Psicologia e em outras ciências afins, que são pré-requisitos necessários para os 

profissionais neste especializado campo da Psicologia. Segundo ele, a Psicologia 

da Aviação tem continuamente desafiado e adaptado o seu próprio escopo de 

conhecimento, seu papel e sua metodologia, para garantir a integração inicial e 

consistente dos fatores humanos em todas as áreas e fases do sistema global de 

aviação. 

Observa-se nestas definições que a atuação do psicólogo pode ser bastante 

ampla, percorrendo um vasto espectro de possibilidades, podendo se dedicar tanto 

a questões relacionadas às reações individuais promovidas pelos diferentes 

ambientes da aviação, como às repercussões de tais reações sobre estes mesmos 

ambientes. Entretanto, em todos os casos, não basta o saber psicológico, o 

conhecimento dos diversos aspectos que envolvem a atividade aérea torna-se uma 

condição preponderante para uma atuação efetiva do psicólogo neste contexto. 
 

3 EVOLUÇÃO DA CONTRIBUIÇÃO DA PSICOLOGIA NO CONTEXTO DA 

AVIAÇÃO 

Mauriño (1994) faz uma rápida retrospectiva sobre a contribuição dos 

psicólogos para a aviação, ressaltando a participação de profissionais que, mesmo 

oriundos de diferentes vertentes, como a clínica1, a comportamental2 e a cognitiva3, 

buscaram compreender as capacidades e limitações humanas e sua relação com a 

segurança aérea. 

A inserção da Psicologia no campo da aviação se deu por volta dos anos 

40, com o advento da II Guerra Mundial. Neste cenário, os efeitos do estresse sobre 

as tripulações da Real Força Aérea tornaram-se aparente quando foram 

identificados, após exames clínicos, sintomas de neuroses em pilotos como 



132           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

resultado do somatório do estresse promovido por missões nas quais eram 

vivenciados níveis incomuns de perigo, do estresse decorrente de problemas 

domésticos e conjugais, e da possível predisposição individual, ou seja, uma baixa 

resistência ao estresse. Para minimizar este problema, métodos de seleção por 

entrevistas psiquiátricas e testes psicológicos foram desenvolvidos para detectar 

aqueles indivíduos que seriam mais vulneráveis ao desenvolvimento de tais quadros 

(EDWARDS, 1988). 

Outra preocupação residia sobre a necessidade de seleção e treinamento 

em grande quantidade, principalmente, de pilotos, mecânicos, controladores, entre 

outros operadores da linha de frente. O sucesso das missões dependia das 

habilidades das tripulações, das quais se requeria o desempenho das tarefas em 

um ambiente de extrema hostilidade. Vários programas de pesquisa foram levados 

a efeito na tentativa de melhor compreender as lacunas existentes na compreensão 

dos processos de cognitivos e psicomotores que envolviam a aprendizagem e o 

treinamento das habilidades necessárias ao desempenho das atividades. 

Segundo Edwards (1988), um dos primeiros grupos de pesquisadores 

solicitados a contribuir foi o do Laboratório de Psicologia liderado pelo Professor Sir 

Frederic Bartlett, da Universidade de Cambridge, que desenvolveu pesquisas 

direcionadas à compreensão das habilidades humanas e seus resultados 

contribuíram para as áreas de seleção e treinamento de tripulações, de déficit de 

sono e fadiga, além de vários aspectos da percepção visual e projeto de displays.  

Até meados dos anos 70, os esforços dos estudos ainda concentravam-se 

sobre estas áreas, e os diferentes grupos de pesquisadores, tanto na Europa como 

nos Estados Unidos, continuavam a dedicar seus estudos ao conhecimento e 

explicação de questões ligadas ao processamento da informação e de tomada de 

decisão, às capacidades e limitações da cognição humana, ao processo de 

aprendizagem, entre outros. Entretanto, estas abordagens focavam essencialmente 

o indivíduo, deixando inalterado o sistema no qual as ações e eventos ocorriam. 

No final dos anos 70 e durante os 80, com a constatação da ocorrência de 

acidentes que apresentavam problemas na coordenação entre os membros da 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          133 
 

tripulação como fatores contribuintes, os conhecimentos oriundos do campo social, 

com ênfase nos estudos da dinâmica de pequenos grupos4, trouxeram uma nova 

perspectiva de contribuição com a inserção de conceitos da Psicologia Social5. 

Desta forma, o desenvolvimento de metodologias e tecnologias para os 

treinamentos que apresentavam uma preocupação com a melhoria das relações 

entre os integrantes de uma tripulação, no caso considerada um “pequeno grupo”, 

bem como a adequada utilização dos diferentes meios de informação que 

pudessem ser utilizados para um melhor gerenciamento da atividade aérea, 

tornaram-se o foco de contribuição nessa fase. 

Surgem, então, os primeiros treinamentos em gerenciamento de recursos da 

tripulação, também conhecidos como Cockpit Resource Management – CRM, fruto 

da recomendação do National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB, 1979) sobre o 

acidente da United Airlines, ocorrido em 1978. Neste acidente, foram apontadas 

falhas no gerenciamento de informações por parte do comandante, ao não aceitar 

os “inputs” dos tripulantes mais novos, e, também, do engenheiro de voo, com sua 

falta de assertividade em fazer suas orientações serem ouvidas, como fatores 

contribuintes para o acidente. 

Estes treinamentos foram desenvolvidos com a ajuda dos consultores que 

tinham elaborado programas de treinamento em empresas na tentativa de melhorar 

a eficácia gerencial. O programa da United Airlines foi modelado tendo por base o 

formato do “Grid Gerencial” de autoria dos psicólogos Robert R. Blake e Jane S. 

Mouton (1964, apud HELMREICH; MERRITT; WILHELM, 1999). O treinamento era 

conduzido em um seminário intensivo que incluía o diagnóstico dos estilos 

gerenciais dos participantes e tinha como objetivo básico preparar os grupos para a 

tomada de decisão, através de uma comunicação eficaz, envolvendo questões 

sobre fluxo de informação entre os membros de pequenos times, liderança e 

seguidores, e estratégias de resolução de problemas (Ibid, 1999). 

A principal contribuição da Psicologia Social neste momento foi a 

constatação de que o comportamento humano, e, consequentemente o erro 

humano, não acontece em um “vaccum social”, fortalecendo a idéia de que as 



134           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

iniciativas voltadas para os aspectos de segurança não deveriam focar 

exclusivamente os indivíduos, ou seja, o pessoal operacional, ao contrário, deveriam 

buscar a organização como um todo. Neste ponto, observa-se a importância do 

comprometimento organizacional e do envolvimento da alta gerência para a eficácia 

da segurança na atividade aérea. A segurança deixa de ser um fim e passa a ser o 

meio de se alcançar os objetivos e a missão organizacional (MAURIÑO, 1994). 

Entretanto, apesar da evolução dos treinamentos CRM, conduzida, 

principalmente, pelo grupo do Aerospace Crew Research Project da Universidade 

do Texas, tendo à frente dos estudos o psicólogo Robert L. Helmreich, e dos 

esforços dos profissionais da Psicologia, as estatísticas de acidentes ainda 

apontavam para a limitação humana. Neste sentido, ainda em meados dos anos 80, 

a tecnologia surge em uma tentativa de superar algumas das limitações físicas e 

cognitivas dos operadores. As cabines, que antes se apresentavam de forma 

analógica com uma quantidade de mostradores que desafiavam as capacidades 

humanas, passaram por uma revolução tecnológica ao apresentarem toda 

informação necessária em dispositivos e monitores, agora de forma digital, os 

chamados glass cockpit (RIBEIRO, 2003). 

As estações de trabalho na aviação, dentro e fora dos aviões, contavam 

agora com o auxílio da automação que, embora tivesse por objetivo auxiliar nas 

tarefas, paradoxalmente, colocava o operador afastado do controle. Com isso, 

pensava-se que os erros iriam, pelo menos, diminuir. A indústria de aviação, na 

tentativa de projetar o erro para fora do avião, investiu pesado na filosofia de 

desenvolvimento da “automação centrada no homem”, chegando quase ao ponto de 

proibir os seres humanos de errar (BILLINGS, 1997). 

Já ao final da década de 80, um acidente ocorrido na cidade de Dryden – 

Ontário / Canadá – trouxe outra perspectiva para a investigação de acidentes 

aeronáuticos, porque ali foi dado, pela primeira vez e em grande escala, um enfoque 

organizacional (FLIGHT SAFETY FOUNDATION, 2008; TRANSPORT CANADA, 

2008). Mauriño et al. (1995) descrevem que, inicialmente, parecia ser igualmente 

claro o porquê do acidente, pelo menos do ponto de vista dos conhecimentos 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          135 
 

existentes na época: os pilotos haviam tomado uma decisão errada. Estava claro o 

que havia acontecido: a aeronave bateu contra o solo devido ao fato de suas asas 

estarem cobertas de gelo e neve. Se estava nevando, se havia condições para a 

formação de gelo e os pilotos optaram em favor da decolagem sem degelar as asas, 

então o acidente deve ter sido causado por erro do piloto. As provas eram tão 

claramente óbvias que a investigação deveria ter sido encerrada poucas semanas 

após o acidente, se ela tivesse sido realizada do modo convencional. Mas não foi 

assim. 

No dia 29 de março de 1989, foi formada uma Comissão de Investigação, e 

o Juiz Moshansky foi nomeado para presidi-la. Imediatamente, ele decidiu deixar de 

lado, como fato inconseqüente, o que era evidente, ou seja, a ideia de erro do piloto. 

A investigação do acidente do voo 1363 representa uma das primeiras aplicações, 

em grande escala, de um enfoque sistemático e organizacional para investigar um 

acidente aeronáutico. 

Com a assessoria de um grupo multidisciplinar, o juiz Moshansky revelou 

faltas e falhas sistêmicas presentes na rede de segurança do sistema de aviação 

canadense, que não apenas fomentaram, mas, também, falharam em conter o 

acidente. 

Segundo Mauriño (1994), o relatório final deste acidente apresenta-se como 

um exercício prático de aplicação dos conceitos da Psicologia Organizacional6 e da 

Social. Desde então, tem-se observado uma influência significativa destas vertentes 

da Psicologia sobre a segurança aérea. 

Os anos 90 foram recheados de estudos e propostas de abordagens 

envolvendo temas relacionados à cultura corporativa e sua influência no 

comportamento individual e nas culturas seguras e inseguras. Particular atenção 

deve ser dada aos estudos desenvolvidos pela Drª Ashleigh C. Merritt, também do 

grupo da Universidade do Texas, sobre as influências das culturas nacional, 

profissional e organizacional nas questões de segurança na aviação, com base nos 

achados do Dr. Geert Hofstede (1980, apud HELMREICH; MERRITT; WILHELM, 

1999; HELMREICH, 1999). 



136           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

Ainda nos anos 90, outros estudos significativos envolvem questões 

relativas ao impacto do projeto organizacional sobre o desempenho operacional e à 

contribuição de tomadores de decisões estratégicas sobre o comportamento 

organizacional, entre outras. Neste cenário, ressalta-se a contribuição expressiva do 

psicólogo inglês James T. Reason, da Universidade de Manchester/UK, que 

desenvolveu um modelo de análise organizacional das “patogenias latentes”7 

oriundas de decisões emanadas dos níveis gerenciais que, associadas a condições 

latentes presentes nos sistemas decorrentes destas decisões e a falhas ativas 

produzidas pelos operadores, podem colaborar para o surgimento dos incidentes e 

acidentes (HELMREICH; MERRITT; WILHELM, 1999). 

Atualmente, as contribuições oriundas dos estudos dos Profs. R. Helmreich, 

A. Merritt, J. Reason e colaboradores, entre outros, oferecem as bases teóricas sob 

as quais programas de segurança promovidos pela Organização de Aviação Civil 

Internacional8, através do Programa de Segurança de Voo e Fatores Humanos 

(ICAO, 2007), procuram disseminar os conhecimentos desenvolvidos, colaborando, 

desta forma, para a melhoria da segurança operacional na aviação mundial. 

Com os objetivos de difundir o conhecimento produzido e reunir 

pesquisadores e profissionais da área, em 1981, ocorreu o primeiro International 

Symposium on Aviation Psychology, em Ohio, trazendo temas como: Segurança 

Aérea, Cockpit Resource Management (CRM), Automação no Cockpit, Investigação 

de Acidentes, Fadiga/Stress, Seleção, Treinamento, Consciência Situacional, entre 

outros. Os focos de atenção dos estudos eram os profissionais que atuavam no 

sistema, tais como: tripulantes de voo (pilotos, engenheiros de voo e comissários), 

controladores de tráfego aéreo e pessoal de manutenção. 

Este evento vem se repetindo bianualmente e na edição do ano de 2009 

pode-se notar que esses temas ainda continuam sendo alvos de estudos e 

propostas, ainda contando com contribuições significativas das áreas da Psicologia 

Organizacional, Comportamental, Cognitivista e Social, na tentativa de superar 

dificuldades encontradas no passado com abordagens estanques (WRIGHT STATE 

UNIVERSITY, 2009). 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          137 
 

Outros eventos têm ocorrido desde então, e em outros pontos do mundo, 

como as conferências bianuais organizadas pela European Association for Aviation 

Psychology (EAAP, 2007) e pela Australian Aviation Psychology Association 

(AAvPA, 2007), mostrando que a comunidade científica tem se mantido alerta 

quanto à necessidade de aprofundar cada vez mais estudos que envolvam o 

conhecimento sobre as capacidades e limitações humanas e sua participação para 

a melhoria da segurança aérea. 

 

4 PSICOLOGIA E AVIAÇÃO 

4.1 No Mundo 

São várias as iniciativas para sistematizar a participação da Psicologia da 

Aviação no mundo. Algumas delas são apresentadas a seguir: 

a) Association for Aviation Psychology (AAP) – é uma organização profissional 

sem fins lucrativos, organizada nos 60's. Sua finalidade é promover a 

Psicologia da Aviação e as disciplinas aeroespaciais e ambientais 

relacionadas. Para tal, objetiva atuar em quatro áreas específicas, quais 

sejam: a disseminação de conhecimentos, a promoção de reuniões e de 

publicações, a melhoria da educação e da pesquisa e a aplicação de 

princípios psicológicos ao bem-estar e à segurança aérea. Dentre os 

eventos que a associação patrocina, está o International Symposium on 

Aviation Psychology em parceria com a Wright State University – Ohio (AAP, 

2007). 

b) European Association for Aviation Psychology (EAAP) – desde 1956, 

bianualmente, promove um fórum para os profissionais que trabalham nos 

vários domínios da Psicologia da Aviação e de Fatores Humanos. Com mais 

de 300 membros de 36 países europeus e não-europeus, seu objetivo é o 

de facilitar o intercâmbio de uma rede profissional que estimule e incentive a 

troca de informações que promova um gerenciamento bem sucedido do 

desempenho humano na aviação (EAAP, 2007). 



138           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

c) Asociación Española de Psicología de la Aviación (AEPA) – começou suas 

atividades no ano 1995 frente à inquietação de um grupo de psicólogos da 

aviação no sentido de conhecerem seus trabalhos e compartilharem suas 

experiências. Esta inquietação concretizou-se em dezembro de 1998 com a 

oficialização da entidade. Seus principais objetivos envolvem: fomentar e 

promover o intercâmbio de conhecimentos, experiências e estudos no 

campo da Psicologia da Aviação e dos Fatores Humanos; potencializar e 

otimizar a segurança aérea e a saúde das pessoas envolvidas no meio 

aeronáutico; assessorar e cooperar com diversas instituições com atuação 

no campo da aviação; e, orientar e assessorar com respeito à investigação 

científica e aplicações práticas específicas no campo da Psicologia da 

Aviação (AEPA, 2007). 

d) Australian Aviation Psychology Association (AAvPA) – é uma organização 

sem fins lucrativos, criada em 1981. Seus objetivos preliminares são o de 

promover a troca de informação e o avanço do conhecimento nos campos 

da Psicologia da Aviação e de Fatores Humanos, e de expandir desse modo 

sua contribuição para a segurança e para a eficiência da indústria da 

aviação na região da Ásia e do Pacífico (AAvPA, 2007). 

e) University of Texas – Human Factors Research Project – criado para 

investigar fatores individuais, de equipe e organizacionais que determinam o 

desempenho e segurança na aviação, no espaço e na medicina. Fundado e 

dirigido pelo Prof. Robert L. Helmreich, seus estudos tinham por meta o 

desenvolvimento de novas medidas de desempenho nesses ambientes, 

bem como a avaliação do impacto dos fatores humanos sobre o treinamento 

em atitudes e comportamento. Um acordo de colaboração com 

organizações de formação e companhias aéreas participantes permitiu ao 

projeto gerar bases de dados confidenciais que serviram de recursos 

nacionais para o desenvolvimento de tecnologias de treinamento e 

programas de segurança. (UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS, 2007). 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          139 
 

f) Embry Riddle Aeronautical University – oferece o Programa de Psicologia e 

Fatores Humanos, no qual se trata dos desafios envolvidos na otimização do 

desempenho e segurança dos seres humanos e as máquinas que utilizam. O 

programa visa desenvolver no estudante a capacidade para projetar, conduzir e 

aplicar a pesquisa em fatores humanos ao projeto dos sistemas simples e 

complexos. O objetivo do programa é educar e graduar profissionais para 

atuarem como especialistas em fatores humanos, ou para continuar seus 

estudos na escola de pós-graduação (EMBRY RIDDLE AERONAUTICAL 

UNIVERSITY, 2007). 

g) International Journal of Aviation Psychology – o objetivo principal deste 

jornal é a publicação de trabalhos acadêmicos desenvolvidos dentro deste 

campo de estudo cada vez mais importante - o desenvolvimento e 

gerenciamento de sistemas de aviação seguros e eficazes do ponto de vista 

dos operadores humanos. Quatro disciplinas acadêmicas contribuem 

fortemente para o seu conteúdo, tornando-a verdadeiramente interdisciplinar 

na natureza e âmbito. Esses campos são: as ciências de engenharia e 

computação, a psicologia, a educação e a fisiologia. (TAYLOR AND 

FRANCIS GROUP, 2007). 

 

4.2 No Brasil 

A história da Psicologia inserida no contexto aeronáutico no Brasil se inicia 

com a criação da Força Aérea Brasileira (FAB), por volta da década de 40. 

Entretanto, somente em 1967, foi criado o Serviço de Seleção e Orientação – 

SESO, órgão subordinado à Diretoria de Ensino, que tinha por missão estudar as 

bases técnicas e científicas que viessem a nortear a seleção de candidatos aos 

cursos oferecidos pela Aeronáutica (BRASIL, 2007a). 

Com o passar do tempo, tendo em vista a necessidade de ampliar as ações 

da Psicologia para além das questões de seleção psicológica, por conta da 

complexidade das atividades, a inserção tecnológica e o próprio desenvolvimento da 



140           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

Psicologia, a nomenclatura, a subordinação, a missão e a estrutura tiveram que ser 

alteradas. 

Dessa forma é que, a partir de 1970, as atividades de Psicologia da FAB 

passaram à subordinação do Comando-Geral do Pessoal (COMGEP) e, ainda em 

1970, o então SESO deu lugar ao Núcleo do Instituto de Seleção e Orientação 

(NUISO), que por sua vez, transformou-se no Instituto de Seleção e Orientação 

(ISO), em 1981. 

Na década de 80, vários eventos assinalaram definitivamente o papel da 

Psicologia no contexto aeronáutico. A criação do Sistema de Psicotécnica da 

Aeronáutica, que mais tarde veio a constituir o Sistema de Psicologia da 

Aeronáutica (SISPA), bem como a mudança, em 1988, da denominação de ISO 

para IPA - Instituto de Psicologia da Aeronáutica, com novas atribuições, foram 

marcos importantes neste processo evolutivo. Foi neste período, também, que a 

participação do psicólogo nas comissões de investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos 

foi consolidada, trazendo um enfoque diferenciado para a análise das questões 

relativas à contribuição do fator humano nestes eventos (COELHO et al., 2007). 

Outros marcos significativos na evolução do papel do IPA em prol da 

segurança de voo podem ser destacados, tais como: o apoio à implantação do 

programa de Gerenciamento de Recursos de Tripulação (CRM) na FAB; a primeira 

pesquisa brasileira sobre a influência do aspecto psicológico na ocorrência de 

acidentes aeronáuticos na aviação civil e militar; a criação da Divisão de Segurança 

de Voo (DISEV), que mais tarde passou a se chamar Divisão de Segurança do 

Trabalho, tendo em vista a possibilidade de ampliação das suas atividades para 

além da segurança de voo; a participação no planejamento e execução dos 

conteúdos para o Curso de Prevenção de Acidentes – Fator Humano, destinado a 

médicos e psicólogos, ministrado pelo Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de 

Acidentes Aeronáuticos (CENIPA); a realização da pesquisa de levantamento de 

estressores em algumas Unidades Aéreas e em Centros de Controle de Tráfego 

Aéreo da FAB; a investigação de um acidente aeroespacial envolvendo o Veículo 

Lançador de Satélite VLS-1V03; e, ainda, a realização do I Curso de Extensão em 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          141 
 

Psicologia Aplicada à Aviação, no ano de 2004 (COELHO; BARRETO; FONSECA, 

2007; BRASIL, 2007a). 

Atualmente a missão do IPA é a de desenvolver ações nos diversos campos 

da Psicologia, oferecendo o suporte especializado às Organizações Militares e ao 

pessoal, no âmbito do Comando da Aeronáutica. (BRASIL, 2009a). 

A inserção da Psicologia no meio aeronáutico também pode ser observada 

tanto na Marinha do Brasil (MB) quanto no Exército Brasileiro (EB). Ambas as forças 

possuem grupos de voo especializados que dão o apoio aéreo necessário a seus 

respectivos combatentes. 

Na MB, a participação da Psicologia nos esquadrões de voo foi oficialmente 

confirmada a partir do momento em que foi criado o Curso Especial de Psicologia de 

Aviação para Oficiais (C-Esp-PAVO), em 2005, já que “em virtude da diversidade de 

atividades a serem desempenhadas por psicólogos na área da Aviação Naval, a 

Diretoria de Aeronáutica da Marinha, através do Exmo. Sr. Chefe do Serviço de 

Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos da Marinha, considerou 

necessária a formação de psicólogos de aviação” (informação verbal)2. 

As atribuições dos psicólogos de aviação na MB estão previstas em Norma 

do Comando Aeronaval (BRASIL, 2007b), ressaltando sua atuação como um 

importante elo nas atividades relacionadas à segurança de aviação, através do 

acompanhamento cotidiano do estado psicológico de todo pessoal - direta ou 

indiretamente - envolvido nas atividades aéreas das Organizações Militares (OM) 

em que servem. Para tanto, atuam em plena consonância com as atividades 

desenvolvidas pelo Oficial de Segurança de Aviação (OSAv) de sua OM, assim 

como com aquelas desenvolvidas pelo Médico de Aviação (Md-Av) designado para 

acompanhamento da OM. 

No EB, a aviação faz parte da sua história anteriormente à própria criação 

do Ministério da Aeronáutica, que veio a assumir as atribuições relativas às 

                                                        
2 Informações obtidas em texto sobre a atuação da Psicologia na Marinha do Brasil preparado e enviado pelo 
Psicólogo de Aviação CC (T) Fernando Antonio Gonçalves, participante da Comissão de Elaboração de 
Subsídios para a criação do Curso Especial de Psicologia de Aviação para Oficiais (C-Esp-PAVO). 



142           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

questões aéreas, antes desenvolvidas pelo EB, somente em 1941. Entretanto, as 

atividades aéreas no Exército foram retomadas no ano de 1986 com a criação da 

Diretoria de Material de Aviação do Exército (DMAvEx) e do 1º Batalhão de Aviação 

do Exército (1º BAvEx), este último instalado em Taubaté no ano de 1988. 

Atualmente, a cidade é a sede do Comando de Aviação do Exército, abrigando três 

batalhões de aviação (1º, 2º e 3º BAvEx), um batalhão de manutenção e o Centro 

de Instrução de Aviação do Exército – CIAvEx (BRASIL, 2009c). Atualmente, o 

CAvEx conta com três psicólogas militares, uma atuando na área clínica, e as outras 

duas atuando nas áreas de prevenção e investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos e 

na de instrução aérea, desenvolvendo atividades voltadas para a segurança de vôo 

(informação verbal)3 . 

Nos dias atuais, é possível encontrar psicólogos atuando em diferentes 

setores da atividade aérea, tais como: empresas aéreas, cursos de ciências 

aeronáuticas, escolas de aviação, indústria aeronáutica, controle de tráfego aéreo, 

infraestrutura aeroportuária, entre outras. Entretanto, tendo em vista que esta área 

de atuação não é apresentada ao aluno durante o curso de Psicologia, a inserção 

deste profissional no contexto aeronáutico se dá, em alguns casos, quase que 

acidentalmente, quando ele presta algum concurso para os quadros militares ou 

entidades do setor público, ou, ainda, quando são recrutados para atuarem em 

departamentos de pessoal de empresas ligadas ao meio aeronáutico e acabam por 

“descobrir” esta vertente de atuação. 

Apesar dessa dificuldade na divulgação, aqueles que se envolveram e se 

envolvem com este contexto, vêm tentando, ao longo dos anos, construir um 

conhecimento específico, com técnicas e metodologias de intervenção 

características, que possa servir de base para auxiliar aqueles que estão por vir e 

fazer deste segmento um campo de atuação reconhecido oficialmente. 

Outras atividades e eventos ocorridos ao longo desse período mostram-se 

significativos para caracterizar o crescimento desta área de atuação para os 
                                                        
3 Informação fornecida pela 2º Ten Psi Alessandra Gleysse Del Guerra Scigliano, psicóloga da Seção de 
Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos do Comando de Aviação do Exército. 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          143 
 

psicólogos. Dentre eles pode-se citar: 

a) Os Encontros de Psicologia da Aeronáutica foram realizados no período de 

1983 a 1989, por iniciativa do Instituo de Seleção e Orientação – ISO, atual 

Instituto de Psicologia da Aeronáutica – IPA, no Rio de Janeiro, após a 

criação, em 1982, do Quadro de Oficiais Femininos da Reserva da 

Aeronáutica, que possibilitou o ingresso de psicólogas militares. Estes 

encontros apresentavam, entre outros objetivos, o de reunir os psicólogos 

atuantes em diferentes setores do Comando da Aeronáutica para troca de 

experiências e estabelecimento de procedimentos específicos para cada 

setor. 

b) As Jornadas de Psicologia da Marinha são realizadas, anualmente, pelo 

Serviço se Seleção de Pessoal da Marinha desde 1996 e se constituem 

como referência dos eventos comemorativos do aniversário de criação desta 

Organização Militar ou em homenagem ao Dia do Psicólogo. Na edição do 

ano de 2000, atenção especial foi dada à atuação da Psicologia no 

ambiente de aviação (BRASIL, 2009d). 

c) Nos anos de 1998 e 2001, por iniciativa dos psicólogos da Faculdade de 

Psicologia da Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul - 

PUCRS que davam apoio ao Curso de Ciências Aeronáuticas, os I e II 

Encontros Brasileiro de Psicologia da Aviação foram realizados. Dentre os 

vários objetivos dos encontros, destacam-se, entre outros: reunir os 

psicólogos que atuavam no ambiente da aviação de forma a favorecer a 

troca de experiências, a discussão e a reflexão sobre o que vinha sendo 

desenvolvido por cada um em seus setores de trabalho; buscar a 

sistematização do conhecimento nesta área da Psicologia; identificar 

facilidades e dificuldades desse campo de atuação; e relacionar as 



144           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

competências necessárias ao psicólogo para atuar nesta área (informação 

verbal)4. 

d) O lançamento do livro “Os voos da Psicologia no Brasil: estudos e práticas 

na aviação”, em 2001, reuniu as experiências e ideias de alguns psicólogos 

que vinham atuando na área aeronáutica. O objetivo foi o de congregar 

gradativamente o conhecimento construído por essa prática profissional ao 

longo dos anos e, ainda, difundir as possibilidades de atuação do Psicólogo 

em um espaço que era, até então, de certa forma, desconhecido. 

(PEREIRA; RIBEIRO, 2001). 

e) Em 2004, o Segundo Serviço Regional de Aviação Civil (SERAC 2), realizou 

o III Encontro Brasileiro de Psicologia Aplicada à Aeronáutica, na cidade do 

Recife/PE, em continuação aos encontros realizados em Porto Alegre. Este 

evento teve por objetivo reunir psicólogos que atuam na comunidade 

aeronáutica brasileira para discutir temáticas pertinentes ao 

desenvolvimento das ações da Psicologia nesse contexto (BRASIL, 2004). 

f) Realização dos Cursos de Extensão em Psicologia Aplicada à Aviação pelo 

IPA nos anos de 2004, 2006 e 2008, como complemento aos Cursos de 

Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos – Fator Humano, destinados a 

médicos e psicólogos, realizados pelo CENIPA. Os Cursos de Extensão em 

Psicologia Aplicada à Aviação foram destinados a psicólogos atuantes ou 

com a intenção de atuar em organizações militares ou civis de aviação. 

Buscou enfocar as bases teóricas, a prática e as possibilidades de atuação 

na área da Psicologia da Aviação. Considerou a atuação do psicólogo não 

apenas na atividade aérea, propriamente dita, mas, também, em outros 

ambientes, tais como o tráfego aéreo e a manutenção aeronáutica 

(COELHO et al., 2007). 

                                                        
4 Informações obtidas no discurso de abertura do I Encontro e no folheto de chamada do II Encontro, fornecidos 
pela Professora e Psicóloga Silvia Bozzetti Moreira, uma das organizadoras dos eventos. 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          145 
 

g)  Em 2005, o Curso Especial de Psicologia de Aviação para Oficiais (C-Esp-

PAVO) foi criado pela Diretoria de Pessoal da Marinha, sendo considerado o 

primeiro curso de Psicologia de Aviação na América Latina, e ministrado no 

Centro de Instrução e Adestramento Aeronaval (CIAAN), em São Pedro da 

Aldeia/RJ. O C-Esp-PAVO tem a duração de 16 semanas, com carga horária 

total de 560 horas/ aula, e é desenvolvido em três módulos: Psicologia 

Aeroespacial, Tecnologia Básica de Aviação e Prática Profissional Aplicada. 

Os psicólogos de aviação (Psi-Av) da Marinha, após o curso, estão aptos a 

desenvolverem atividades nas áreas operativas e organizacionais, clínica, 

de segurança de aviação, e de seleção e formação de pessoal para a 

Aviação Naval. A primeira turma de Psi-Av iniciou o curso em março de 

2006, no CIAAN, composta por dez Oficiais da Marinha. A segunda turma 

realizou o C-Esp-PAVO no 2º semestre de 2008 e participaram três Oficiais 

da Marinha e uma Oficial da Polícia Militar do Estado do Rio de Janeiro. 

Após sua conclusão, os Psi-Av são distribuídos pelas diversas unidades 

aeronavais, incluindo os esquadrões de helicópteros distritais (informação 

verbal)5. 

h) Em finais de 2006 e início de 2007, foi realizado o curso de Extensão 

Universitária em “Factores Humanos y Psicología Aeronáutica” através de 

um consórcio estabelecido pela Faculdade Frassinetti do Recife (Brasil) e La 

Fundació Universitat Rovira I Virgili (Espanha). Este curso foi preparado na 

modalidade de ensino à distância e contou com a participação de instrutores 

e professores do Brasil, Guatemala, Espanha, Argentina e Uruguai, sendo 

oferecido tanto em espanhol como em português. Seu objetivo principal era 

o de apresentar uma visão geral de conceitos de Fatores Humanos e 

Psicologia inseridos no contexto aeronáutico para profissionais que atuam 

ou que possuem interesse nesta área (PEREIRA et al. 2006). 
                                                        
5 Informações obtidas em texto sobre a atuação da Psicologia na Marinha do Brasil preparado e enviado pelo 
Psicólogo de Aviação CC (T) Fernando Antonio Gonçalves, participante da Comissão de Elaboração de 
Subsídios para a criação do Curso Especial de Psicologia de Aviação para Oficiais (C-Esp-PAVO). 



146           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

i) Por ocasião da comemoração do 40º aniversário de criação do Instituto de 

Psicologia da Aeronáutica, foi lançado o livro “Coletânea de Artigos 

Científicos”, reunindo uma série de artigos científicos elaborados por 

psicólogos do IPA, com base em trabalhos e pesquisas desenvolvidas por 

estes profissionais com o objetivo de contribuir para o emprego da 

Psicologia em prol daqueles que se dedicam às atividades aéreas, tanto no 

âmbito civil como no militar (BORGES et al., 2007). 

j) Em 2008, a disciplina “Psicologia em Aviação” foi inserida na grade curricular 

do primeiro curso de Mestrado Profissional em Segurança de Aviação e 

Aeronavegabilidade Continuada realizado pelo Instituto Tecnológico da 

Aeronáutica (ITA), em parceria com o Centro de Investigação e Prevenção 

de Acidentes Aeronáuticos (CENIPA). O curso tem por objetivos: (a) formar 

profissionais em nível de Mestrado Profissional para atuarem em áreas 

diretamente ligadas à Segurança de Aviação e Aeronavegabilidade 

Continuada; (b) fomentar o estudo e o desenvolvimento de técnicas para o 

estabelecimento de tecnologias adequadas à realidade brasileira, através do 

estabelecimento de uma abordagem científica, de modo a estimular novas 

linhas de pesquisa no campo de Segurança de Aviação e 

Aeronavegabilidade Continuada em nosso País; e, (c) fornecer subsídios 

para o crescimento da cultura de Segurança de Aviação nos diversos 

ambientes onde a atividade aérea é essencial, contribuindo para a atuação 

proativa nos diversos escalões das empresas, instituições e organizações 

(BRASIL, 2009b). 

Os eventos apresentados são algumas das iniciativas desenvolvidas pelos 

profissionais que consideram a Psicologia aplicada ao ambiente aeronáutico como 

um campo promissor e que acreditam na contribuição significativa que ela pode 

oferecer para o incremento da segurança de voo. 

 
 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          147 
 

5 CONCLUSÃO 

Esta breve retrospectiva tem a finalidade de apresentar os caminhos 

trilhados pela Psicologia no ambiente da aviação. Embora, no mundo, este ramo da 

Psicologia já seja amplamente consagrado, no Brasil, o delineamento de suas 

fronteiras e de seus focos de atuação ainda está em construção. 

São muitos os profissionais que dia a dia vão construindo esse novo saber, 

nas companhias aéreas, nas escolas de aviação, nos centros de treinamento, nos 

núcleos de pesquisa, nos centros de controle de tráfego aéreo, nos órgãos de 

infraestrutura aeroportuária, nos órgãos reguladores, nos grupos de atendimento no 

pós-acidente e em tantos outros lugares. 

Entretanto, no Brasil, diferentemente de outras partes do mundo, esse saber 

ainda não tem uma ampla divulgação, tanto no meio da Psicologia quanto no da 

própria aviação. Por não ser apresentada nos currículos de formação do psicólogo, 

esta área, que possui tantas características peculiares, em geral, só é descoberta se 

o profissional, por algum motivo, se envolve com o contexto aeronáutico. Por sua 

vez, os diferentes setores da aviação, também, nem sempre têm a exata noção das 

possibilidades de atuação desse profissional. É muito comum se encontrar o 

psicólogo envolvido com as questões de recursos humanos da organização, tais 

como recrutamento, seleção, treinamento, porém, na maioria das vezes, 

desvinculadas daquelas relacionadas à segurança de voo. 

A inexistência de uma especialização formal e reconhecida na área torna 

essa possibilidade mais difícil de ser concretizada em sua plenitude. Os cursos hoje 

existentes no Brasil, oferecidos pela Aeronáutica e pela Marinha, ocorrem em um 

nível que, pela carga horária ou por estarem inseridos em um ambiente militar, 

podem não caracterizar um grau de aprofundamento ou abrangência que conduza a 

uma titulação aceita pela comunidade acadêmica. 

Apesar da trajetória até aqui desenvolvida e os muitos degraus 

conquistados, a Psicologia no ambiente da aviação continuará, pelo menos por 

enquanto, a ser construída por aqueles que fazem da sua práxis a base do seu 



148           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

conhecimento, buscando com isso contribuir, cada vez mais, para que o meio 

aeronáutico possa desenvolver suas operações com maior eficácia e segurança. 

NOTAS 

1 Psicologia Clínica: área de especialização da Psicologia que estuda o comportamento do 
indivíduo (ou do grupo) por meio de técnicas apropriadas, tais como testes de inteligência, 
de personalidade, entrevistas, etc., numa tentativa de compreender-lhe e resolver-lhe os 
conflitos. 
2 Comportamentalismo ou Behaviorismo: campo de estudo da Psicologia que tem o 
comportamento como base de estudo. Os behavioristas trabalham com o princípio de que a 
conduta dos indivíduos é observável, mensurável e controlável similarmente aos fatos e 
eventos nas ciências naturais e nas exatas. J. Watson, considerado como pai do 
behaviorismo, era um defensor da importância do meio na construção e desenvolvimento do 
indivíduo. Dentre os representantes desta corrente, destaca-se B. F. Skinner, cujos 
conceitos sobre condicionamento operante influenciaram os estudos da Psicologia, 
principalmente na área da aprendizagem. 
3 Psicologia Cognitiva: campo de estudo da Psicologia que se preocupa com o modo como 
as pessoas percebem, aprendem, recordam e pensam sobre a informação (STERNBERG, 
2000, p.22).  
4 Estudos desenvolvidos por Kurt Lewin com base na sua Teoria de Campo, cuja proposição 
básica é que o comportamento humano é função do indivíduo e do seu ambiente. As 
hipóteses elaboradas por ele sobre a dinâmica dos pequenos grupos são: 1) o grupo 
constitui o terreno sobre o qual o indivíduo se mantém; 2) o grupo é para o indivíduo um 
instrumento; 3) o grupo é uma realidade da qual o indivíduo faz parte, mesmo aqueles que 
se sentem ignorados, isolados ou rejeitados; e, 4) o grupo é para o indivíduo um dos 
elementos ou dos determinantes de seu espaço vital (YUNES, 1999). 
5 Psicologia Social: área de especialização e campo de investigação que pode ser 
entendido como "o estudo científico da influência recíproca entre as pessoas (interação 
pessoal) e do processo cognitivo gerado por essa interação (pensamento social)” 
(RODRIGUES; ASSMAR; JABLONSKI, 2005). A integração social, a interdependência entre 
os indivíduos, o encontro social são os objetos investigados por essa área da Psicologia. 
6 Psicologia Organizacional: inicialmente denominada como Psicologia Industrial, área de 
especialização e campo que estuda os fenômenos psicológicos presentes nas 
organizações, mais especificamente, atuando sobre os problemas organizacionais ligados à 
gestão de recursos humanos (ou gestão de pessoas). Atualmente, reconhecida como 
Psicologia Organizacional e do Trabalho, atua em atividades relacionadas à análise e 
desenvolvimento organizacional, ação humana nas organizações, desenvolvimento de 
equipes, consultoria organizacional, seleção, acompanhamento e desenvolvimento de 
pessoal, estudo e planejamento de condições de trabalho, estudo e intervenção dirigidos à 
saúde do trabalhador (CFP, 2001). 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          149 
 

7 “Patogenias latentes” ou “Condições latentes” são fatores que estão silenciosamente 
presentes por um longo período de tempo em uma organização, mas que, eventualmente, 
se combinam com circunstâncias locais e falhas ativas (erros e violações) cometidas pelos 
operadores e acabam por romper todos os mecanismos de defesa e ocasionar o 
acidente/desastre. São geradas nos níveis mais altos da organização e surgem de decisões 
estratégicas dos gerentes (REASON, 1997). 
8 Organização de Aviação Civil Internacional (OACI): também conhecida por sua sigla em 
inglês, ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), é uma agência especializada das 
Nações Unidas criada em 1944 com 190 países-membros. Sua sede permanente fica na 
cidade de Montreal, Canadá. Tem como principais objetivos o desenvolvimento dos 
princípios e técnicas de navegação aérea internacional e a organização e o progresso dos 
transportes aéreos, de modo a favorecer a segurança, a eficiência, a economia e o 
desenvolvimento dos serviços aéreos (ICAO, 2008). 

 

REFERÊNCIAS 

ASOCIACIÓN ESPAÑOLA DE PSICOLOGÍA DE LA AVIACIÓN. Bienvenidos a AEPA. Disponível 
em: <www.aepa-spain.com/>. Acesso em: 16 jul. 2007. 

ASSOCIATION FOR AVIATION PSYCHOLOGY. Home. Disponível em: <www.avpsych.org/>. 
Acesso em: 15 jul. 2007. 

AUSTRALIAN AVIATION PSYCHOLOGY ASSOCIATION. Home. Disponível em: 
<www.aavpa.org/home.htm>. Acesso em: 16 jul. 2007. 

AUSTRIAN AVIATION PSYCHOLOGY ASSOCIATION. Definition. Disponível em: 
<http://www.aviation-psychology.at/definition.php>. Acesso em: 16 out. 2009. 

BARBARINO, M. Introduction. In The 50th years of EAAP. Postdam, Germany: 2006. Disponível em: 
<http://www.eaap.net/fileadmin/Eaap/downloads/EAAP_History/EAAP_History_Book_-
_heavy_version.pdf.> Acesso em: 16 out. 2007. 

BILLINGS, C. E. Aviation automation: the search for a human-centered approach. New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, 1997. 

BORGES, J. P. et al. (Org.). Coletânea de artigos científicos. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto de Psicologia 
da Aeronáutica / Sumauma Ed. e Gráfica, 2007. 

BRASIL. Comando da Aeronáutica. Departamento de Aviação Civil. Segundo Serviço Regional de 
Aviação Civil. Encontro Brasileiro de Psicologia Aplicada à Aeronáutica. Coletânea de 
Apresentações. Recife/PE: SERAC2, 2004. CD-ROM. 

BRASIL. Comando da Aeronáutica. Instituto de Psicologia da Aeronáutica. História do IPA. (Site 
oficial) Disponível em: <www.ipa.aer.mil.br/historico1.htm>. Acesso em: 24 out. 2007a. 

______. ______. ______. Missão do IPA. (Site oficial) Disponível em: 
<http://www.ipa.aer.mil.br/missao1.htm>. Acesso em: 20 out. 2009a. 

 



150           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

______. ______. Instituto Tecnológico da Aeronáutica. Mestrado Profissional em segurança de 
aviação e aeronavegabilidade continuada. (Site oficial) Disponível em 
<http://www.aer.ita.br/conteudo/mestrado-profissional-seguran-avia-o-e-aeronavegabilidade-
continuada>. Acesso em: 21 out. 2009b. 

______. Comando do Exército. Comando de Aviação do Exército. Histórico. (Site oficial). Disponível 
em: <http://www.cavex.eb.mil.br/historico.htm>. Acesso em: 20 out. 2009c. 

______. Marinha do Brasil. Comando da Força Aeronaval. Atuação dos psicólogos de aviação. 
NORMAERNAV 05-01. 10 jul. 2007b. 

______. ______. Serviço de Seleção de Pessoal da Marinha. Histórico das jornadas de 
Psicologia. (Site oficial). Disponível em: <http://www.mar.mil.br/sspm/jornada_13ago08.htm>. 
Acesso em: 21 out. 2009d. 

COELHO, E. C.; BARRETO, M. R. M.; FONSECA, C. S. Contribuições da Psicologia à segurança de 
voo. In: BORGES, J. P. et al. (Orgs.). Coletânea de artigos científicos. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto de 
Psicologia da Aeronáutica / Sumauma Ed. e Gráfica, 2007a. 

______. et al. Investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos: atuação dos psicólogos no Brasil. In: 
BORGES, J. P. et al. (Orgs.). Coletânea de artigos científicos. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto de 
Psicologia da Aeronáutica / Sumauma Ed. e Gráfica, 2007b. 

CONSELHO FEDERAL DE PSICOLOGIA. Institui o título profissional de especialista em psicologia e 
o respectivo registro nos Conselhos Regionais. Resolução CFP 02/01. Brasília, DF: CFP, 10 de 
março de 2001. 

EDWARDS, E. Introductory overview. In: WIENER, E. L. & NAGEL, D. C. Human factors in 
aviation. San Diego: Academic Press, 1988. 

EMBRY RIDDLE AERONAUTICAL UNIVERSITY. Human factors and psychology program. 
Disponível em: <http://daytonabeach.erau.edu/coas/human-factors/psychology.html>. Acesso em: 14 
jul. 2007.  

EUROPEAN ASSOCIATION FOR AVIATION PSYCHOLOGY. About EAAP. Disponível em: 
<www.eaap.net/>. Acesso em: 15 jul. 2007. 

FLIGHT SAFETY FOUNDATION. Dryden accident description. Aviation Safety Network. Database 
1989. Disponível em: <http://aviation-safety.net/database/record.php?id=19890310-1>. Acesso em: 
14 jun. 2008. 

HELMREICH, R. L. Building safety on the three cultures of aviation. In: IATA HUMAN FACTORS 
SEMINAR, August 12, 1998, Bangkok, Thailand. Proceedings of the IATA Human Factors 
Seminar. Bangkok, Thailand: IATA, 1999. p. 39- 43. 

______.; MERRITT, A.C.; WILHELM, J.A. The evolution of Crew Resource Management training in 
commercial aviation. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, Philadelphia, PA: Laurence 
Erlbaum Association, v.9 n. 1, p. 19-32, 1999. 

INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION. Flight safety and human factors website. 
Disponível em: <http://www.icao.int/ANB/humanfactors/index.html>. Acesso em: 18 jul. 2007. 

 



 Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento.          151 
 

______. About ICAO. Disponível em: <http://www.icao.int/icao/en/m_about.html>. Acesso em: 18 
set. 2008. 

MAURINO, D. E. Foreword. In: JOHNSTON, N; MCDONALD, N. & FULLER, R. (Eds.) Aviation 
psychology in practice. Aldhershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 1994. 

______. et al. Beyond aviation human factors. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 1995. 

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD. Aircraft Accident Report: United Airlines, Inc., 
Douglas DC-8-54, N8082U, Portland, Oregon, December 28, 1978. (NTSB-AAR-79-7). Washington, 
DC: Author, 1979. Disponível em: <http://www.avweb.com/news/safety/183016-1.html>. Acesso em: 
14 ago. 2007. 

PEREIRA, M. C.; RIBEIRO, S. L. O. (Orgs.) Os voos da Psicologia no Brasil: estudos e práticas na 
aviação. Rio de Janeiro: DAC/NUICAF, 2001. 

______. et al. (Coord.) Factores humanos y psicologia aeronáutica. Apostila. Reus/Spain-Recife/PE: 
Universidad Rovira I Virgili / Faculdades Francinete do Recife, 2006. 

REASON, J. Managing the risks of organizational accidents. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1997. 

RIBEIRO, S. L. O. Carga de trabalho e automação: estudo da cabine de voo do ponto de vista da 
ergonomia cognitiva. 2003. 229 f. Tese (Doutorado em Engenharia de Produção) – Instituto Alberto 
Luiz Coimbra de Pós-graduação e Pesquisa em Engenharia (COPPE) / Universidade Federal do Rio 
de Janeiro (UFRJ). Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 2003. 

RODRIGUES, A.; ASSMAR, E. M. L.; JABLONSKI, B. Psicologia social (23ª ed.). Petrópolis, RJ: 
Vozes, 2005. 

STERNBERG, R. J. Psicologia cognitiva. Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2000. 

TAYLOR AND FRANCIS GROUP. Journal Details. Disponível em: 
<http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/1050-8414.asp>. Acesso em: 23 ago. 2007. 

TRANSPORT CANADA. Scrutinizing aviation culture: professional courtesy. Disponível em: < 
http://www.tc.gc.ca/civilaviation/systemsafety/newsletters/tp185/pdf/1_2004.pdf>. Acesso em: 14 jun. 
2008. 

UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS. Human factors research project. Disponível em: 
<http://homepage.psy.utexas.edu/homepage/group/HelmreichLAB/>. Acesso em: 15 jul. 2007. 

WEST CHESTER UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA. Careers in Aviation Psychology. Disponível 
em: <http://www.wcupa.edu/_ACADEMICS/sch_cas.psy/Career_Paths/Aviation/Career11.htm#intro>. 
Acesso em: 16 out. 2009. 

WRIGHT STATE UNIVERSITY. Presentation. International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, 15, 
2009, Dayton;OH. Proceedings of The XV International Symposium on Aviation Psychology. 
Dayton, OH: Author, 2009. CD-ROM. 

YUNES, Y. A. Qualidade de vida e de relações de trabalho: integração pessoal pelo 
desenvolvimento de percepções gestálticas. Dissertação. (Mestrado em Engenharia de Produçãao. 
Florianópolis, SC: Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina / Departamento de Pós-graduação em 
Engenharia de Produção, 1999. Disponível em: 
<http://www.eps.ufsc.br/disserta99/yamile/index.htm>. Acesso em: 16 out. 2009. 



152           Rev. Conexão SIPAER, v. 1, n. 1, nov. 2009. Edição de Lançamento. 
 

PSYCHOLOGY IN AVIATION CONTEXT: BRIEF RETROSPECTIVE 

ABSTRACT: Aviation is one of the sectors of human activity that most developed in 
the last century. Sciences of different areas of human knowledge contributed 
towards a significant progress in this sector. Psychology had a significant 
participation in this development, aiming at adapting the knowledge generated from it 
to aviation needs. The purpose of this material is to present, from a historical point of 
view, the evolution of the Psychology participation in the aviation environment, both 
on the national and international contexts, and its main achievements. 

KEYWORDS: Psychology and aviation. Flight Safety. Human Factor. Psychological 
Aspect. 



earch 39 (2008) 87–100
www.nsc.org
Journal of Safety Res
www.elsevier.com/locate/jsr
A methodology to model causal relationships on offshore safety assessment
focusing on human and organizational factors

J. Ren a, I. Jenkinson a, J. Wang a,⁎, D.L. Xu b, J.B. Yang b

a School of Engineering, Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK
b Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M60 1QD, UK

Received 14 May 2007; accepted 5 September 2007
Available online 7 February 2008
Abstract

Introduction: Focusing on people and organizations, this paper aims to contribute to offshore safety assessment by proposing a methodology to
model causal relationships. Method: The methodology is proposed in a general sense that it will be capable of accommodating modeling of multiple
risk factors considered in offshore operations and will have the ability to deal with different types of data that may come from different resources.
Reason's “Swiss cheese” model is used to form a generic offshore safety assessment framework, and Bayesian Network (BN) is tailored to fit into the
framework to construct a causal relationship model. The proposed framework uses a five-level-structure model to address latent failures within the
causal sequence of events. The five levels include Root causes level, Trigger events level, Incidents level, Accidents level, and Consequences level.
To analyze and model a specified offshore installation safety, a BN model was established following the guideline of the proposed five-level
framework. A range of events was specified, and the related prior and conditional probabilities regarding the BN model were assigned based on the
inherent characteristics of each event. Results: This paper shows that Reason's “Swiss cheese” model and BN can be jointly used in offshore safety
assessment. On the one hand, the five-level conceptual model is enhanced by BNs that are capable of providing graphical demonstration of inter-
relationships as well as calculating numerical values of occurrence likelihood for each failure event. Bayesian inference mechanism also makes it
possible to monitor how a safety situation changes when information flow travel forwards and backwards within the networks. On the other hand, BN
modeling relies heavily on experts' personal experiences and is therefore highly domain specific. Impact on Industry: “Swiss cheese” model is such a
theoretic framework that it is based on solid behavioral theory and therefore can be used to provide industry with a roadmap for BN modeling and
implications. A case study of the collision risk between a Floating Production, Storage and Offloading (FPSO) unit and authorized vessels caused by
human and organizational factors (HOFs) during operations is used to illustrate an industrial application of the proposed methodology.
© 2008 National Safety Council and Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Safety assessment; Offshore safety; Human error; Bayesian networks
1. Introduction

In the UK it is estimated that about 26,000 people work
offshore on a regular basis on fixed production platforms,
mobile drilling rigs, or FPSOs (UK Jobs4U, 2006). Over the
past two decades, a number of serious accidents including the
Piper Alpha tragedy that claimed 165 lives have attracted public
concerns to offshore safety and reliability. The studies on how
⁎ Corresponding author. School of Engineering, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, L3 3AF. Tel.: +44 151 2312245; fax: +44 151 2312453.

E-mail address: j.wang@ljmu.ac.uk (J. Wang).

0022-4375/$ - see front matter © 2008 National Safety Council and Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.jsr.2007.09.009
similar accidents may be prevented in the future have been
actively carried out at both the national and international levels.

Surveys conducted by different individuals and safety bodies
have revealed that about 75–96% of marine casualties are fully/
partially caused by human and organizational errors (Rothblum,
2000). Studies (Bryant, 1991; Cormier, 1994; Transportation
Safety Board of Canada, 1994; UK. P&I Club, 1992) have
shown that human and organizational factors (HOFs) contribute
to:

• 75% of fires and explosions.
• 75% of allisions.
All rights reserved.



88 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
• 89–96% of collisions.
• 79% of towing vessel groundings.
• 84–88% of tanker accidents.

Accidents are not usually caused by a single failure or mistake,
but by the confluence of a whole series, or chain, of errors. In
offshore operations, accidents are often initiated by errors induced
by technical failures, HOFs, or a combination of both. To reduce
the risk, some risk and reliability analysis techniques have been
used in the UK offshore industry for almost 20 years, and have
contributed to the reduction of the incidence rate of severe
accidents in many circumstances. These techniques, however,
have traditionally focused more on technical aspects of design,
construction, and operation, rather than on human and organiza-
tional aspects. They mainly use descriptive, not predictive
models, and are thus often not very effective in determining
ways to prevent accidents. Therefore, there is a need for
rethinking the methodology of offshore safety assessment.

The nature of offshore safety is that the causes of an accident
on an offshore installation may be found in the complexity of
the relationships implicit in the design, procedures, equipment,
environment, operations, and so forth. In order to gain a full
understanding and comprehensive awareness of safety in a
given situation, it is necessary to use a systemic approach to
consider all the aspects that may lead to hazardous events. In
offshore safety assessment, a systemic approach means
considering all functional entities that constitute the offshore
system as a whole, exploring patterns and inter-relationships
within subsystems and seeing undesired events as the products
of the working of the system (Beard, 1989).

However, applying a holistic risk analysis to offshore
installations could have some hurdles. Particularly, in dealing
with HOFs, there are some difficulties:

• It is hard to agree on what HOF really means. This is because
the definition of HOF varies considerably. HOF may con-
centrate on aspects of manpower, organization, management,
allocation of responsibility, automation, communication, skills,
training, health, safety, and the prevention of errors or acci-
dents, or any one of a number of other possibilities.

• It is hard to measure HOFs as to what measures can be used
and how those measures are inter-related to form a proper
assessment framework.

• It is hard to collect empirical data from industry. There is often
inadequate data or imprecise information available when
carrying out HOFs analysis. Although several maritime
accident databases have been built up, the data contained in
them are only marginally relevant to the human and organi-
zational errors.

• It is hard to establish a uniformed framework to model HOFs
related offshore safety issues. This is because offshore safety
assessment must take all major risk factors into account.
When those factors involve HOFs, modeling becomes very
complicated (e.g., exploring the relationships among HOFs
needs a deep understanding of offshore safety issues and
may involve domain experts' personal experiences that are
difficult to be treated in a comprehensive way).
• It is hard to use conventional assessment approaches to deal
with HOFs. Conventional assessment approaches often fall
short in their ability to permit the incorporation of subjective
and/or vague terms.

By focusing on the human beings and the organizations as
well as the technology in offshore safety assessment, this paper
aims to contribute to offshore safety assessment by proposing a
methodology to model causal relationships. Such a methodol-
ogy will be proposed in a general sense that it will be capable of
accommodating modeling of multiple risk factors considered in
offshore operations and will have the ability to deal with
different types of data coming from different sources. When
such a framework is applied to a particular offshore installation,
risk factors specific to the installation investigated can be added
to the generic framework to model the actual situations.
Reason's “Swiss cheese” model is used to form a generic
offshore safety assessment framework and BN is used to
construct a causal relationship model. Based on the literature
review, a five-level framework will be proposed to address
latent failures within the causal sequence of events. The five-
levels include Root causes level, Trigger events level, Incidents
level, Accidents level, and Consequences level. A range of
events will be specified based on the inherent characteristics of
each event. To analyze and model a particular offshore
installation safety, a BN model will be established and the
related prior and conditional probabilities regarding the model
will also be investigated. A number of algorithms will be used
to compute and analyze the experimental data.

The objectives of this paper are therefore set up as follows:

• Develop a framework to integrate all hazardous events into a
multi-level model to produce an overall picture of the offshore
operations safety.

• Identify constituent levels of the framework and establish the
causal relationships between the levels.

• Identify latent errors (human error, equipment failure, etc.) of
each level.

• Investigate how to use BNs to establish a causal relationship
model.

• Justify the proposed methodology by a case study.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
briefly reviews the major problems and methods in offshore risk
analysis. Section 3 proposes a HOFs model and an offshore risk
analysis flow diagram. Section 4 gives a case study of collision
risk assessments between FPSO and authorized vessels during
operations. Section 5 provides the conclusions of the paper.
Appendices A–C give the background of fuzzy set theory, BN
model, and f-weighted valuation function for data transforma-
tion, respectively. Appendix D provides the case study data and
Appendix E gives the results of sensitivity analysis.

2. Review of literature

Human and organizational errors refer to unacceptable or
undesirable performance on the part of an individual (human



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 89

Fig. 1. “Swiss cheese” model (Perneger, 2005).
error) or a group (organizational error) that can result in
unanticipated or undesirable effects (US Coast Guard, 2004).
According to the UK CHIRP (Confidential Human Factors
Incident Reporting Programme), the subject of human factors
deals with all the human elements of people in man-machine
systems. Therefore, it should cover aspects of manpower, or-
ganization, management, allocation of responsibility, automa-
tion, communication, skills, training, health, safety, and the
prevention of errors or accidents, as well as the traditional
design and layout of equipment and workplaces. Thus the
concept of a HOF is extremely broad, for example, the people
concerned could be all those associated with the total system,
not merely the crews, but also designers, equipment suppliers,
maintainers, support personnel, instructors, and so on.

According to Senders and Moray (1991) human error is a
result of observable behavior originated from psychological
processes on different levels, evaluated against some performance
standards, initiated by an event in a situation where it was possible
to act in another way considered to be right. Hollnagel (1998),
however, pointed out that human errors cannot be observed
directly. It is only possible to observe human errors indirectly by
observation of human behaviors. Therefore a definition of human
errors must include three parts:

• Evaluation of human behavior against performance standard
or criterion.

• Event that result in a measurable performance shortfall such
that the expected level is not met by the acting agent.

• A degree of volition such that the actor has the opportunity to
act in a way that will not be considered erroneous.

Human errors may cause accidents, but accidents may not be
caused purely by human errors. Accidents are caused by the con-
fluence of a whole chain of errors. In order to reduce casualties,
safety analysts must first identify the type of human and
organizational errors that cause casualties and then study and
determine how accidents happen. To identify and group HOFs are
extremely difficult, because the type of human and organizational
errors varies. For instance, Draper (2000) classified human and
organizational errors into four categories:

• Slips: Actual behavior fails to conform to the intention/plan
(wrong action).

• Lapses: Actual behavior fails to conform to the intention/
plan (omitted action, memory failure).

• Rule-based mistake: wrong rule selected for action (i.e.,
behavior conforms to immediate intention, but intention,
while consistent with a viable rule for action, is inconsistent
in this case with wider knowledge).

• Knowledge-based mistake: error in generating a novel plan
for a novel situation.

From human behavior and organization theory point of view,
some researchers investigated human and organizational error
classification and grouped them into four basic categories: skill-
based errors, decision based errors, perceptual errors, and
violation errors (Baker & MaCafferty, 2005). Each basic group
could include some factors. Significant factors associated with
skill-based errors, for example, may include Failed to prioritize
attention, Inadvertent use of system controls, Omitted step in
procedure, Omitted checklist item, Poor technique, and Over-
controlled the system. Decision based errors include Improper
procedure, Misdiagnosed emergency, Wrong response to
emergency, Exceeded ability, Inappropriate maneuver, and
Poor decision. Perceptual errors happen due to Misjudged
distance and Visual illusion. Violation errors may include Vio-
lated training rules, Failed to properly prepare for the mission,
Not current/qualified for the mission, and Intentionally
exceeded the limits of the vessel.

Recently many individuals and research bodies have studied
the major human and organizational errors in different
industries. UK Energy Institute (2006), for instance, published
the top 10 human and organizational factor issues facing
onshore major hazards sites in the chemical and allied
industries. In general, different domain experts may use
different categories to classify human and organizational errors,
each category may have different types of errors. This requires
analysts to develop novel methods that are capable of finding a
right balance in dealing with general safety assessment and
domain specific analysis. In doing so, two popularly recognized
methods are highlighted in this literature study. The remainder
of this section is the discussion of the two methods: Reason's
“Swiss cheese” model and BN model.

Based on human behavior and organizations theory, Reason
(1990) proposed the “Swiss cheese” model to study HOFs (see
Fig. 1). This model demonstrates how generic human and
organizational errors can be decomposed into logical, mutually
exclusive categories, each influencing the next. In the model,
each slice of cheese represents a safety barrier or precaution
relevant to a particular hazard. The holes in the cheese slices
represent latent errors (human error, equipment failure, etc.)
waiting to happen. The defensive barriers are like dynamic
slices of Swiss cheese against accidents and incidents, with the
holes constantly subject to changes in size and location. When
the holes line up, meaning that all the defenses fail and a
system's latent vulnerabilities are exposed, then an incident
occurs. A significant attribute of Reason's model is that each of
the contributing factors is seen as necessary but not sufficient on
its own to cause the occurrence of an accident.

Following Reason's “Swiss cheese” model, many researchers
proposed similar taxonomies. For example, Swain and Guttman
(1983) paid more attention to organizational conditions that



90 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
contribute to human errors. Miller and Swain (1987) defined the
term performance shaping factors, which include: inadequate
work space and work layout, poor environmental conditions,
inadequate human engineering design, inadequate training and
job aids, poor supervision. Boniface and Bea (1996) linked the
concept of performance shaping factors to Reason's human error
framework and developed a tool for analyzing maritime acci-
dents. Other researchers (Pauchant & Mitroff, 1992; Perrow,
1984; Roberts, 1990; Sagan, 1994) studied the impact of
organizational culture on the incidence of human errors.

What makes the “Swiss cheese” model particularly useful is
that it forces investigators to address latent failures within the
causal sequence of events. However, this model is simply a
theoretical framework, not a prescriptive investigation techni-
que. It has few details on how to apply it in a real-world setting.
One needs to find out what “holes” are, how big they are and how
they are correlated, so that they can be detected and corrected
before an accident occurs (Wiegmann & Shappell, 1997).

One way to make good use of Reason's model is to use the
quantitative analysis tool to enhance the “Swiss cheese” model.
Particularly in exploring causal relationships in offshore safety
assessment, conventional tools have been widely used including
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Event Tree Analysis (ETA), Failure
Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), and Hazard and
Operability Studies (HAZOP). However, all those methods
may not be well suited for dealing with systems in situations of
HOFs involved and thus having a high level of uncertainty.

BN has been increasingly recognized as a powerful tool to
support causal inference in situations where data for analysis is
with a high level of uncertainty. BN is capable of replicating the
essential features of plausible reasoning in a consistent, efficient
and mathematically sound way. Critically it has the function to
retract belief in a particular case when the basis of that belief is
explained away by new evidence. BN has been used in many
different domains. In recent years, BN has attracted increasing
attention because of the new algorithms (Eleye-Datubo, Wall,
Saajedi, & Wang, 2006; Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter, 1988;
Zhang, Bai, Lu, & Zhang, 2004). BN has several features:

• It has the ability to incorporate new observations in the
network and to predict the influence of possible future ob-
servations onto the results obtained (Heckerman & Breese,
1996).

• It can let users observe the relationships among variables
easily and also give an understandable semantic interpreta-
tion to all the parameters in a BN (Myllymaki, 2005). This
allows users to construct a BN directly using domain expert
knowledge.

• Furthermore, a BN has both causal and probabilistic seman-
tics, and thus it provides an ideal representation scheme for
combining prior knowledge (which often comes in causal
form) and data.

• It can handle missing and/or incomplete data. This is be-
cause the model has the ability to learn the relationships
among its nodes and encodes dependencies among all
variables (Heckerman, 1997).

• It can conduct inference inversely.
Many applications have proven that BN is a powerful technique
for reasoning relationships among a number of variables under
uncertainty. For example, BN has been applied to ecological risk
assessment (Hayes, 1998). It has also been applied to fault diag-
nosis in complex nuclear power systems (Kang & Golay, 1999).
However, when using BN in offshore safety assessment, there are
some difficulties (e.g., how to deal with incomplete and vague
information that largely exists both at the early system design stage
and during normal operations). In prior research, approximate
reasoning approaches have been proposed (Ren et al., 2005; Sii &
Ruxton, 2001;Wang, Yang,& Sen, 1995). In dealingwith HOFs in
offshore safety assessment, however, BN is mainly criticized with
the difficulty of modeling how HOFs are inter-related to form a
logic chain/network and what is the underlying relationship
between them. This difficulty is mainly caused by lack of guide-
lines that are based on human behaviors and organization theories.
Another difficulty is the utilization of a probability measure to
assess uncertainty. It arguably requires too much precise informa-
tion in the form of prior and conditional probabilities, and it is often
difficult or impossible to obtain such information. In particular, in
dealing with indirect relationships, even domain experts may find
that it is usually difficult to make precise judgments with crisp
numbers (i.e., to assign an exact value to the probability that
consequences happen given the occurrence of an event). In many
circumstances, a verbal expression (e.g., “very unlikely”) of proba-
bilistic uncertaintymay bemore appropriate than numerical values.

Therefore, the “Swiss cheese” model can act as a high level
modeling methodology, while BN can be used as a low level
modeling technique. This provides a potential of combining the
two tools that may overcome shortcomings of each. In fact, the
“Swiss cheese” model is mainly criticized for being simply a
conceptualmodelwith fewdetails on how to apply it in a real-world
setting. This weaknesswill be overcome byBNs that are capable of
providing graphical demonstration of inter-relationships as well as
numerical values of occurrence likelihood for each failure event.
Bayesian inference mechanism also makes it possible to monitor
how a safety situation changes when information flows travel
forward and backward within the network. On the other hand, BN
is mainly criticized for lack of guidelines in establishing causal
model, that is, modeling is heavily dependent on experts' personal
experiences and highly domain specific. The “Swiss cheese”model
is such a theoretical framework based on solid behavioral theory
and therefore can be used to provide a roadmap for BN modeling
(Ren, Wang, Jenkinson, Xu, & Yang, 2006).

3. TheHOFsmodel and offshore safety assessment framework

This section proposes a five-level HOFs model and provides
an offshore safety assessment framework.

3.1. The conceptual model for HOFs

Derived from the literature, the proposed methodology is
based on the following assumptions:

• Accidents cannot be attributed to a single cause, but are the
end result of a number of failures or mistakes, that is, they are



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 91
caused by the confluence of a whole chain of errors. The
relationships between those causes can be represented by
causal chains or networks.

• Accidents are not caused by the occurrence of sudden
unfavorable circumstances. Instead, they are mostly gener-
ated by HOFs which, under certain conditions, trigger an
undesired event.

• All accidents and incidents have their trigger causes and root
causes.

• Risk factors are dynamic in nature. Risk analysis must reflect
their dynamic properties and therefore should be capable of
dealing with dynamic information.

A causal conceptual model is proposed in this section (see
Fig. 2). The model uses five levels of hierarchical abstraction to
describe the causal chain of HOFs safety assessment, each level
providing a different cause/contributory model.

Level 1: The first level is about consequence. It describes the
consequences of accident (e.g., personnel injury, loss of life,
property damage, economic loss, and environmental pollution).

Level 2: The second level is about accident. It refers to the
offshore accidents that may include collision, powered ground-
ing, drift grounding, foundering, structural failure, and fire/
explosion. Any event in this level may cause consequences and
thus it is the causal level of consequence level.

Level 3: The third is the incident level. It includes all
possible incidents that create an unsafe condition that may
result in an accident. For instance, during a tandem offloading
operation between a FPSO unit and a dynamically positioned
(DP) shuttle tanker, drive-off incident may occur and thus may
cause collision (accident).

Level 4: The fourth level is the trigger event level. Trigger
events are those unsafe operator actions caused by human and
organizational errors. Unsafe human actions, for example, may
cause unexpected high hawser loads beyond the operational
limits. Trigger events are immediate causes of an incident. They
provide the conditions that allow the events at the third level to
occur.
Fig. 2. The conceptual
Level 5: The fifth level is the root cause level. The factors at
this level are often referred to as the root causes or systemic
factors of an accident. Root causes affect trigger events. At this
level, HOFs are the main concerns.

It should be noted that offshore accidents occur through the
concatenation of multiple latent errors. An individual error may
not be sufficient to cause severe consequences unless it occurs in
combination with other latent errors. The above proposed
framework demonstrates how root causes, trigger events, inci-
dents, accidents, and consequences are logically related, there-
fore it provides the potential of exploring the correlation between
HOFs and severity consequences. In fact, the HOFs may be
involved with operators, managers, and regulators. The propa-
gation and escalation of HOFs often make it possible for com-
binations of these latent errors to build up over time, hence
creating the preconditions for failure.

3.2. Offshore safety assessment framework

To conduct offshore risk analysis, a uniformed framework is
essential. Based on the literature review, a generic framework
for offshore risk analysis is proposed. The framework consists
of the following four major components:

1. Identify potential failure factors.
2. Categorize potential failure factors to form a risk analysis

hierarchy.
3. Establish BN model and estimate prior/posterior probabilities.
4. BN inference and interpret analysis results.

Each component of the framework is described in detail as
follows:

Component 1: Identify potential failure factors.
This component is the start point of the whole analysis

process. All anticipated causes/factors to potential failures during
offshore operations must be identified. In doing so, extensive
literature studies and empirical investigations are essential.
model for HOFs.



92 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
Component 2: Categorize potential failure factors to form
risk analysis hierarchies.

In this component, all the identified potential factors need to
be categorized according to their inherent characteristics. The
proposed conceptual model (Fig. 2) acts as the guidelines to
formulate a hierarchical structure.

Component 3: Establish BN model and estimate prior/
posterior probabilities.

Following the guidelines proposed in the HOFs conceptual
model and based on the identified risk factors, this component
focuses on exploring and establishing the causal relationships
among those risk factors. Using variables (nodes) to represent
the identified potential failures, prior probability table (PPT) or
conditional probability table (CPT) of each variable (node)
will be specified. It should be noted that data obtained from
available databases and data networks may not be complete
and well presented. Data mining techniques may be used in
such cases where, for instance, it is necessary to select suitable
types of fuzzy membership function to delineate linguistic
terms, and consult experts with interpretation of the fuzzy
membership function. Transformation of fuzzy/linguistic data
into crisp values is thus included in this component (Yager &
Filev, 1999).

Component 4: BN inference and interpret analysis results.
This component conducts the BN inference and interprets the

inference results. This is done by updating the values of all the
nodes via calculating posterior probabilities. During the process,
Bayesian Equations (i.e., Eqs. (1)–(4) in Appendix B) must be
used when new information is available.

4. Offshore safety case study

In this section, a case study is presented to demonstrate the
application of the proposed methodology for conducting
offshore safety assessment. This case study analyzes the risk
of the collision between a FPSO and the shuttle tanker/support
vessels during operation. For simplicity, but without loss of
generality, the following are assumed:

• Only those risk factors associated with HOFs are considered.
• Threemajor types ofHOFs are considered to be the root causes
of accidents: (a) Rule-based errors, (b) Knowledge-based
errors, and (c) Safety culture based errors.
Fig. 3. The BN model of the collision risk
• The values of prior and conditional probabilities are given by
estimation rather than from real historical databases.

• All fuzzy probabilities are represented by triangular form
membership functions.

The background knowledge of fuzzy set theory, BN inference
algorithm, and f-weighted valuation function for data transfor-
mation is given in Appendices A–C.

4.1. General description and BN model establishment

A FPSO is one of the most popular floating systems used by
the offshore oil and gas industry. In theUK, crude oil froma FPSO
is normally transported to shore using shuttle tankers specially
designed for dealing with the harsh weather conditions. Shuttle
tankers equipped with a bow-loading system are connected to a
FPSO unit or storage facilities by mooring hawser and loading
hose through which cargo is offloaded. Tandem loading/offload-
ing is a complex marine operation. It is with high risk due to the
close proximity required between the two large vessels. In addi-
tion, FPSOs are also routinely serviced by support vessels. During
the operation of service, support vessels could collide with FPSO
units due to faulty positioning. In a generic scenario, FPSO units
can collide with these ships. The consequence of the collision
varies from minor contact to incidents that may cause personnel
injury/loss, environment pollution, and/or damage to the property.

To avoid the occurrence of the incident and accident, it is
necessary to find out the hidden root causes that may be
indirectly linked to severe consequences. HOFs are the main
concerns in this case study. Incorrect human intervention of the
dynamically positioned system, for example, is one reason that
can result in a drive off or drift off situation with the risk of
collision. Safety analysts are interested in exploring what HOFs
have the most impact on safety consequences and how sensitive
those HOFs are when a situation changed.

4.2. Offshore safety assessment

The evaluation framework and BN model proposed in the
previous sections are used to analyze the case example.

Step 1: Identify potential failure factors
Identification for potential failure factors must be based on

empirical investigation and expert interviews. For demonstration
of a FPSO and the authorised vessels.



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 93

Table 1
Fuzzy prior probabilities Pf (RB), Pf (KB), Pf (SC)

RB Yes No
(0.09,0.1,0.11) (0.89,0.9,0.91)
0.1 0.9

KB (0.09,0.1,0.11) (0.89,0.9,0.91)
0.1 0.9

SC (0.09,0.1,0.11) (0.89,0.9,0.91)
0.1 0.9
purposes, this case study considers 11 factors: Personnel Injury/
loss(PI), Shuttle Tanker collision with FPSO(ST), Support Vessel
collision with FPSO(SP), Drive-off(DF), Miss Position(MP), Over
Control of the vessel(OC), Improper procedure(IP), Misjudgment
of the distance(MI), Rule-based errors(RB), Knowledge-based
errors(KB), and Safety Culture based errors(SC).

Step 2: Categorize potential failure factors to form risk
analysis hierarchy

The 11 factors are located at different levels of the proposed
framework (see Fig. 3). On the consequence level, Personnel
Injury/Loss is considered as the main consequence. On the
accident level, Shuttle Tanker and Support Vessel collisions with
FPSO are considered as the main constituents of this level. Drive-
off and Miss Position are identified as the main causes of the
accidents, these two factors are therefore located at the incident
level. On the Trigger level, three events, namely Over Control of
the vessel, Improper Procedure, and Misjudgment of the distance
are considered as the trigger events. The last level is root cause
level. Here three HOFs are identified as the root causes in the case
study: Rule-based errors, Knowledge-based errors, and Safety
culture based errors. The causal relationships among those 11
factors are addressed in a way that HOFs may trigger undesired
events to happen. For example, rule-based errors may cause an
improper procedure to handle emergency. When such an
undesired event occurs, incident may happen resulting in shuttle
tanker or support vessel being in a faulty position. Such a faulty
position of the shuttle tanker or support vesselmay cause collision
with the FPSO, and thus may eventually cause personnel injury/
loss. The causal relationships are demonstrated in Fig. 3. As can
be seen in Fig. 3, the 11 nodes are organized by the acyclic arrows
that represent the causal relationships among them. One of the
most interesting questions is to find out if there is a personnel
injury/loss observed, and then how it is caused by HOFs.

Step 3: Establish BN model and estimate prior/posterior
probabilities

Domain experts were asked to give judgments about the
probabilities regarding all the nodes. Suppose they use fuzzy
Table 2
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (MP|OC, IP, MJ)

OC Yes

IP Yes No

MJ Yes No Yes No

MP: (0.69,0.7,0.71) (0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.09,0.1,0.11)
Yes 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.1
MP: (0.29,0.3,0.31) (0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.89,0.9,0.91)
No 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.9
membership functions to describe the probabilities. For example,
a probability value may be assigned with fuzzy membership
function (0.09, 0.10, 0.11). Without loss of generality, in this case
study triangular fuzzy number (a, b, c) is used where a, b and c
represent the lower least likely value, the most likely value, and
upper least likely value, respectively. A triangular fuzzy set is a
special trapezoidal fuzzy set when the core set of the trapezoidal
fuzzy set takes the form of a single point. In Appendix C, a
trapezoidal fuzzy set is used to demonstrate how to conduct fuzzy-
to-crisp value transformation.

Table 1 gives the fuzzy prior probabilities of nodes RB
(Rule-based errors), KB (Knowledge-based errors), and SC
(Safety culture based errors). As shown in Table 1, there are
two possible values for each of the three nodes: Yes or No. If
RB is true (Yes), for example, it means that the event caused by
Rule-based errors took place. The occurrence likelihood of the
event was defined by domain experts as a triangular fuzzy
number Pf (RB1)= (0.09, 0.10, 0.11) as shown in Table 1. From
Table 1, one can see that the most likely value of Pf (RB1) is
0.1, while 0.09 and 0.11 are the lower and upper least likely
values of Pf (RB1), respectively.

Table 2 gives the conditional fuzzy probabilities of variable
“Miss Position (MP)” given the states of nodes Over control of
the vessel (OC), Improper Procedure (IP), and Misjudgment of
the distance (MJ). In Table 2, a fuzzy probability is provided for
each possible combination of states of nodes OC, IP, and MJ
(2×2×2×2=16 in this case). The fuzzy probability value
(MP1) under condition of OC1, IP2, and MJ2, for example, is
shown in the fourth row and fifth column. The particular value
suggests that the faulty position of shuttle tanker or support
vessel is quite unlikely to happen with fuzzy probability (0.09,
0.1, 0.11). This is because when there is malfunction caused by
Over control of the vessel, it is immediately sorted out by right
procedure and right judgment of the distance. Otherwise, in this
situation if there is a misjudgment of distance, the occurrence
likelihood of a shuttle tanker or support vessel being in a faulty
position is increased to even chance with fuzzy probability
(0.49,0.5,0.51) (shown in the fourth row and fourth column of
Table 2).

Tables 4–10 in Appendix D give the fuzzy conditional
probabilities of other nodes, respectively. The meanings of each
fuzzy conditional probability can be explained in a similar way
to the one depicted above.

Step 4: BN inference and interpret analysis results
In order to conduct Bayesian inference, it is necessary to

transform fuzzy values into crisp values. In this paper, fuzzy
No

Yes No

Yes No Yes No

(0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.09,0.1,0.11) (0.09,0.1,0.11) (0.001,0.001,0.001)
0.5 0.1 0.1 0.001
(0.49,0.5,0.51) (0.89,0.9,0.91) (0.89,0.9,0.91) (0.9999,0.999,0.999)
0.5 0.9 0.9 0.999



94 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
prior probabilities and fuzzy conditional probabilities are
transformed into crisp numbers using transformation equations
provided in Appendix C.

Fuzzy probability Pf (RB=RB1)= (0.09,0.1,0.11) for exam-
ple, is transformed as followþ s (using Eq. (7) in Appendix C):

0:1þ0:1 0:09þ0:11
PðRB ¼ RB 2

1Þ ¼ 2 ¼ ð0:1þ 0:1Þ=2 ¼ 0:1:
2

The transformed values of other prior probabilities are repre-
sented with bold fonts shown in the body of Table 1.

Similarly, the bold fonts in the bodies of Tables 4–10 in
Appendix D are the transformed probabilities obtained using
Eq. (7).

The Bayesian inference mechanism can then be used to
conduct various types of analysis. Suppose it is observed that
there is human injury, and it is requested to inference the degree
to which this disastrous consequence was related to HOFs. This
needs to calculate posterior probability P(SC=SC1| PI=PI1), P
(KB=KB1| PI=PI1)and P(RB=RB1| PI=PI1). By using Baye-
sian Eqs. ((1)–(4)) (a detailed description is presented in
Appendix B), the relevant calculation is:

¼ SC
Pð PðSC

SC ¼ SC 1;PI ¼ PI1Þ
1jPI ¼ PI1Þ ¼ PðPI ¼ PI1Þ :

In fact:
X

Pf ðPI ¼ PI1Þ ¼ PðST ; SP;PI ¼ PI1Þ
ST ;SP

¼ PðST ¼ ST1; SP ¼ SP1;PI ¼ PI1Þ
þ PðST ¼ ST2; SP ¼ SP1;PI ¼ PI1Þ
þ PðST ¼ ST1; SP ¼ SP2;PI ¼ PI1Þ
þ PðST ¼ ST2; SP ¼ SP2;PI ¼ PI1Þ

=0.13.

The marginal probabilities of all the other nodes can be com-
puted by using Bayesian Eq. (3) (Hugin, 1998). Therefore:

PðSC ¼ SC ;PI ¼ PI
PðSC ¼ SC 1Þ

1jPI ¼ PI 1
1Þ ¼ PðPI ¼ PI1Þ

=0.1570.

Similarly P(KB=KB1| PI=PI1) and P(RB=RB1| PI=PI1) can
be computed as:

PðKB ¼ KB1jPl ¼ Pl1Þ ¼ 0:1576

PðRB ¼ RB1jPI ¼ PI1Þ ¼ 0:1204:

Comparing the posterior probabilities (P (KB=KB1|PI=PI1)=
0.1576, P (RB=RB1| PI=PI1)=0.1204, P (SC=SC1| PI=PI1)=
0.1570) with prior probabilities (P (KB=KB1)=0.10, P (RB=
RB1)=0.10, P (SC=SC1)=0.10), it can be seen that there is a
significant change in the occurrence likelihood of KB and SC
errors (increased 57% and 57.6%, respectively) when a personnel
injury consequence has been observed. This might imply that
node “Personnel Injury/Loss” is sensitive to nodes “Knowledge-
based errors” and “Safety culture based errors,” that is, once a
personnel injury/loss caused by collision of FPSO is observed, it
is more likely that knowledge-based and safety culture related
errors are the main causes during operations. Meanwhile, node
“Rule-based errors” is less sensitive to node “Personnel Injury/
Loss.” When a personnel injury/loss consequence caused by
collision of FPSO is observed, the likelihood of occurrence of
“Rule-based errors” only increased 20.4%.

The above results may suggest that in order to avoid severe
consequences, it is crucial to provide education and training that
broaden the staff's knowledge, increase their job competencies,
and develop professional potential. In addition, developing and
maintaining a safety culture is equally important. This may
involve bringing appropriate concepts, practices, and meth-
odologies of safety and integrating them into the corporate
culture of a company, so that safety is present at all levels.

To further justify the above conclusions, sensitivity analysis
will be conducted in the next section.

4.3. Sensitivity analysis

Sensitivity refers to how sensitive a model's performance is
to minor changes in the input parameters. Sensitivity analysis is
particularly useful in investigating the effects of inaccuracies or
incompleteness in the parameters of a BN model on the model's
output. The most natural way of performing sensitivity analysis
is to change the parameters' values and then, using an evidence
propagation method, monitor the effects of these changes on the
posterior probabilities. In this case study, the preliminary conclu-
sion (i.e., node “Personnel Injury/Loss” is quite sensitive to nodes
“Knowledge-based errors” and “Safety culture based errors,” not
so sensitive to node “Rule-based errors”) is drawn based on
posterior probabilities (e.g., P (KB=KB1| PI=PI1), P (RB=RB1|
PI=PI1) and P (SC=SC1| PI=PI1)). Thus one of the most impor-
tant sensitivity analysis aspects is to analyze how they change
when prior probabilities take different values.

4.3.1. Sensitivity analysis at the HOFs level
Without loss of generality, each of the fuzzy numbers (Pf (KB=

KB1), Pf (RB=RB1) and Pf (SC=SC1)) takes five different values,
ranging from (0.09, 0.10, 0.11) to (0.29, 0.30, 0.31) (see Table 3).
The sensitivity analysis results were shown in Table 3. As can be
seen in the last column of Table 3, the change between prior and
posterior probabilities clearly indicates that there is a significant
change betweenPf (KB=KB1) andP (KB=KB1|PI=PI1) (average
change is 48.40%), and also between Pf (SC=SC1) and P (SC=
SC1| PI=PI1) (average change is 47.89%). Meanwhile, the
change between Pf (RB=RB1) and P (RB=RB1| PI=PI1) (average
change is 17.74%) is less significant than those of KB and SC.
Therefore there is reason to believe that the conclusions made in
Section 4.2 are reliable.

4.3.2. Sensitivity analysis at the Trigger event level
In order to examine how robust the proposed model is, it is

essential to conduct sensitivity analysis at the key levels of the
model. To analyze Trigger event level, for example, the first step



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 95

Fig. 4. Sensitivity analyses at the Trigger event level.
to conduct sensitivity analysis is to change the likelihood of
occurrence of each trigger event and analyze the corresponding
change of posterior probabilities at the root cause level. When
conditional probability (Pf (OC=OC1|RB,KB,SC), Pf (IP= IP1|
RB,KB,SC) or Pf (MJ=MJ1|RB,KB,SC)) changes with scale
±0.05, ±0.10, and ±0.15 once at a time, for example, sensitivity
analysis will explore how posterior probabilities (P (RB=RB1|
PI=PI1), P (KB=KB1| PI=PI1) and P (SC=SC1| PI=PI1))
change in values, respectively. For each single change in param-
eter, the analysis results are shown in Tables 11–13 of Appendix
E, respectively. To give graphical demonstration, for example,
Fig. 4 is the corresponding figure in Tables 11–13 of Appendix
E. Each sub-figure in Fig. 4 shows the three curves of the
posterior probabilities. It is clear that with the increase of the
occurrence likelihood of each trigger event, the corresponding
posterior probability increases. This may imply that if there is
close correlation between the Root causes level and the Trigger
events level, the HOFs may have strong impact on the Conse-
quences level.

It can also be seen that all the curves in Fig. 4 are flat, that is,
the change of each posterior probability trend slope is very
small. It means that the posterior probability trend is not so
sensitive to the trigger event individually.

The second step to conduct sensitivity analysis is to simulate
different scenarios where all the sensitivity analysis parameters
simultaneously change with different scales. Table 14 in
Appendix E shows how P (RB=RB1| PI=PI1) P (KB=KB1|
PI=PI1) and P (SC=SC1| PI=PI1) change when Pf (OC=OC1|
RB,KB,SC) Pf (IP= IP1|RB,KB,SC) and Pf (MJ=MJ1|RB,KB,SC)
Table 3
Sensitivity analysis results between prior and posterior probabilities

Fuzzy prior Crisp prior probabilities and posterior Change
probabilities probabilities between

prior and
posterior
probabilities (%)

No Pf (RB=RB1) P(RB=RB1) P(RB=RB1|PI=PI1)

1 (0.09,0.10,0.11) 0.10 0.1204 20.40
2 (0.14,0.15,0.16) 0.15 0.1785 19.00
3 (0.19,0.20,0.21) 0.20 0.2354 17.70
4 (0.24,0.25,0.26) 0.25 0.2911 16.44
5 (0.29,0.30,0.31) 0.30 0.3455 15.17

Average change (%)= 17.74
No Pf (KB=KB1) P(KB=KB1) P(KB=KB1|PI=PI1)

1 (0.09,0.10,0.11) 0.10 0.1576 57.60
2 (0.14,0.15,0.16) 0.15 0.2291 52.73
3 (0.19,0.20,0.21) 0.20 0.2963 48.15
4 (0.24,0.25,0.26) 0.25 0.3595 43.80
5 (0.29,0.30,0.31) 0.30 0.4192 39.73

Average change (%)= 48.40
No Pf (SC=SC1) P(SC=SC1) P(SC=SC1|PI=PI1)

1 (0.09,0.10,0.11) 0.10 0.157 57.00
2 (0.14,0.15,0.16) 0.15 0.2282 52.13
3 (0.19,0.20,0.21) 0.20 0.2953 47.65
4 (0.24,0.25,0.26) 0.25 0.3584 43.36
5 (0.29,0.30,0.31) 0.30 0.418 39.33

Average change (%)= 47.89
change values. As expected, the posterior probabilities decrease
when the values of occurrence likelihood of trigger events de-
crease. There is a clear trend that the posterior probabilities of KB
and SC change faster than that of RB.

Derived from the above sensitivity analysis, it can be con-
cluded that the proposed model is reasonably robust and the
assigned probabilities are rational.

5. Conclusions

Offshore installation usually operates in a dynamic environ-
ment in which technical and human and organizational malfunc-
tions may cause possible accidents. This requires safety engineers
and risk analyzers to take HOFs into account as well as technical
aspects of design, construction, and operation. It is crucial to
model relationships between risk factors in order to address latent
failures within the causal sequence of events. The application of
the “Swiss cheese”model and BN approach to the offshore safety
assessment problem, as presented in this paper, shows its potential
to help deal with a wide range of complex risk analysis problems
of similar nature.

In particular, this paper has presented an offshore risk
analysis methodology that focuses on modeling HOFs. Based
on the literature review, a five-level framework has been pro-
posed to address latent failures within the causal sequence of
events. Guided by the five-level framework, hazardous events
are identified and arranged to each of the five levels based on
the inherent characteristics of the events. A BN model has been
investigated to fit into the proposed framework.

The case study shows that Reason's “Swiss cheese” model
and BN can be jointly used in offshore safety assessment. On
the one hand, the five-level conceptual model is enhanced by



96 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
BNs that are capable of providing graphical demonstration of
inter-relationships as well as computing numerical values of
occurrence likelihood for each failure event. Bayesian inference
mechanism makes it possible to monitor how a safety situation
changes when information flows travel forwards and backwards
within the network. On the other hand, BN modeling relies
heavily on experts' personal experiences and is therefore highly
domain specific. The “Swiss cheese”model is such a theoretical
framework based on solid behavioral theory and can be used to
provide a roadmap for BN modeling. Therefore it is believed
that the proposed framework is a promising methodology to
meet the challenges of modeling HOFs in offshore operations.

It should be noted that the techniques proposed in this paper do
not intend to replace traditional risk analysis approaches such as
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA), Event Tree Analysis (ETA), Failure
Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), and Hazard and Operability
Studies (HAZOP). In addition, BN uses probability measure to
assess uncertainty and thus requires precise information in the
form of prior and conditional probability tables, and such infor-
mation is often difficult or impossible to obtain. In particular, in
dealing with indirect relationships, even domain experts may find
that it is usually difficult to make precise judgments with crisp
numbers. In certain circumstances, a verbal expression (e.g., “very
unlikely”) of probabilistic uncertainty may be more appropriate
than numerical values. Therefore additional goals of future work
should be to investigate the possibility of merging BN and fuzzy
logic to conduct fuzzy Bayesian reasoning to facilitate offshore
risk analysis.

Acknowledgements

This project is funded by the UK Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under Grant References:
GR/S85504/01 and GR/S85498/01.

Appendix A. Fuzzy set and fuzzy number

Fuzzy sets were derived from generalizing the concept of set
theory. Fuzzy sets can be thought of as an extension of classical
sets. In a classical set or crisp set, the objects in a set are called
elements or members of the set. An element x belonging to a set A
is defined as x∈ A, an element that is not a member in A is noted
as x∉ A. A characteristic function or membership function µA(x)
is defined as an element in the universeU having a crisp value of 1
or 0. Forevery x ∈ U,

AAð Þ ¼ 1 for xaA;
x

0 for xgA:

this can also be expressed as µA(x)∈{0,1}. For the classical set or
crisp set, membership functions take a value of 1or 0. However, for
fuzzy sets, a membership function can take values in the interval
[0,1]. The range between 0 and 1 is referred to as the membership
grade or degree of membership. A fuzzy set A is defined below:

A ¼ fðx; AAðxÞÞjxaA; AAðxÞa½0; 1g
where µA(x) is a membership function belonging to the interval
[0,1].
Fuzzy numbers are very special fuzzy subsets of the real
numbers. The general definition of a fuzzy number X is a fuzzy
subset of R. If the membership function of X is denoted as µX(x),
X must meet the following conditions:

(a) The core of X is non-empty, i.e. ∃x∈R such that µX(x)=1.
(b) (b) α-cuts of X are all closed, bounded intervals.
(c) It has a bounded support, i.e. ∃N∈R such that ∀x∈R, if

|x|≥N then µX (x)=0.

Note that an α-cut of a fuzzy number X is an interval number
Xα that contains all the values of real numbers that have a mem-
bership grade inX greater than or equal to the specified value ofα.
This can be written as

X a¼ ½a; b ¼ fxaX jAX ðxÞzag:

Appendix B. Bayesian network model

A classical BN is a pair N={(V, E), P} where V and E are the
nodes and the edges of a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), respec-
tively, and P is a probability distribution over V. Discrete random
variables V={X1; X2;…Xn} are assigned to the nodes while the
edges E represent the causal probabilistic relationship among the
nodes. Each node in the network is annotated with a Conditional
Probability Table (CPT) that represents the conditional probability
of the variable given the values of its parents in the graph. The CPT
contains, for each possible value of the variable associated to a
node, all the conditional probabilities with respect to all the com-
binations of values of the variables associated with the parent
nodes. For nodes that have no parents, the corresponding table will
simply contain the prior probabilities for that variable. The prin-
ciples behind BN are Bayesian statistics and concentrate on how
probabilities are affected by both prior and posterior knowledge.

Inference in BN generally targets the calculation of some
probability of interest. Inference algorithms are based on the
following four equations:

Conditional independence
n

PðX1;X2; :::;XnÞ ¼ j PðX jParentsð iÞ : ð Þ
i¼ i X Þ 1

1

 Joint probability
P Y ¼ yj;X ¼ xi ¼ PðX ¼ xiÞ

 
dP Y ¼ yjjX ¼ xi : ð2Þ

MarginalizXation rule
 

P Y ¼ yj ¼ PðX ¼ 
xiÞdP Y ¼ yjjX ¼ 

xi : ð3Þ
i

Bayesian rule

  P ¼ iÞ
 

P X ¼ P ¼ j X x
xijY ¼ ðX x d Y y j ¼ i

yj ¼ 
P Y ¼  : ð4Þ

yj

In order to use fuzzy numbers in the above Bayesian rules, a
suitable transformation method from linguistic probabilities into
crisp probabilities must be proposed.



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 97
Appendix C. Transformation from fuzzy to crisp values

Several tools are available for fuzzy-to-crisp transformation
such as Maximum Transformation Technique (MTT), Centroid
Defuzzification Technique (CDT) and Weighted Average
Technique (WAT) (Ross, 1995). Many existing techniques are
suffering from information loss and being sensitive to single
information that dominates the fuzzy set during the process that
transforms a fuzzy number into a crisp value. This paper adopts
f-weighted valuation function (Detynieckim & Yager, 2000;
Yager, 1981) to decrease the degree of losing information and
make the analysis results more reasonable and reliable.

A generalized formulation for a class of valuations is as follows:
R 1

Valð Þ ¼ 0 AveraRgeðFaÞ  f ðaÞda
F 1 ð5Þ

0 f ðaÞda
where Val(F) is a crisp value transformed from fuzzy member-
ship function F; Fα={x|F(x)≥α}is an α-level set of F; Average
(Fα) is the average of the elements in the α-level set. f is defined
as f-weighted valuation function.

When F takes the form of trapezoidal fuzzy set, for instance,
it will have the membership function:

Fðx; ð8a; b; c; dÞÞ ¼ Trapezoidðx; ða; b; c; dÞÞ
>>> x0 a xVa
< a x b

b b V
a

¼ > 1 bbxVc
>> d x
: cbxVd

d  c
0 xNd
Appendix D. Case study data
Table 4
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (PI|ST, SP)

Table 5
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (ST|DF, MP)

Table 6
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (SP|DF, MP)
For the case of trapezoidal fuzzy set, the average of the elements
in the α-level set can be computed as follows (Yager & Filev,
1999):

AverageðF Þ ¼ ua þ va
a 2

where uα and vα are the horizontal axis values of intersection points
between α-cut line and the left-hand side and right-hand side of the
trapezoidal fuzzy set, respectively. They are calculated as follows:

ua ¼ ðb aÞ  aþ a and va ¼ d  ðd  cÞ  a:

Then Eq. (5) becomes:
R 1 uaþva

ValðFðx; ða; b; c; dÞÞÞ ¼ 0 R2  f ðaÞda
1

R 0 f ðaÞda
1 1

¼ 2 0 ½ðbþ cÞ  aþRð1 aÞ  ðaþ dÞ  f ðaÞda
1 : ð6Þ
0 f ðaÞda

Without loss of generality, let f-weighted valuation function
f (α)=1. Eq. (6) becomes:

ValðFðRx; ða; b; c; dÞÞÞ
1 1

¼ 2 0 ½ðbþ cÞ  aþR ð1 aÞ  ðaþ dÞ  
da bþ 

c
2 þ aþ 

d

1 ¼ 2 :
0 da 2

ð7Þ
This shows that the transformed value is between the middle

point of the core and the middle point of the support.
Using f-weighted valuation function, experts are able to

adjust subjective parameter values to make their judgements.



98 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100

Table 7
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (DF|OC, IP, MJ)

Table 8
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (OC|RB, KB, SC)

Table 9
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (IP|RB, KB, SC)

Table 10
Fuzzy conditional probability Pf (MJ|RB, KB, SC)

Appendix E. Results of sensitivity analysis

Table 11
Errors caused by Over Control (OC) sensitivity analysis

Table 12
Errors caused by Improper Procedure (IP) sensitivity analysis

Table 13
Errors caused by Miss Judgement (MJ) sensitivity analysis



J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100 99

Table 14
Combined sensitivity analysis on Trigger events level
References

Baker, C. C., & MaCafferty, D. B. (2005). Accident database review of human-
element concerns: what do the results mean for classification?Human factors
in ship design, safety and operation, February 23–24. London: Royal
Institution of Naval Architects.

Beard, A. N. (1989). Some ideas on a systemic approach. Fire Safety Journal,
14(3), 193−197.

Boniface, D. E., & Bea, R. G. (1996). Assessing the risks of and countermeasures
for human and organizational error. Proceeding of the Society for Naval
Architects and Marine Engineers 1996 Annual Conference.

Bryant, D. T. (1991). The Human element in shipping casualties. Report prepared
for the Department of Transport. United Kingdom: Marine Directorate.

Cormier, P.J. (1994). Towing vessel safety: analysis of congressional and coast
guard investigative response to operator involvement in casualties where a
presumption of negligence sexists.Masters thesis, University of Rhode Island.

Detynieckim, M., & Yager, R. (2000). Ranking fuzzy numbers using alpha-
weighted valuations. International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and
Knowledge-Based Systems, 8(5), 573−592.

Draper, S. (2000). Discussion on error types. Report prepared for Glasgow
Interactive Systems Team (GIST), the University of Glasgow.

Eleye-Datubo, A. G., Wall, A., Saajedi, A., & Wang, J. (2006). Enabling a
powerful marine and offshore decision-support solution through Bayesian
network technique. Risk Analysis, 26(3), 695−721.

Hayes, K. R. (1998). Bayesian statistical inference in ecological risk assessment.
Hobart, Australia: Centre for Research on Introduced Marine Pests, CSIRO.

Heckerman, D. (1997). Bayesian networks for data mining. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 1, 79−119.

Heckerman, D., & Breese, J. (1996). Causal independence for probability
assessment and inference using Bayesian networks. IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 26(6), 826−831.

Hollnagel, E. (1998). Cognitive reliability and error analysis method: CREAM.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Hugin, A/S. (1998). Hugin expert A/S. P.O. Box 8201 DK-9220 Aalborg,
Denmark. www.hugin.dk. access date: 11/10/2006.

Kang, C. W., & Golay, M. W. (1999). A Bayesian belief network - based
advisory system for operational availability focused diagnosis of complex
nuclear power systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 17(1), 21−32.

Lauritzen, S. L., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. (1988). Local computations with
probabilities on graphical structures and their application to expert systems.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 50, 157−224.

Miller, D. P., & Swain, A. D. (1987). Human error and human reliability. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.

Myllymaki, P. (2005). Advantages of Bayesian networks in data mining and
knowledge discovery.http://www.bayesit.com/docs/advantages.html access
date: 11/10/2006.

Pauchant, T. C., & Mitroff, I. I. (1992). Transforming the crisis prone
organization. San Francisco: Jossey and Bass.

Perneger, T. V. (2005). The Swiss cheese model of safety incidents: Are there
holes in the metaphor? BMC Health Services Research, 5, 71.

Perrow, C. (1984). Normal accidents: living with high risk technologies. New York:
Basic Books.

Reason, J. (1990). Human error. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ren, J., Jenkinson, I., Sii, H. S., Xu, D. L., Wang, J., & Yang, J. B. (2005).

An offshore safety assessment framework using fuzzy reasoning and
evidential synthesis approaches. Journal of Marine Engineering and
Technology, Part A, 3−16.
Ren, J., Wang, J., Jenkinson, I., Xu, D. L., & Yang, J. B. (2006). Amethodology to
model human and organizational errors on offshore risk analysis. Proceeding
of the 2006 IEEE Conference on Automation Science and Engineering,
Shanghai, China, October 7–10 (pp. 142−147).

Roberts, K. H. (1990). Some characteristics of one type of high reliability
organization. Organization Science, 1(2), 160−176.

Ross, T. J. (1995). Fuzzy logic with engineering applications. McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Rothblum, A. M. (2000). Human error and marine safety. US Coast Guard, http://

www.uscg.mil/hq/gm/risk/E-Guidelines/RBDM/html/vol4/Volume4/Gen_
Rec/HumanErr.htm. access date: 21/10/2006.

Sagan, S. D. (1994). Toward a political theory of organizational reliability.
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 2(4), 228−240.

Senders, J. W., & Moray, N. P. (1991). Human error: cause, prediction, and
reduction. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Sii,H.S.,&Ruxton,T. (2001).Asynthesis using fuzzy set theory andDempster–Shafer
based approach to compromise decision making with multiple attribute applied to
risk control options selection. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engi-
neers Part E, IMechE. Journal of Process Mechanical Engineering,212, 251−261.

Swain, A., & Guttman, H. (1983). Handbook of human reliability analysis with
emphasis on nuclear power plant applications. Washington, DC: US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission Technical Report NUREG/CR- 1278.

Transportation Safety Board of Canada. (1994). Working paper on tankers
involved in shipping accidents 1975–1992. Author.

UK Energy Institute. (2006). Top ten human factors issues facing major hazards
sites – definition, consequences, and resources. http://www.hse.gov.uk/
humanfactors/index.htm access date: 02/10/2006.

UK Jobs4U. (2006). Jobs for you careers database.http://www.connexions-
direct.com/jobs4u/index.cfm?id=1 access date: 02/10/2006.

UK P&I Club. (1992). Analysis of major claims Bermuda: The United Kingdom
Mutual Steam Ship Assurance Association (Bermuda) Limited.

U.S. Coast Guard. (2004). Prevention through people. Office of marine safety,
security and environmental protection. http://www.uscg.mil/hq/gm/nmc/ptp/
access date: 02/10/2006.

Wang, J., Yang, J. B., & Sen, P. (1995). Safety analysis and synthesis using
fuzzy set modeling and evidential reasoning. Reliability Engineering and
Systems Safety, 47(2), 103−118.

Wiegmann, D. A., & Shappell, S. A. (1997). Human factors analysis of post-
accident data: applying theoretical taxonomies of human error. International
Journal of Aviation Psychology, 7(1), 67−81.

Yager, R. R. (1981). A procedure for ordering fuzzy subsets of the unit interval.
Information Sciences, 24(1), 143−161.

Yager, R. R., & Filev, D. P (1999). On ranking fuzzy numbers using valuations.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 14(6), 1249−1268.

Zhang,G., Bai, C., Lu, J., &Zhang,C. (2004). Bayesian network based cost benefit
factor inference in e-services.Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Information Technology for Application (ICITA). Harbin, P. R. China,
January 7–10 (pp. 464−469).

Dr JunRen is a Lecturer at Liverpool JohnMooresUniversity (LJMU).He obtained
hisBSc (Mathematics) andMSc (Engineering&Management) degrees fromSichuan
University and Harbin Institute of Technology in China in 1985 and 1991,
respectively. He received his PhD from the University of Exeter in 2003. Before
joining Liverpool John Moores University as a postdoctoral research fellow in
September 2004,Dr Renworked as a research fellow at theUniversities ofNewcastle
UponTyne andExeter. DrRen's current research interests are in the areas ofmaritime
and offshore risk analysis, multi-criteria decision making, lean/agile manufacturing,
and logistics/supply chain management.



100 J. Ren et al. / Journal of Safety Research 39 (2008) 87–100
Dr. Ian Jenkinson is Director of the School of Engineering at Liverpool John

MooresUniversity (LJMU).Dr Jenkinson joinedLJMU in 1991 as a senior lecturer
in Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering having spent six years as a project
and process development engineer in the semiconductor and process industries.
During this period he worked on the application of statistical problem solving and
process improvement techniques. Dr Jenkinson became a Principal Lecturer in
1997 and in 2002 was appointedDirector of School. Dr Jenkinson'smajor research
interest is in the application of artificial intelligence to the design and optimisation
of engineering systems.

Professor JinWang is Professor ofMarine Technology at Liverpool JohnMoores
University. He received his BSc in Marine Automation from Dalian Maritime
University, P. R. China, MSc in Marine Engineering and PhD in Maritime Safety
Engineering from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne in 1989 and 1994,
respectively. He has been involved in marine and offshore research for the past
15 years with support from the EPSRC, EU, HSE, etc. His extensive publications
include over 60 refereed journal papers and 2 research books. Professor Wang's
major research interests include safety and reliability based design andoperations of
large marine and offshore systems.
DrLing Xu is a Lecturer in theManchester Business School, working in the areas of
decision analysis, decision support, and decision technology. As a co-designer, she
developed two window based assessment tools called IDS Multi-Criteria Assessor
and IDS Cost Estimator, and several web based assessment and decision support
tools. She has published a book and over 60 papers in decision analysis and support,
computerized traffic management and control, optimization, control system design,
statistical process control and statistical analysis. Her current research interests are in
theoretical and applied research in multi-criteria decision analysis under uncertainty.

Professor Jian-Bo Yang is Professor of Decision and System Sciences at
Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester, UK. He has conducted
research in multiple criteria decision analysis under uncertainty, multiple objective
optimization, intelligent decision support systems, decision modelling, and dynamic
system modelling, simulation and control for engineering and management systems.
His applied research includes design decision-making, risk and safety analysis,
production planning and scheduling, quality modelling and evaluation, supply chain
modelling and assessment, and integrated evaluation of products, systems, projects,
policies, etc. He has published widely in these areas. His research is extensively
supported by EPSRC, EC, DEFRA, etc.



ARTICLE IN PRESS

Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Reliability Engineering and System Safety
 Corr
E-m

0951-83
doi:10.1
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress
Resilience and brittleness in the offshore helicopter transportation system:
The identification of constraints and sacrifice decisions in pilots’ work
Jose O. Gomes a, David D. Woods b, Paulo V.R. Carvalho c,, Gilbert J. Huber a, Marcos R.S. Borges a

a Graduate Program in Informatics-NCE&IM, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Cidade Universitária, Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
b Ohio State University, Ohio, USA
c National Nuclear Energy Commission/Nuclear Engineering Institute, Cidade Universitária-Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro RJ 21945-970, Brazil
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 17 September 2007
Received in revised form
14 March 2008
Accepted 23 March 2008
Available online 8 April 2008

Keywords:
Resilience engineering
Offshore helicopter transportation
Sacrifice decision
Safety
esponding author. Tel.: +55 2121733835; fax
ail address: paulov@pesquisador.cnpq.br (P.V.

20/$ - see front matter & 2008 Elsevier Ltd. A
016/j.ress.2008.03.026
a b s t r a c t

Offshore transportation using helicopters is a complex socio-technical system. The resilience of this
system is an emergent property related to performance variability in many nested levels, e.g. pilot
activities, maintenance, management systems, helicopter design and so forth. This paper examines
production/safety tradeoffs in pilots’ work in the helicopter transportation system for the Campos Basin
oil fields in Brazil to understand the resilience and brittleness of this system. The study team carried out
and analyzed 63 h of interviews with pilots, co-pilots, managers and human resources personnel of
some of the main helicopter-operating companies. About 80% of the oil extracted in Brazil comes from
this Basin, a 3 h drive north of Rio de Janeiro city. The oil company hires nine helicopter-operating
companies to transport about 40,000 people who work on ships and platforms every month. The main
goal of this project is to discover how the transport system is resilient and brittle, given the workload
demands and economic pressures. The analysis uncovered goal conflicts that arise at the boundaries of
the organizations and how people in different roles cope with these conflicts, and their implications to
overall system safety and resilience.

& 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
[y] every system is stretched to operate at its capacity; as soon as there is some
improvement, for example in the form of new technology, it will be exploited
to achieve a new intensity and tempo of activity.
(
Woods D.)
1. Introduction

Offshore helicopter transportation represents one of the major
hazards in offshore oil and gas production. Helicopters carry
personnel to and from the offshore platforms, some of them
located far away from the coast, and this transport has resulted in
several accidents. In the North Sea, from 1990 to 1999, three fatal
accidents occurred with a total of 29 deaths. These accidents were
related to helideck operations and helicopter failure during flight.

This paper examines constraints, goal conflicts and production/
safety tradeoffs in the helicopter transportation system for the
Campos Basin oil fields in Brazil. The study team carried out and
analyzed 63 h of interviews with pilots, co-pilots, managers and
human resources personnel of some of the main helicopter
: +55 21 21733836.
R. Carvalho).

ll rights reserved.
companies. About 80% of the oil extracted in Brazil comes from
this Basin, located a 3 h drive north of Rio de Janeiro city. The main
oil company hires nine helicopter-operating companies to trans-
port about 40,000 people who work on ships and platforms every
month, in 6300 helicopter flights. These large numbers and the
possibility of avoiding hindsight bias and escaping from the
traditional safety approach where conflict situations are investi-
gated only after major mishaps provide the motivation for this
research project. The main goal of this project is to analyze and
discover how the transportation system is resilient and brittle,
given the workload demands and economic pressures. The
analysis uncovered goal conflicts that arise at the boundaries of
the organizations and how people in different roles cope with and
adapt to these conflicts.

The initial objective of the research program presented in this
paper was to map the constraints to which aircrew are subjected
in the course of their daily activities. Constraints are factors that in
some way hamper what is done or how things are done, and are
the object of various coping strategies. As a general rule, these
factors can contribute to undesirable system occurrences, gen-
erating micro incidents [1], but they are insufficient, in isolation,
to provoke incidents or accidents [2]. Nonetheless, the aggregate
load and/or wear and tear generated by the accumulation of many
small constraints under the faster, better, cheaper organizational



ARTICLE IN PRESS

312 J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319
environment can impact system resilience [3], and can be the
cause of great losses. Progress on safety therefore ultimately
depends on providing workers and managers with state and
change information about vulnerabilities and enabling them to
develop new means for meeting these [4].
1.1. Creating foresight in complex organizations

A basic condition for an organization to achieve high reliability
and resilience is to escape from hindsight bias, creating foresight.
Such an organization must be able to look back with clarity,
understanding and reflecting about micro incidents, work constraints
and the sensible strategies developed by people, in order to learn and
change before dramatic failures occur [3]. As already pointed out by
Dekker [5], a proactive safety management system based on
resilience engineering principles aims to help people and organiza-
tions become more sensitive to the models of risk that they adopt as
they search for and attempt to control pathways to failure [6].

The detailed investigations of the Challenger and Columbia
accidents [7] have shown how an organization like NASA, with
several layers of defense and control systems, failed to balance
safety risks with production pressure. CAIB’s investigation
uncovered classical patterns in the organizational drift toward
an accident. These patterns were defenses erode under production
pressure, past success is taken as a reason for confidence in the
future, fragmented problem-solving processes that cloud the big
picture, failure to revise assessments as new evidence accumu-
lates, and breakdowns at the boundaries of organizational units
that impede communications [3], resulting in a blind organization
unable to learn from minor incidents.

In a similar vein, Snook [8] investigating the friendly fire that
shot down two US Army Black Hawk Helicopters in the no fly zone
over northern Iraq, airspace controlled by US Air Force Airborne
Warning and Control System, identified patterns of behavior at
individual, group and organizational levels that configure an
erosion of safety barriers which he calls ‘‘A Theory of Practical Drift’’.

If we consider that the patterns described above are almost the
same throughout an entire set of major accidents in complex
sociotechnical systems, then to avoid accidents we need to create
foresight, monitoring the system risk level throughout its entire
life-cycle, identifying the sacrifice decisions, i.e., the safety/
production tradeoffs made by people during their daily work
[9,10], understanding how success is obtained under actual work
conditions, how people learn and adapt to create safety in a world
fraught with gaps, hazards and multiple conflicting goals [11].

During their daily work in complex organizations with several
layers of defense-in-depth barriers, people may not be inclined or
able to consider or reflect upon [possibly|potentially] emergent
paths to failure resulting from (locally) sensible strategies they
develop to maintain operations, deal with constraints and cope
with complexity. A resilient organization’s safety management
system should provide means to overcome this situation, allowing
it to monitor, understand, reflect and learn from these strategies,
perceive emergent safety threats, and feed these back to the
relevant actors. Failing to do that brings the organization into a
reactive (and hindsight) mode [4].
2. Materials and methods

2.1. Research setting

2.1.1. Campos Basin oil and gas exploration
The sedimentary area known as Campos Basin covers an area

of around 60,000 square miles on the northern coast of Rio de
Janeiro state. On shore, the boundaries of the basin are outlined by
the hills surrounding it. More than a thousand oil and gas wells,
38 fixed and mobile production platforms, over 2500 miles of
submarine pipelines, production of more than a million barrels of
oil and 15.7 million cubic meters of gas per day, which is around
80% and 42% of the national production, respectively, operate in
dozens of oil fields. With most of the fields 100 km or more from
shore, the production platforms have been designed as self-
contained units with their own power supplies and accommoda-
tion for staff, and the helicopter transportation system has
become the only option available, mainly due to the lower
transportation time relative to the older catamaran transportation
system. Fig. 1 shows a map of the Campos Basin oil and gas
platform locations off the Brazilian coast.

To explore different kinds of oil and gas fields and for different
types of exploration and production activities, there are many
different platform types, requiring different helicopter landing
approaches. The main types of platform used are fixed platforms,
jack-up platforms, semi-submersible platforms, drill ships, and
floating production, storage and offloading vessels (FPSO).

2.1.2. The transportation system management structure
The overall organization of the transportation system is

presented in Fig. 2. From a management perspective, each
helicopter under contract is treated as a business unit, which
requires billable hours be kept high and costs low to ensure
profitability, and pilots’ pay varies with their flight hours. The
helicopter companies work for and compete to win and keep
contracts with the oil company. The Brazilian government has an
aviation regulatory board that enforces regulations to ensure
safety including those governing maintenance and inspections.

This management system runs under the oil company’s
Program for Excellence in Transportation. This program en-
courages and supports continuous improvement efforts in air
and sea transportation services, emphasizing safety, health and
environmental issues in association with operational perfor-
mance, in order to fulfill the oil company’s safety requirements.

2.2. Methods

Resilience engineering provides the methodological framework
and cognitive task analysis (CTA) the techniques to assay the
helicopter transportation system’s complexity. CTA is an over-
arching label for a number of methods used to understand and
describe the cognitive aspects of (normal daily) work activities,
including how its practitioners view it, how they do it and how
they make sense of the events and constraints they face while
doing it [12]. These methods rely on direct access to the
practitioners or to experts or experienced workers in specific
domains from whom they seek to elicit information.

According to the resilience engineering approach, to help
people and organizations make better production/safety tradeoff
decisions in a dynamic and competitive context, it is not enough
to have a safety organization with safety barriers and engineering
safeguards: safety has to be part of everyday decision-making
through active reconsideration and revision of models of risk and
assessments of the effectiveness of countermeasures. A safety
organization must be dynamic, involved, informed and informa-
tive to be able to maintain an adequate production/safety
balance over the long run [3]. Such an organization has to have
developed ways to generate information about how the organi-
zation is actually operating and why people are operating in
this way.

Thus, rather than focusing on how work should be done (the
prescribed rules and tasks), we aim to understand how and why



ARTICLE IN PRESS

J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319 313

Fig. 1. Campos Basin map.

Oil company (Leadership)

Consulting services
(management, Research team
plans, quality) (Cognitive Task

Nine transportation companies Analysis)
(achieving better practices)

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Helicopters

Brazilian Aviation
Regulatory Board
(flight rules, accident
investigation) - ANAC

Fig. 2. Management structure of the offshore transportation system.
the work is being done in a particular way, by considering the
constraints or boundaries that shape work, and reflecting about
the underlying risk models people are using during their sacrifice
decisions. This approach recognizes the variability of the workers’
activities and that their options—what, when and how to do some
action—are afforded and constrained by the work environment.
Within these constraints, workers can generate a large variety of
work patterns including novel behaviors, innovations in work
practices that must be monitored to identify production/safety
implications. As there are different types of constraints that can
shape workers’ behavior, several dimensions of analysis are
necessary, as shown in Fig. 3.

Interview methods were used in the CTA to circumvent the
logistical complications that direct observation of pilots’ work
activities would entail. The subjects (helicopter pilots and co-
pilots and people in different organizational roles) were system-
atically interviewed. Interviews were recorded when they con-
sented (usually the case) and transcribed to facilitate data
analysis. The entire research was done with the support of expert
consultants in offshore aviation operations. The final results were
validated with pilots, companies and with service contractor (the
oil company) staff.

Before interviewing pilots, the research group, formed by
ergonomics experts and undergraduate students of Brazilian and
USA universities, carried out interviews with experts in helicopter
offshore flight safety, obtaining information about the organiza-
tion of Brazilian flight safety regulatory bodies, about the set of
regulatory rules governing this work activity, and about the



ARTICLE IN PRESS

314 J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319

The work The companies

Sociotechnical Investments,
Work constraints conditions: maintenance,
and conditions materials, upgrades etc.

workplace

Pilots’ work Management of Social policies,
activities: human resources: work organization,
innovative practices salary, procedures,
sacrifice decisions work rules training

Production results:
Work results: Contracts,

quality,
production goals, quality program,

quantity,
safety implications commercial

accidents results 

Fig. 3. Level of analysis.
contractual relations between the helicopter services clients and
the companies operating them, and between these companies and
their pilots. The research group studied these elements to gain
insight into the work environment, pilot’s tasks, operational
modes and the basic constraints on pilots’ activities before
beginning the pilot interviews proper.

Pilot and co-pilot interviews were individual or in small
groups. Initial interviews were less structured (almost a con-
versation). As the research progressed, they changed to a three-
phase approach: (1) non-structured interview, (2) an evaluation of
partial conclusions and (3) a structured interview phase with
questions raised during the analysis of previous interviews.
Through semi-structured interviews, our aim was to discover
how pilots and co-pilots collectively regulate (adapt) their
work in normal and increasing workload situations, by allowing
them to describe how they cope with system constraints and
make decisions. When answering questions like ‘‘What problems
do you have during flight preparation? or (y) during the flight?’’,
the helicopter pilots and co-pilots brought up some issues
recurrently, which were collected and classified in the analysis
phase.

The people interviewed were divided into different categories
as indicated below:

 Pilots/non-management: pilots who only fly and command
helicopters (they do not hold company management posi-
tions);


 Pilots/management: those pilots who also occupy manage-

ment positions in the companies (flight coordinator, chief pilot,
etc.);


 Pilots: people with helicopter flight licenses and approved by

the companies to fly and command helicopters, regardless of
having management roles (pilots/non-management+pilots/
management);


 Co-pilots: helicopter co-pilots. People with helicopter flight

licenses and approved by the companies to fly but not to
command helicopters. They can be (and frequently are) more
experienced and/or qualified than their fellow pilots, but they
have not met all requirements to be a pilot (e.g. work time with
the company; flight hours in the Basin), or for lack of available
pilot positions.


 Aviators: people licensed to fly helicopters, employed as pilots

or co-pilots, including managers in company positions requir-
ing an active pilot’s license (pilots+co-pilots);


 Others: people in other activities related to pilots’ work, such

as flight safety advisor, human resource management, flight
control supervisor, flight safety agent, flight operations quality
assurance, oil company offshore transportation management.

Tables 1 and 2 describe the research sample and universe
compositions in terms of the number of participants, and of
interview effort distribution through interview duration and time
allocation.
3. Results

The issues raised by most of the subjects emerged as important
points to improve system resilience and drove the focus of the
analysis. The work constraints were classified as presented below,
together with some data collected from the interviews.

3.1. Physical environment

Local weather: ‘‘(y) when it is raining or very windy (y), we
must go to an alternative airport. We must contact the [air traffic]
control all the time to know about the weather conditions, then
calculate the amount of fuel necessaryy this is stressful and
increases our workload (y)’’ ‘‘(y) sometimes the wind is coming
from the opposite direction when landing, pushing you off the
platform, that is toughy(y)’’

Bird collision risk: In many interviews the risk of collision with
many different types of birds flying around some airports
appeared. Some pilots have already identified that some birds
are more dangerous than others. ‘‘(y) the biggest problem is the
sea-gulls, because they are very stupid, they fly toward you, they
don’t go away. The black vulture sees the helicopter and goes
away, but the sea-gull doesn’t (y)’’



ARTICLE IN PRESS

J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319 315

Table 1
People interviewed: sample composition of people interviewed

Sample classes Numbers of members in each Class size as a (%) of total Class participation in its Number of elements in each class of Interview time
class sample sample super-class (%) Campos basin (HH:MM)

Total population 25 100 100 434 63:15
Aviators 20 80 80 400 55:00
Pilots 13 52 65 200 24:20

Management 6 24 46 56 12:15
Non- 7 28 54 144 12:05
management

Co-pilots 7 28 35 200 30:40
Others 5 20 20 34 8:15

Table 2
Interview time for each interviewee role

Sample classes Interview time Class interview time as a percentage Class interview time as a percentage of its Interviewee count considered Mean interview
(HH:MM) of total interview time (%) super-class interview time (%) in mean calculation duration (HH:MM)

Total population 63:15 100 100 22 2:53
Aviators 55:00 87 87 17 3:14
Pilots 24:20 38 44 10 2:26

Management 12:15 19 50 4 3:04
Non- 12:05 19 50 6 2:01
Management

Co-Pilots 30:40 48 56 7 4:23
Others 8:15 13 13 5 1:39
3.2. Operating environment

High temperatures inside the cockpit: The helicopters [flying in
Campos Basin] do not have air conditioning systems in order to
avoid ‘‘unnecessary’’ weight.

Excessive vibration: ‘‘(y) The start and also leading indicator of
equipment malfunctions is almost always vibration. If the Captain
keeps flying with the aircraft vibrating more than usual, he will do
harm to the whole helicopter. (y)’’

Distance from hangar and offices to equipment: When there are
no available spots in front of the company’s hangar, the aircraft
park at the far end of the airport, about a half mile away. The
crews have to walk up to 8 min.
3.3. Economic environment

Personal financial constraints in flight operation decisions: Part of
pilots’ pay comes from hours effectively flown. ‘‘(y) there are
some Captains that forget about Safety in order to fly more (y)’’
‘‘(y) there are cases-with older aircraft-where the pilot knows
that the aircraft should stop flying because of excessive vibration.
But he doesn’t do that and leaves the problem to be solved during
the other 15 days [when it won’t impact his income]. (y)’’

Budget constraints in maintenance operations: Conflicts among
pilots, mechanics and inspectors were reported. If the Captain
records an aircraft problem in the Aircraft Log Book, the aircraft
must be grounded until it is repaired and the repair inspected. The
company may be fined by the regulator for not grounding an
aircraft with [formally] pending maintenance issues. So some-
times pilots do not write equipment problems or malfunctions in
the Aircraft Log, and report them informally—directly to a
mechanic—and keep flying under the Minimum Equipment List
(MEL) rules while they await favorable maintenance conditions:
parts availability and inspection timing. This can go on until the
pilot cannot stand it anymore and decides to report it officially.
Besides Safety, there is also a conflict with mechanics.
3.4. Flight infrastructure issues

The visual flight plan form is inadequate: The form uses an A4
format which is problematic because it is almost twice the size of
the clipboard used during flight (A5 landscape). The form presents
both pre-flight and in-flight information, and because of the way
this information is distributed, simply folding the form is not
sufficient. While some pilots resort to transcribing from one area
of the form to another, enabling a simple fold (see Fig. 4), other
pilots fold the form in complex ways (which they refer to as
origami), and others are constantly manipulating the form during
flight. The same pilot might adopt different flight plan use
strategies, depending on the number of legs of the flight (number
of offshore platforms he/she has to land on). This problem
compounds as the number of flight legs increases, as there is
more data to represent and there are more operations to do in
less time.

Flight region maps: The maps of the offshore air space provided
by the companies do not provide the entire set of data
pilots would like to have. In order to overcome this shortcoming,
most of them buy an unofficial map—generated by specific
specialized software—produced by an individual pilot. Besides
better information presentation (colors, better design and
layout), this map has useful information not available on the
official map, such as air traffic control system and production unit
(platforms and ships) radio frequencies, and latitude and long-
itude scales.

Congested radio communications: For much of the flight from
Macaé to the oil fields the rigs are out of radio range. Near the
platforms, drill-ships and support vessels there is a large number
of aircraft trying to communicate with them and the three
embedded air traffic controllers. At this point, when communica-
tion is crucial, it turns out to be difficult to be performed. The
frequent solution used by the pilots is to call several platforms in
rapid succession, allowing only a token interval for them to reply,
and then handle the replies as they come in, at which point they
may request a shift to another radio frequency and do all the



ARTICLE IN PRESS

316 J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319

Fig. 4. A sample visual flight plan form.
talking over this alternate channel. There is a recommendation to
communicate with the platforms to exchange landing information
when 20 min out and then again when 5 min out, to allow for
safety preparations there, but as on many-legged flights the legs
can be very short, the crews anticipate the calls, which may have
to be remade should any delays occur. These two strategies
increase the number of communication exchanges in the air traffic
control system.



ARTICLE IN PRESS

J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319 317
3.5. Operations issues

Flight schedules: The interval between two consecutive flights
of a same aircraft is 30 min. Within this interval, the pilots must
walk from the helicopter to the office (depending on the landing
position it may take almost 10 min), fill in a report, check the next
flight’s information, register the flight plan, walk back to the
helicopter and do a safety briefing with the passengers. In order to
be able to accomplish all those tasks, there is almost no time left
to rest.

Lack of standardized identification of the production units: ‘‘(y)
There is identification on the deck, but it should be more visible
and easier to make out. This is a great problem with small ships.
Each ship has a different place where the identification is located,
which makes it more difficult, and you have to pay more
attention. (y)’’ ‘‘(y) I have already landed on a wrong ship.’’

Ship operations: Small ships are difficult to land on. ‘‘(y) you
land on ships and platforms, it is a security area, you have fuel
issues and there are engineers [passengers] on board. It requires
specific training. You are not landing on the top of a building.
There are limit conditions for landing on ships that we call pitch
and roll, the ship’s motion. It is very hard, even your body must
adapt to it (y)’’

Rapid changes in flight planning: ‘‘(y) I leave with everything
set up, planned, and then I go to the platform, board some
passengers, etc. And, while flying, the radio informs that there is a
flight plan change. I usually leave with everything in my mind.
I have to take off from here and then communicate on this radio
frequency, etc. When it changes I find myself completely lost. OK,
so where should I go now? What should I do? Everything changes
in your mind. In my opinion, it increases the stress level a lot (y)’’

Limited contingency fleet: ‘‘(y) there should be a rescue aircraft
because the helicopter is fast. If you come by ship the guy may die
on the way to the hospital. In one case some people suffered an
accident at 11:30 am and were rescued 1 h later. People got hurt,
not much, but hurt! They reached shore 5 h later! What if
someone were seriously injured? Someone could have died (y)’’

Pilot/co-pilot coordination: ‘‘(y) that has happened to me.
I tried to help verbally, telling the pilot how to do ity And then
the pilot got angry and said:-shut your mouth, I want to learn by
myself. That is stressful. He was not respectful and that was the
end of the flight for me. And that happened at the beginning of the
15 day tour. I began waking up in the morning and thinking to
myself: damn, I have to go and fly with that guy! Then you have to
wait for him to calm down. Meanwhile, instead of helping the
captain, one stops doing it. Then one doesn’t follow the right
procedures, doesn’t do the checklist (y)’’
4. Discussion

As a consequence of the management system structure, each
actor pursues its own goals, given its area of responsibility. Goal
conflicts arise, in particular, for helicopter pilots who have to
report potential maintenance problems but can undermine their
own pay and the helicopter company’s profitability, because the
timing of inspections delays the return to service. Both the
company and the crew earn more money when the aircraft is
flying (the oil company only pays the company for helicopter
hours actually flown, or, at least, were eligible to be flown). If a
helicopter is removed from service for maintenance, the helicop-
ter companies do not earn income and have reduced capability to
provide the contracted service. Furthermore, officially reporting
technical problems may ground the craft until the next scheduled
ANAC inspection (carried out by a contractor) which occurs every
15 days. As a result, a helicopter can be out of service extra time,
while waiting for the next inspection to release the craft for
further service.

The organizational and financial relationships create pressure
to keep helicopters flying. Under this pressure, pilots face a
dilemma when considering if a problem is major enough to
initiate the official maintenance cycle. Pilots may notice problems
that are early indicators of future in-flight failures and could
report symptoms of problems to maintenance to catch problems
before they become a safety threat (plus the substantial direct and
indirect financial losses associated with in-flight failures). But
sending the helicopter for maintenance removes it from service,
losing flight time against a demanding schedule, and the lost
flight time directly leads to lost earnings, given the financial pay
and incentive systems in place.

This is an example of a sacrifice judgment created by pressure
to be faster, better, cheaper. Discovering the sacrifice dilemma
allowed the team to investigate how the system has adapted
formally and informally to cope. Fig. 5 uses a flowchart structure
to capture the basic character of the sacrifice judgment pilots face.
The system adapts to categorize problems into two classes:
those severe enough to require going directly into the official
process, including the wait for an inspection after the repairs
have been completed, and others which are light enough to allow
being reported directly to maintenance staff for correction or
investigation.

The dilemma faced by the pilot refers to whether to report a
condition officially or not. The unofficial route may keep an
aircraft in service, while maintenance evaluates the information
or orders parts. Maintenance may even ground the aircraft. The
decision to report officially or not is the pilot’s responsibility.
However, the pilots may not be maintenance experts who can
interpret the seriousness of the technical problems.

The room to maneuver arises in part because there is a
difference between two rule sets. The regulatory rules are stricter
than the MEL rules (an aircraft-specific list of items that must be
functioning in order for an aircraft to be eligible to fly, allowed by
international regulations). Thus, although there may be problems,
reporting them may not be mandatory, and if they fall short of the
stricter rules those problems may be reported directly to
maintenance independent of the official process.

The analysis uncovered a point of brittleness that leads the
overall system to be operating riskier than any party realizes.
Identifying a specific naturally occurring sacrifice dilemma
allowed the team to critically examine concepts about resilience
and brittleness in a specific system. For example, the cases involve
cross-scale interactions as pilots and maintenance adaptations
influence and are influenced by management policy decisions in a
competitive business environment. Another issue addressed was
whether recognizing a point of brittleness helps anticipate how
the system can fail and helps define interventions. The dilemma
arises in part due to gaps at organizational boundaries. How can
multiple groups or organizations coordinate roles to ensure
resilience?
5. Conclusion

Our aim in this research was to show that it is possible to
create foresight in the multiple organizations that are dealing
with the Campos Basin helicopter offshore transportation system,
using the resilience engineering framework. Resilience engineer-
ing, using CTA, looks at how sharp-end practitioners adapt to
various types of pressures and reveals brittle points in the system.
Studying cross-level interactions inside the system indicates
situations where people are acting riskier than desirable from a
safety perspective, pushing system operation closer to safety



ARTICLE IN PRESS

318 J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319

Normal
Operation

Problem
detected

Inspections will not check if
If operations continues after Check OK operations have stopped
reporting, company can get Minimum Equipment because official report was

fined by DAC List not made.

Not OK 
Pilots are inclined to not
report officially in cases

Obliged to stop when MEL is ok and
operations maintenance will take too

long to fix the aircraft.

Maintenance Report the
problem

Official Report 

Unofficial Report 
Maintenance

Fig. 5. Flowchart of pilots’ sacrifice judgment.
boundary conditions. Creating foresight means anticipating the
weaknesses and discussing, reflecting and learning about the
brittleness of the system. We also wanted to show the differences
between the new resilience engineering paradigm that affords
proactive safety management, and the traditional industrial safety
paradigm of counting errors after accidents or mishaps, followed
by specific interventions to reduce this count, and the specific
errors identified.

Resilience engineering aims to understand the big picture by
articulating the local and situated activities and constraints with
the macro-organizational issues (understanding cross-level inter-
actions), to help people in different roles within the organizations
to make better production/safety tradeoffs.

In the Columbia accident, NASA’s safety management system
failed to understand the safety implications of the production/
safety tradeoffs people made in the context of foam strikes that
occurred in almost all shuttle flights. A similar situation occurred
in the Challenger accident related to the O-rings’ conditions. The
lack of understanding of the big picture regarding the loss of foam
during the previous launches that contributed to the tradeoffs
before and during the last Columbia mission (e.g. why was the
video of the foam loss during the launch disregarded by the
mission command?) is directly connected to the local decisions
made by people in the various organizational levels.

In our study we note that pilots’ sacrifice decisions depend on
perceiving symptoms of main flight operations (see, read,
interpret), and the MEL’s accuracy and freshness, and also on
pilot expertise in discriminating non-deferrable critical main-
tenance issues from postponable non-critical maintenance con-
cerns. This last issue is related to the offshore transportation
companies’ commercial relations with their pilots and with their
main customer, the oil company. Through understanding the big
picture it is possible to act and improve safety.

A proactive safety management should dig out early indicator
signs of brittle points without waiting for adverse events. This
may be possible through the understanding of the interplay
between local, situated (e.g. how and why people in different
organization positions are making decisions) and organizational
issues (contracts, investments, hierarchy).

Therefore, a proactive safety management system using
resilience engineering concepts should provide the organization
with effective means to balance safety and high-productivity
goals, by restructuring cross-level interactions to better balance
safety with production pressures. To do so, safety must be treated
as a core value, continuously monitoring the risk model and
sacrifice decisions that people are using in their daily activities.

Such resilient organizations must escape from hindsight bias, a
situation in which we have to wait for accidents to think about
safety. Indeed, as already pointed out by Weick [13] ‘‘safety is a
dynamic non event’’, or in other words, the actual safety level may
remain unnoticed if events do not happen. Rather than viewing
past success as an indicator of a good safety level, resilient
organizations must continue to invest in anticipating the chan-
ging potential for failure because they appreciate that their
knowledge of the gaps is imperfect and that their environment
constantly changes.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of National
Council of Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq-
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı́fico e Tecnológico),



ARTICLE IN PRESS

J.O. Gomes et al. / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 94 (2009) 311–319 319
the Fipse/Capes Program, and also thank the extraordinary
contributions of helicopter captains Jose M. Marun and Geraldo
C. Barbosa Jr.
References

[1] Carvalho PVR, Vidal M, Santos IL. Safety implications of some cultural and
cognitive issues in nuclear power plant operation. Appl Ergon 2006;37(2):
211–23.

[2] Carvalho PVR, Vidal MC, Santos IL. Nuclear power plant shift supervisor’s
decision-making during micro incidents. Int J Ind Ergon 2005;35(7):
619–44.

[3] Woods DD. Creating foresight: lessons for resilience from Columbia. In:
Starbuck WH, Farjoun M, editors. Organization at the limit: NASA and the
Columbia disaster. Malden, MA: Blackwell; 2005. p. 2005.

[4] Woods DD. Essential characteristics of resilience for organizations. In:
Hollnagel E, Woods DD, Leveson N, editors. Resilience engineering: concepts
and precepts. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate; 2006.
[5] Dekker S. Resilience engineering: chronicling the emergence of confused
consensus. In: Hollnagel E, Woods DD, Leveson N, editors. Resilience
engineering: concepts and precepts. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate; 2006.

[6] Wreathall J. Properties of resilient organizations: an initial view. In: Hollnagel
E, Woods D, Leveson N, editors. Resilience engineering: concepts and
precepts. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate; 2006. p. 2006.

[7] CAIB-Columbia Accident Investigation Board. Report, 6 vols. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office; 2003.

[8] Snook S. Friendly fire: the accidental shootdown of US black hawks over
Northern Irak. Princeton: Princeton University Press; 2000.

[9] Hollnagel E, Woods DD. Joint cognitive systems: an introduction to cognitive
systems engineering. London: Taylor & Francis; 2005.

[10] Adamski A, Westrum R. Requisite imagination. The fine art of anticipating
what might go wrong. In: Hollnagel E, editor. Handbook of cognitive task
design. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 2003. p. 193–220.

[11] Cook RI, Render ML, Woods DD. Gaps in the continuity of care and progress on
patient safety. Br Med J 2000;320:791–4.

[12] Crandall B, Klein G, Hoffman R. Working minds: a practitioners guide to
cognitive task analysis. Cambridge: The MIT Press; 2006.

[13] Weick K. The collapse of sense making in organizations: the Mann Gulch
disaster. Administrative Sci Q 1993;38(4):628–52.



84 volume V  | nº1  | 2009  | pp. 84-93

Dossier Temático
Pesquisa Empírica

Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade: estudos de 
casos de sistemas sócio-técnicos complexos no Brasil na área nuclear, aviação e 
emergência

José O. Gomes 1, Paulo V. R. Carvalho 2, David D. Woods 3, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun 4, Marcos R. S. Borges 5

1, 2, 5 Núcleo de Computação Electrónica & Instituto de Matemática gilidad en los diversos dominios abordados, mostrando aun que 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro un sistema proactivo de gerenciamiento de seguridad usando 
Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 274 conceptos de la ingeniería de resiliencia puede fornecer a las 
Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil organizaciones medios eficaces para balancear seguridad y ob-
1 joseorlando@nce.ufrj.br jetivos de alta productividad.
2 paulov@ien.gov.br
5 mborges@nce.ufrj.br Palabras-clave resiliencia, seguridad de sistemas comple-

jos, análisis del trabajo cognitivo
3 Institute for Ergonomics
Ohio State Universit, EUA
3 woods.2@osu.edu 1.	 Introdução

2 Comissão Nacional de Energia Nuclear Uma condição básica para que uma organização alcance alta 
Instituto de Engenharia Nuclear, Brasil confiabilidade e resiliência é superar as tendências reativas, 
2 paulov@ien.gov.br construindo antecipações aos problemas e a eventos inespera-

dos e não desejados. Tal organização deve ser capaz de obser-
4 Laboratoire d’Ergonomie var o passado com clareza, produzindo compreensão e reflexão 
Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, France sobre os micro-incidentes, as restrições ao trabalho dos opera-
tahar-hakim.benchekroun@cnam.fr dores e as estratégias desenvolvidas pelas pessoas de forma a 

aprender e prevenir a ocorrência de falhas nas organizações 
(Woods, 2005). A Engenharia de Resiliência tem como propósito 
permitir às pessoas e às organizações a se tornarem atentas e 

Resumen La Ingeniería de Resiliencia hay como propósi- sensíveis aos modelos de riscos que adotam de forma a contro-
to permitir a las personas y las organizaciones a se tornaren lar a origem e os caminhos das falhas (Dekker, 2006).
atentas y sensibles a los modelos de riesgos adoptados y a las 
estrategias adaptativas usadas para controlar la emergencia y Os acidentes em sistemas sócio-técnicos (Challenger, Colum-
los recorridos de fallas. Una organización resiliente debe pro- bia, colisão aérea da Gol/Legacy, queda da aeronave Black Ha-
porcionar medios para la gestión de las adaptaciones, monito- wks dos EUA no Iraque, etc.) têm mostrado como diversas orga-
reando, entendiendo, reflejando y aprendiendo a partir de estas nizações, todas com múltiplas camadas de defesas e sistema de 
estrategias, identificando amenazas y riesgos à la seguridad. controle, não conseguiram balancear os riscos da segurança 
Fallar en aplicar eses principios lleva la organización a actuar com a pressão produtiva. Esses acidentes evidenciaram pa-
en un modo reactivo, en una condición de lucha constante con- drões clássicos de deriva das organizações em direção a uma 
tra el peligro. Los estudios de caso presentados en este artigo operação mais eficiente e menos segura, produzindo acidentes. 
procuran aplicar los conceptos y métodos de la ingeniaría de Alguns desses padrões são: enfatizar mais a produção que a se-
resiliencia, así como relaciónalos con el concepto de sustenta- gurança, considerando os êxitos do passado como razão de 
bilidad de los sistemas socio-técnicos complejos, en un país de confiança no futuro; processos fragmentados de resolução de 
desarrollo industrial reciente que es el caso de Brasil. Los casos problemas; falta de reavaliação das estimativas quando novas 
abordan los dominios nuclear, aviación y emergencia y utilizan evidências se acumulam; perturbações/interrupções dos fluxos 
la Análisis del Trabajo Cognitivo (ATC) como base metodológica. de informação entre departamentos da organização dificultan-
Los estudios permitirán identificar factores de resiliencia y fra- do a comunicação, resultando em organizações cegas e incapa-



Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges 85

zes de aprender com os incidentes de menor importância (CAIB, Também foram estudados os conflitos entre metas e objetivos 
2003; Snook, 2000; Carvalho, Gomes, Huber & Vidal, 2009). no sistema de transporte por helicópteros para as plataformas 

de petróleo na Bacia de Campos no Brasil, para descobrir o quão 
Se considerarmos que os padrões descritos acima são quase os resiliente e frágil é o sistema de transporte por helicóptero, 
mesmos para todo um conjunto de acidentes maiores em siste- dada as demandas de produção e pressões econômicas vigen-
mas sócio-técnicos complexos, então, para poder evitar tais aci- tes. A análise permitiu conhecer conflitos entre meta e objetivos 
dentes, necessita-se criar a antecipação (foresight), monitoran- que se apresentaram nas fronteiras do funcionamento entre as 
do o nível de risco do sistema através de seu ciclo vital completo diversas organizações envolvidas e como as pessoas, atuando 
e identificando os sacrifícios na tomada de decisões (sacrifice em seus diversos papéis, adaptam-se a esses conflitos, e as im-
decisions), isto é, as compensações da segurança/produção plicações destas adaptações para segurança e resiliência do 
são feitas pelas pessoas todos os dias. Além disso, precisamos sistema como um todo (Gomes et al., 2009).
entender como se obtém êxito frente às restrições à atividade 
de trabalho (e se esse êxito poderia conduzir a maiores falhas) O terceiro estudo caso relacionado à pesquisa tem por objetivo 
e como as pessoas aprendem e se adaptam para garantir a se- analisar a simulação da resposta a uma emergência nuclear sob 
gurança em um mundo pleno de lacunas, perigos e conflitos de uma abordagem da ergonomia cognitiva e engenharia de resili-
metas e objetivos (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005; Adamski & Wes- ência. Esta simulação acontece anualmente como forma de trei-
trum, 2003; Cook, Render & Woods,2000). namento para responder eficazmente a situações e eventos li-

gados às emergências nucleares. Ela se desenvolve na cidade 
Durante o seu trabalho diário, as pessoas atuam em diversos de Angra dos Reis, em cujo município está localizado o parque 
papéis dentro de uma organização complexa com várias cama- nuclear brasileiro de produção de energia e congrega 26 organi-
das de barreiras de defesa em profundidade. Neste cenário zações privadas e públicas, nos níveis federal, estadual e muni-
complexo, as pessoas não estão totalmente conscientes dos cipal (Costa et al., 2008).
potenciais caminhos de falhas que podem emergir conforme 
elas desenvolvem as estratégias locais para face frente às res- Por fim, acreditamos que a resiliência dos sistemas sócio-técni-
trições e à complexidade do sistema. A multiplicidade de tare- cos complexos é uma condição, entre outras, para manter a sus-
fas para manter uma operação eficiente e sem falhas e a conse- tentabilidade das organizações. Para isto, o uso dos conceitos, 
qüente sobrecarga cognitiva, normalmente impede às pessoas da metodologia e das ferramentas que fazem parte da Análise 
de refletir sobre o resultado de suas ações e aprender com elas. Ergonômica do Trabalho (AET), é uma condição sine qua non 
Uma organização resiliente deve proporcionar meios para su- para compreender as organizações identificando resiliência e 
perar esta situação, monitorando, entendendo, refletindo e fragilidades que interferem no funcionamento dos sistemas 
aprendendo a partir dessas estratégias, identificando ameaças produtivos complexos. O conceito de desenvolvimento susten-
e riscos à segurança. Falhar em aplicar esses princípios leva a tável dos sistemas de trabalho empregado neste artigo se ba-
organização a atuar em um modo reativo (e hindsight), numa seia, em parte, na resiliência do mesmo, tanto ao nível de proje-
condição de luta constante contra o perigo (Woods, 2005). to quanto de funcionamento. Portanto, desenvolver a resiliência, 

compreendendo o nível de projeto e operação, é uma condição 
Os estudos de caso apresentados neste artigo procuram apli- necessária e fundamental. Por resiliência de projeto, compreen-
car os conceitos e métodos de engenharia resiliência, bem demos a atividade desenvolvida na concepção dos sistemas 
como relacioná-los com o conceito de sustentabilidade dos sis- produtivos complexos cujo processo permite em suas várias 
temas sócio-técnicos complexos, num país de desenvolvimen- etapas realizar atividades de simulação que permitam, por 
to industrial recente que é o caso do Brasil. Os casos abordam exemplo, visualizar as atividades futuras de funcionamentos, 
os domínios nuclear, aviação e emergência. Em uma Usina de identificando gaps e bugs na relação entre tecnologia, pessoas 
Energia Nuclear, foram analisados micro incidentes durante a e organizações (Adamski & Westrum, 2003). E por resiliência de 
operação da planta. As análises mostram as ações de controle funcionamento ou operação compreendemos a capacidade con-
dos operadores usadas para solucionar pequenos conflitos que tinua e ininterrupta do sistema em adaptar-se à variabilidade de 
se apresentaram no nível operacional, e como eles organiza- situações e sempre se antecipar às situações não desejáveis 
ram os recursos requeridos para sua ação/cognição, ou seja, o para garantir uma confiabilidade e eficiência permanentes.
material, a parte social, e características culturais do ambien-
te. O quadro (framework) de micro incidente permite uma visão 
antecipada das ações de controle dos operadores, permitindo 2.	 Metodologia
a análise sistêmica e o pensamento crítico sobre a possibilida-
de, de que essas situações problemáticas relativamente pe- A Engenharia de Resiliência proporciona uma estrutura metodo-
quenas nas camadas fracamente acopladas do sistema, pos- lógica e a Análise de Tarefas Cognitivas (CTA – Cognitive Task 
sam conduzir a resultados negativos em algum momento no Analysis), as técnicas para analisar o trabalho em sistemas com-
futuro (Carvalho, Santos, Gomes & Borges, 2008). plexos, utilizadas nos diversos estudos de casos descritos arti-

go: micro-incidentes em sala de controle de uma usina nuclear, 
sistema de transporte por helicópteros e a simulação de resposta 



86 Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges

à emergência nuclear. A CTA é um nome geral que engloba um 
conjunto de métodos e técnicas usados para compreender e des- O trabalho As organizações

crever os aspectos cognitivos das atividades diárias de trabalho, 
incluindo como os profissionais vêem o trabalho que fazem, e 
como eles dão sentido aos eventos e restrições que encontram Condições

Investimentos, 
Condições e restrições sociotécnicas:

durante o desempenho de suas atividades (Crandall, Klein & Ho- manuntenção, 
ao trabalho materiais, postos de

melhorias, etc.
ffman, 2006). Esses métodos dependem de um acesso direto aos trabalho, etc.

profissionais ou especialistas ou trabalhadores experientes em 
Políticas sociais, 

domínios específicos dos quais se busca extrair informações. Actividade de trabalho, 
Gerência de RH: organização

práticas inovativas e 
regras, salário, etc. do trabalho,

decisões de sacrifício
treinamento

De acordo com a abordagem da engenharia de resiliência, para 
permitir que as pessoas e organizações possam tomar melhores 

Resultados trabalho: Contratos, resul-
decisões no tradeoff produção versus segurança num contexto Resultados produção: 

objectivos de produção tados comerciais, 
quantidade, qualidade, 

dinâmico e competitivo, não é suficiente a organização possuir e implicações programa de 
segurança, etc.

de segurança qualidade
apenas um sistema de gestão de riscos, com barreias de segu-
rança e uma engenharia voltada para a proteção contra eventos 
adversos. Em organizações resilientes, a segurança deve ser fa-
zer parte das tomadas de decisão diárias, por meio de uma revi- Figura 1: As diversas dimensões da análise

são ativa dos modelos de risco e avaliação da efetividade das 
ações corretivas Uma organização segura precisa ser dinâmica, Nos casos que serão apresentados a seguir, diversos métodos e 
engajada, informada e informativa para ser capaz de manter um técnicas da Análise de Tarefas/Atividades Cognitivas foram usa-
balanço de produção versus segurança adequado em um longo dos tanto na fase de coleta quanto de análise e apresentação 
período de tempo (Woods, 2005). Desta maneira, uma organiza- dos dados, conforme as características de cada ambiente de 
ção para se tornar resiliente precisa desenvolver maneiras de trabalho e os objetivos específicos de cada um dos estudos.
gerar informações sobre como a organização está realimente 
operando e por que as pessoas estão operando desta maneira.

3.	 Análise dos Casos: nuclear, aviação e 		
Assim, em vez de se focar em como o trabalho deve ser feito (as 	 emergência
regras prescritas e tarefas), nós nos voltamos em compreender 
como e porque o trabalho está sendo feito de uma forma parti- 3.1.	 Tomada de decisões operacionais em usinas nucleares
cular, considerando as restrições ou limites que conformam o 
trabalho, e analisando os modelos de risco que as pessoas es- Neste estudo o objetivo foi observar como os operadores de 
tão usando durante suas decisões de sacrifício. Esta abordagem sala de controle de usinas nucleares lidam com situações no-
identifica a variabilidade das atividades dos trabalhadores e vas, ou pelo menos não esperadas, as quais definimos como 
como suas opções – o quê, quando e como agir – são permitidas situações de micro incidentes (Carvalho et al., 2008; Carvalho, 
e/ou ajudadas ou restringidas pelo ambiente de trabalho. Em Vidal & Carvalho, 2007; Carvalho, Santos & Vidal, 2006) de 
meio a estas condições, os trabalhadores podem gerar uma modo a avaliar como os operadores tomam decisões (tradeoffs 
grande variedade de padrões de trabalho, incluindo comporta- segurança versus produção) e usam o suporte dos procedimen-
mentos desconhecidos e inovações nas práticas de trabalho tos operacionais.
que precisam ser monitoradas para identificar as implicações 
âmbito da relação produção versus segurança. Como há dife- A atividade de trabalho dos operadores foi gravada mediante o 
rentes tipos de restrições que podem moldar o comportamento uso de equipamentos de áudio e vídeo. Conforme a abordagem 
dos trabalhadores, várias dimensões de análise são necessá- de estudos em situação real de trabalho da ergonomia, os ope-
rias, como mostradas na figura 1. radores receberam só uma instrução: comportar-se de forma 
 tão normal quanto possível, apesar dos equipamentos de gra-

vação e da presença dos analistas na sala de controle. Quatro 
ergonomistas observaram o trabalho dos operadores na sala de 
controle e coletaram os dados para o estudo. O procedimento 
consistiu de 3 fases: 1) Coleta de dados, 2) Preparação dos da-
dos e 3) Análise. Para compreendermos as decisões dos opera-
dores ao lidar com micro-incidentes, o conteúdo das gravações 
de áudio e vídeo do trabalho dos operadores foi codificado em 
diversas categorias conforme a tabela 1.

Seguindo o método proposto 15 micro incidentes (Mis) foram 
analisados, sendo 10 durante a parada de usina, 4 durante a 



Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges 87

partida e 1 durante o treinamento em simulador. Dentre estes boração e modificação dos procedimentos. Enquanto a estrutura 
MIs observamos que procedimentos foram seguidos em apenas legal adota como um valor seguir procedimentos a risca – esta-
3 ocasiões, sendo que em uma delas durante o treinamento em belecendo punições em caso de não cumprimento de procedi-
simulador, seguir o procedimento a risca sem considerar o esta- mentos – as restrições técnicas, organizacionais e culturais vão 
do geral da planta foi o que engendrou o micro incidente, con- de encontro a este objetivo.
forme observação do próprio instrutor do simulador. Em diver-
sas ocasiões, operadores, mais especificamente Supervisores A concepção procedural do trabalho dos operadores, baseada 
de Turno, tiveram que arbitrar situações onde procedimentos em instruções detalhadas que se supõe sejam seguidas à risca 
geravam conflitos, como nos casos de liberação/suspensão de chamada por Perin (2005) de “cultura do controle”, possui limita-
testes nos quais os procedimentos de teste eram incompatíveis ções em função da dificuldade dos projetistas de preverem todas 
com a programação dos testes: a condição operacional da usina as ações que serão efetivamente necessárias em situações novas 
prevista no procedimento de teste não era compatível com o e devido às restrições impostas pelo contexto de trabalho.
momento planejado para sua realização. Nestes casos o Super-
visor tentou por duas vezes realizar os testes (contrariando um Esta situação foi observada no uso do procedimento de emer-
dos procedimentos) e teve de suspendê-los em função de difi- gência durante o treinamento em simulador. Este procedimento 
culdades operacionais. manda reduzir a pressão até 80 bar e não considera inteiramente 

as variabilidades do processo, gerando dúvidas inclusive quanto 
Categoria Definição

a pertinência da instrução e forma de utilização. Quando ques-
Ponto de ruptura da operação “normal” motivando decisão que gera 
um curso de ação (CuA) diferente do previsto no procedimento. Por tionados pelo instrutor o motivo pelo qual estariam seguindo 

Ponto de ruptura - Decisão
exemplo, usar um atalho, parar um processo, esperar para ver como o uma instrução às cegas, o que estaria agravando o acidente si-
micro incidente evolui, enviar um operador ao campo etc. 

Informação que conduz a uma avaliação alterada que requer uma mulado, os operadores alegaram questões estruturais/legais, 
Entrada decisão. Identificação de quando o tópico relativo à decisão foi como a obrigatoriedade de seguir os procedimentos à risca.

introduzido e que fatores novos causaram a mudança. 

Instigado por Quem identificou a necessidade de tentar resolver um problema. 
Diversos micro incidentes analisados mostraram situações 

Pessoal envolvido desde a identificação do problema/ auxílio na 
Envolvidos

resolução até a tomada de decisão. onde os operadores, em função da situação, das metas e objeti-
O objetivo da decisão. Verbalmente declarado ou deduzido pelo vos, das pressões, de seu estado físico e emocional, e também 

Meta investigador. Metas incluem parar um processo, partir um sistema, 
realizar testes etc. em face de dificuldades inerentes às postulações e incongruên-
Baseada na meta. Por exemplo, a meta pode ser a parada de um cias contidas nos próprios procedimentos, lançam mão de es-
processo, a razão era minimizar o dano potencial da evolução do 

Razão 
micro incidente. Pode ser declarado mas, freqüentemente, tem que tratégias cognitivas baseadas em regras condição-ação implíci-
ser deduzido. 

tas, tentativa e erro, analogias para tomar decisões e flexibilizar 
Opções disponíveis como meios alternativos de solucionar o proble-
ma identificado. Dentre essas opções podem estar não fazer nada ou procedimentos. Estas condições obrigam os operadores a reali-
esperar. As conseqüências se referem ao que aconteceria se estas 

Opções e conseqüências 
opções fossem selecionadas em vez do CuA escolhido. Mais uma vez, zar modificações ad hoc em procedimentos (não cumprimento 
opções e consequências podem ser declaradas, mas algumas vezes 
precisam ser deduzidas. de requisitos escritos) durante a operação, apesar da evidente 
O tempo decorrido desde quando o problema foi identificado até a ansiedade que este tipo decisão provoca em função da cultura 

Tempo 
tomada de decisão. de controle da organização, como no exemplo dos micro inci-

Tabela 1: Esquema de codificação dentes relacionados a liberação/suspensão de testes. Micro in-
cidentes durantes os testes emergiram da relação entre a ne-

Resumimos a seguir os principais resultados do estudo: cessidade do Supervisor seguir o planejamento das tarefas 
(pressão da produção) com requisitos contidos nos procedi-

	 • Os operadores de sala de controle resolvem proble- mentos de testes (realizar testes com o reator no estado sub 
mas gerados por micro incidentes e tomam suas decisões basi- crítico frio, que não era o estado do reator no momento planeja-
camente a partir de reconhecimento de padrões e de regras do para os testes), Assim, por duas vezes o Supervisor toma a 
condição-ação implícitas. Estas regras parecem ser derivadas decisão de não seguir o requisito do procedimento de teste (re-
muito mais da experiência e treinamento (conhecimento tácito) ator sub crítico frio) e libera os testes conforme o plano de tare-
do que dos procedimentos operacionais padrão. fas, os quais tiveram que ser suspensos após pressões do de-
	 • Os problemas são resolvidos em série à medida que vão mais operadores em função de problemas no processo de 
emergindo, quando há alguma mudança observável no estado do resfriamento da planta. O uso de estratégias baseadas em ana-
sistema. Há pouca evidência de geração e comparação de opções. logias (“subir a potência em 5% para ver se pára a oscilação”), 
	 • As restrições do ambiente (técnicas, sociais, cultu- sem o suporte necessário para saber se a estratégia poderia 
rais) limitam severamente a possibilidade de antecipação e a afetar a segurança, permitem indicar que tipo de modelo local 
quantidade de opções disponíveis. de risco vem sendo adotado por cada tipo de operador (supervi-

sores, operadores da planta).
Os procedimentos escritos, de diversos tipos, são a principal 
fonte de auxílio com que contam os operadores das usinas para Por outro lado, é importante observar que o modelo local de 
realizar as tarefas de operação. Entretanto, os resultados do es- risco é reforçado pelos sucessos obtidos nestas flexibilizações 
tudo apontam problemas em relação ao modo de utilização, ela- trazendo como conseqüência natural uma aumento da confian-



88 Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges

ça neste tipo de estratégia, que tende a ser cada mais utilizada, serviço estipulado no contrato. Além disso, relatórios oficiais 
mas que necessariamente demandas novas formas de abordar de problemas técnicos podem deixar fora de serviço a aeronave 
este contexto fundamental para a segurança dos processos, tal até a próxima inspeção da Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil 
como apontada pela engenharia de resiliência. (ANAC) (realizada pelo contratante) que ocorre a cada 15 dias. 

Como resultado, o helicóptero pode ficar fora do serviço por 
3.2.	 Sistema de Transporte por Helicópteros na Bacia de Campos mais tempo até ser realizada a inspeção para liberar o equipa-

mento para serviço.
Esta pesquisa, baseada na análise da atividade cognitiva dos 
pilotos que voam na Bacia de Campos a serviço da Petrobrás, Assim, as relações organizacionais e financeiras criam pressão 
busca identificar os fatores contribuintes e os contrantes que para manter os helicópteros voando. Sob essa pressão, pilotos 
interferem na atividade dos pilotos, cujas consequências afe- encaram um dilema para decidir se um problema técnico é sufi-
tam o desempenho operacional do sistema de transporte como ciente ou não para iniciar um ciclo oficial de manutenção. Os 
um todo e, consequentemente, a segurança de vôo. Contrantes pilotos até reconhecem indícios de problemas (vibração, ruído 
são fatores que de alguma maneira dificultam o que é feito e, etc.), que seriam indicadores prematuros de possíveis falhas no 
principalmente, a forma prescrita de como as coisas deveriam equipamento, e poderiam reportar à manutenção antes que es-
ser feitas, sendo então determinantes da criação de diversas tes problemas se tornem uma ameaça à segurança de vôo. En-
estratégias adaptativas por parte dos agentes. Como regra ge- tretanto, enviar o helicóptero para a manutenção retira-o de 
ral, estas estratégias adaptativas podem tanto facilitar o traba- serviço, perdendo-se tempo de vôo que contraria um calendário 
lho das pessoas quanto contribuir para ocorrências não deseja- exigente e uma demanda sempre crescente pelo serviço, redu-
das no sistema. Normalmente, elas são insuficientes, de modo zindo as receitas de pilotos e empresas.
isolado, para provocar incidentes ou acidentes e, portanto, per-
manecem invisíveis nas análises mais tradicionais, baseadas Esta situação é um exemplo de decisão de sacrifício alicerçada 
em relatórios de perigo, análise de acidentes, inspeções de re- na pressão de ser mais rápido, melhor e mais barato (faster, 
guladores etc. (Carvalho et al., 2006). Entretanto, a carga de better, and cheaper). A descoberta desse dilema no transporte 
trabalho agregada, ou o desgaste gerado pela acumulação de offshore na Bacia de Campos permitiu à equipe investigar como 
diversos “pequenos” desvios nos modos de trabalho sob as o sistema foi adaptado a lidar formalmente e informalmente 
pressões de um ambiente organizacional que visa maior produ- com estas pressões. A figura 2 utiliza uma estrutura de fluxo 
ção com menor custo, pode se constituir num solo fértil para a para capturar a decisão de sacrifício dos pilotos. O sistema 
emergência de grandes perdas, impactando na resiliência e se- adapta e caracteriza os problemas em duas classes: aqueles se-
gurança do sistema (Woods, 2005; Woods, 2006). veros o suficiente para requererem o processo oficial, incluindo 
Métodos baseados em entrevistas foram utilizados, devido as a espera da inspeção após o reparo já ter sido feito, e outras que 
diversas dificuldades que a observação direta do trabalho dos são leves o bastante (de acordo com a experiência do piloto) 
pilotos traria ao projeto de pesquisa. Os sujeitos da pesquisa (pi- para serem reportadas diretamente (mas informalmente) ao 
lotos e co-pilotos de helicóptero) foram sistematicamente entre- funcionário de manutenção ou de investigação.
vistados no aeroporto quando não estavam voando. As entrevis-
tas foram gravadas com o consentimento dos entrevistados e O dilema enfrentado pelos pilotos refere-se a reportar oficial-
posteriormente transcritas para a realização da análise. A pes- mente uma condição ou não. A segunda opção permite manter a 
quisa foi coordenada por dois ergonomistas e contou o auxílio de aeronave em serviço (minimizando perdas financeiras relativas 
5 estudantes de graduação na sua realização. Além disso, todo o ao tempo de vôo), enquanto a manutenção avalia a informação 
processo contou com a participação de especialistas em segu- (gravidade da situação), ou encomenda peças. A manutenção 
rança de vôo e aviação offshore. Os resultados finais foram vali- pode até manter o helicóptero em terra. A decisão de reportar 
dados junto aos pilotos e co-pilotos das diversas companhias. oficialmente ou não é sempre do piloto. Entretanto, as pressões 

contratuais polarizam o processo decisório dos pilotos que é 
Como conseqüência da estrutura do sistema de gestão, cada agravado pela dificuldade técnica que os pilotos podem ter (em 
ator persegue seus próprios objetivos, em função das suas áre- função de sua experiência, formação tempo de vôo etc.) para 
as de responsabilidade. Conflitos de interesses crescem, em interpretar e avaliar a gravidade dos problemas técnicos.
particular, no caso dos pilotos de helicóptero que devem repor-
tar problemas de manutenção, os quais podem prejudicar seus Este espaço de manobra surge, em parte, porque há uma dife-
próprios ganhos e a rentabilidade da empresa, pois o tempo de rença entre dois conjuntos de regras. As regras regulatórias são 
inspeção e paradas para manutenção diminuem o tempo efeti- mais estritas do que aquelas da Relação de Equipamentos Míni-
vamente voada pelo qual ambos, pilotos e empresas, são re- mos (REM), que é uma lista de itens específicos sem os quais 
munerados (a estrutura contratual atualmente em vigor no uma aeronaves não pode voar, regulado por normas internacio-
transporte offshore no Brasil privilegia as horas voadas pelas nais. Portanto, apesar de existirem problemas, reportá-los pode 
aeronaves e/ou o número de aeronaves que estão disponíveis não ser obrigatório e, se eles ficam aquém das regras mais rígi-
para vôo). Caso um helicóptero seja retirado para manutenção, das, podem ser reportados diretamente para a área de manu-
a empresa não gera receitas e reduz a capacidade de fornecer o tenção, sem passar pelo processo oficial de relatório.



Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges 89

A análise permitiu identificar que a decisão de sacrifício dos pi- momento em que respondiam a múltiplos cenários de um aci-
lotos depende, por uma lado da capacidade do piloto para per- dente nuclear simulado. Esta simulação fez parte de uma ativi-
ceber de sintomas fracos de problemas durante as diversas fa- dade nacional de treinamento de resposta a emergências em 
ses de um vôo, e por outro lado ter a expertise necessária para, uma usina nuclear. Múltiplas técnicas de ATC para coleta, análise 
a partir dos sintomas percebidos, discriminar situações de ma- e representação dos dados (Crandall et al., 2006) foram usadas 
nutenção adiáveis daquelas críticas e inadiáveis. de modo a obtermos um melhor entendimento das dimensões 

cognitivas da atividade e identificar padrões de coordenação de 
Outro ponto relevante refere-se a relações comerciais da compa- equipe e gestão de crises surgidos no treinamento simulado. 
nhia de helicópteros com os seus pilotos e com o principal clien- Este estudo foi coordenado por dois ergonomistas e contou com 
te que é a companhia de petróleo. Acreditamos que um entendi- a participação de alunos de graduação e pós-graduação.
mento mais global do contexto pode permitir agir na melhoria da 
segurança como um todo. Um sistema de segurança proativo As atividades das pessoas na sala envolvidas na simulação Pla-
deve ser capaz de, através de indicadores, emitir sinais relativos no de Emergência Externo (PEE) foram representadas ao longo 
aos pontos frágeis do sistema, antecipando-se aos eventos ad- da linha temporal, apresentada na figura 3. Na representação, 
versos, através de uma monitoração contínua e constante. Isto para cada minuto da simulação existe uma linha com diversos 
pode ser possível a partir do conhecimento e da interpolação en- campos a serem preenchidos. Por exemplo, entre 9:45 e 9:46 da 
tre aspectos locais/situados e os aspectos organizacionais des- simulação, atividades envolvendo Perguntas, Pedido de Silên-
te sistema complexo, que envolve várias organizações dispersas cio e Chegada de pessoas foram observadas. Os campos corres-
espacialmente e temporalmente, cujas sincronizações de objeti- pondentes a cada uma dessas subcategorias e ao horário 9:45 
vos e metas revelam-se frágeis em determinados contextos e seriam, então, marcados.
resilientes em outros.

Para representar as diversas atividades das equipes, foram 
criadas categorias de ações. Categorias comuns foram rotula-
das para expressar momentos chave da simulação, assim como, 
para simplificar a representação para análise. Essas categorias 
estão listadas na tabela 2.

Categorias Acções Descrição

Conversa em grupos pequenos Pessoas falando em grupos pequenos

Mensagem da planta/nova 
Verificar lista OK Novos eventos, cenários, informações

informação
de equipamentos Explicação de detalhes/conhe- Explicações técnicas para dividir 

mínimos - MEL cimento específico conhecimento
Comunicação

Comunicação com o exterior da sala 
Comunicação externa (celular)

de emergência

Repetição de informações Resumos para manter o
conhecidas ambiente em acordo

Pergunta Dúvidas dos participantes

Comando para os membros Ordens dadas pelo coodenador ou 
da equipe outro líder

Decisões relativas ao que ser feito 
Aprovação e tomada de decisão

em cada caso
Relatório Ordem/

oficial Comando Pedido de Silêncio Evitar a dispersão do grupo
Pilotos tendem a 

Reportar o 
Pedido de Informação Evitar informações confusas

problema
Recursos tecnológicos

Problemas tecnológicos
Físico/ inadequados

Tecnologia Substituições, almoço,
Chegada de pessoas

chegada de pessoas
Relatório

não-oficial Tabela 2: Categorias de ações e descrições

Figura 2: Diagrama de fluxo do processo de tomada de decisão dos pilotos.
Para analisar os dados mais precisamente, foram empregadas 
cores para cada agente participante da simulação. Enquanto de-

3.3.	 Analise Ergonômica da Simulação da Resposta à veriam existir 26 cores na linha do tempo completa, devido às 
Emergência Nuclear limitações do tempo de gravação, apenas as ações dos indivídu-

os que aparecem no vídeo foram representadas na linha do tem-
Este trabalho apresenta resultados de uma análise do trabalho po. A figura 3 mostra um exemplo da estrutura da linha do tem-
cognitivo (ATC) de uma simulação de acidente nuclear. Registros po de 10:30 até 11:00.
audiovisuais foram coletados de uma equipe de sala de emer-
gência composta por indivíduos de 26 agências diferentes no 



90 Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges

Para efeito de análise e compreensão, comentários sobre algu- 26 diferentes agências revela a diversidade do grupo. Todavia, 
mas ações específicas e de grande relevância foram feitos nas Hong e Page (2004) consideram que, grupos especializados na 
caixas que possuem uma marca vermelha à direita, no topo. Fo- resolução de problemas com integrantes dotados de habilida-
ram alocados números para cada seqüência de ações que pos- des individuais podem superar um time de especialistas.
suíam a mesma origem, i.e. uma nova mensagem chega para a 
equipe. Essa nova mensagem corresponde à serie 24 na se- 3 - A equipe de resposta às emergências apresenta alguns bons 
quência de ações observadas. Então a série 24 será escrita na padrões de organização. Klein (2001) define organização como 
caixa dessa ação. Em seguida a essa mensagem, irão ocorrer a tentativa por parte de múltiplas entidades em atuar juntas 
ações envolvendo explicação de detalhes, perguntas e tomada com o intuito de alcançar um objetivo comum, através da reali-
de decisão. Cada uma dessas ações, nessa mesma sequência, zação de um plano compreendido por todos. No estudo da PEE, 
pertencerá a serie 24. Quando um novo evento ocorrer, a série os membros que compõem a equipe trazem seus próprios pla-
25 será dada à primeira ação desse evento. nos e roteiros para a resposta à emergência. Para demandas 

mais complexas, faz mais sentido ter planos modulares ao invés 
de planos completos e complexos (idem).

4 - Há, também, um mecanismo de reorganização que decorre 
das atividades da equipe de resposta às emergências. Quan-
do surge um incidente que demanda de competências distin-
tas, os membros são requisitados a avaliar a situação e a to-
mar decisões em domínios específicos, se reunindo em 
pequenos grupos para discutir sobre o tema. Um exemplo dis-

10:30 16 16

10:31 16 so foi um caso ocorrido numa situação real não planejada no 
10:32 Protocolo de Simulação. Ativistas ambientais estavam blo-
10:33 17 17 17

10:34 queando estradas perto da área da Central de Energia Nucle-
10:35
10:36 ar. Para solucionar o problema, representantes das polícias 
10:37 (rodoviária, investigativa e militar) se juntaram para discutir 
10:38
10:39 sobre o problema e tomar decisões. Após isso, cada um deles 
10:40 18 18

10:41 19 19 contatou suas agências para agir sob coordenação e os ativis-
10:42 19 tas foram controlados poucos minutos depois. Klein (2001) 
10:43
10:44 20 20 classifica esses mecanismos de organização como novas fon-
10:45 21

tes de valor marginal para as operações.
10:46
10:47 21 21

10:48
10:49 22 22 A Fragilidade de um sistema são aspectos que tornam o funcio-
10:50 22

23 namento do sistema mais perigoso (com mais chances de pro-
10:51
10:52 24 24 23 duzir saídas inadequadas). Identificar fontes de fragilidade 
10:53 24 24 24 24

10:54 24 pode ajudar a antecipar como o sistema pode falhar, auxiliando 
10:55 a prevenção (Gomes, Woods, Carvalho & Borges, 2009).
10:56
10:57 25 25

10:58 As fontes de fragilidade identificadas foram:
10:59
11:00

Figura 3: Visão detalhada da linha do tempo 1 - Enquanto um acidente nuclear é extremamente complexo e 
dinâmico, a concepção da atual simulação estudada foi bastan-

O estudo permitiu identificar fatores de resiliência e fragilidade te estática. Existe um número finito de eventos pré-determina-
no processo de reposta à emergência nuclear. Resiliência é defi- dos que foram enviados para a equipe de resposta às emergên-
nida como a capacidade do sistema em lidar com distúrbios, in- cias em uma seqüência também pré-determinada, criando um 
cluindo surpresas, com sucesso. As seguintes fontes de resili- cenário menos complexo e desafiador. Houve uma notável mu-
ência foram identificadas na análise combinada dos dados: dança no comportamento na equipe quando uma situação real 

e inesperada ocorreu e um grupo de ativistas começou a blo-
1 - Há grandes esforços do coordenador da equipe de emergên- quear as estradas. Os participantes da agência ficaram visivel-
cia na passagem de instruções e na manutenção de um ambien- mente mais sérios e as atividades marginais entre as pessoas 
te comum a todos. Devido às características dinâmicas de uma que não estavam concentradas em encontrar soluções para o 
resposta de emergência, revisões e instruções ad hoc são extre- problema diminuíram.
mamente importantes. (Woods & Hollnagel, 2006).

2 - Por mais que existam mecanismos de passagem de instru-
2 - A diversidade na equipe de resposta às emergências pode ções repetidamente durante toda a simulação, não há meca-
ser uma fonte de resiliência. A presença de representantes de nismos específicos capazes de transmitir um parecer da situ-

Sussurros

Mensagens da plataforma/
informar ação

Explicação de situação

Comunicação exterma

Repetição

Pergunta

Pedido para um outro membro de equipe

Aprovar, tomar decisão

Pedido de silêncio

Pedido de informação

Pedido de informação

Chegada de pessoas



Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges 91

ação aos agentes que chegam durante o evento ou durante o 4.	 Conclusões
processo de tomada de decisão. A chegada dessas pessoas 
ocorre, geralmente, nas primeiras horas da simulação quan- Nos estudos de caso aqui apresentados, foram utilizadas múlti-
do as agências contratadas estão enviando seus representan- plos métodos e técnicas da ATC para encontrar fontes de resili-
tes, durante a hora do almoço ou, também, durante o curso da ência e de fragilidade nos domínios da produção de energia 
simulação, quando a substituição de um agente é necessária nuclear, na aviação offshore de helicópteros na Bacia de Cam-
por algum motivo. pos, bem como na simulação da resposta à emergência nuclear. 

Na nossa análise encontramos essas fontes ligadas à coordena-
3 - A distribuição física dos indivíduos nas salas é extrema- ção de equipe, à concepção e à dinâmica do projeto das organi-
mente importante, uma vez que há situações em que combina- zações e das relações inter-organizações, do design da simula-
ções diferentes de agências vão interferir mais do que outras. ção em si e dos cenários, ao design das estações de trabalho, à 
Em ambientes de trabalho compartilhados, os indivíduos irão estrutura tecnológica visual e de comunicação e às atividades 
organizar seus lugares e atividades de acordo com a distribui- de resposta à crise.
ção dos outros na sala. (Engeström & Middleton, 1996). Uma 	
organização com postos de trabalho apropriados e flexíveis é Conhecer e compreender estas fontes no sistema é um meca-
capaz de promover um layout dinâmico das células represen- nismo útil para melhor compreender o porquê do sucesso ou 
tativas das agências, aperfeiçoando o existente mecanismo do fracasso das atividades e a interferência do sistema no de-
de reposta à emergência. sempenho.

4 - As atividades realizadas pelo coordenador da equipe de si- No acidente da nave Colúmbia, o sistema de gerenciamento de 
mulação são extremamente importantes para a execução e co- segurança da NASA falhou em entender as implicações na segu-
mando da PEE. No entanto, se a maior parte das atividades da rança do tradeoff realizado pelas pessoas, relacionado ao vaza-
PEE é realizada pelo coordenador, pode haver uma sobrecarga mento de espuma que ocorreu em quase todos os vôos. Uma 
cognitiva, gerando, desta forma, um gargalo no processo de to- situação similar ocorreu no acidente Challenger relacionado às 
mada de decisões. Grande parte das atividades de comunicação condições dos O-rings. A falta de compreensão da imagem glo-
entre os agentes é feita pelo coordenador, podendo representar bal, no que diz respeito ao vazamento de espuma durante os 
uma sobrecarga nas suas atividades. lançamentos anteriores que contribuíram para os tradeoffs an-

tes e durante a última missão do ônibus espacial Colúmbia (e.g. 
5 - O número de agentes e de agências tem influência na organi- Por que o vídeo do vazamento de espuma durante o lançamento 
zação e no desempenho da equipe. Após algumas horas na sala foi ignorado pelo comando da missão?), está diretamente ligado 
da emergência externa, parece ocorrer uma tendência de dis- às decisões locais tomadas pelas pessoas dentro dos vários ní-
persão dos participantes e, provavelmente, uma perda de con- veis da organização.
centração. Tal fato é comprovado pela quantidade de vezes em 
que é pedido silêncio à equipe. O número de indivíduos pode Novos estudos e pesquisas se fazem necessários para avan-
degradar esse contexto, especialmente se alguns dos agentes çar o conhecimento nestes três domínios, com o objetivo de 
não têm participação ativa nas decisões e nas atuações da equi- analisar profundamente essas fontes de resiliência, além de 
pe. Ter uma equipe é melhor apenas quando o desempenho do reduzir as fontes de fragilidades ou até transformá-las em 
grupo é maior do que somatório individual do de cada membro. fontes de resiliência. Os resultados fornecidos por essa análi-
Quanto mais integrantes, maior o custo de coordenação e a se sugerem que áreas como coordenação de equipe, concep-
equipe pode se tornar excessivamente numerosa. ção e dinâmica da simulação, gestão de crises e o desenvolvi-

mento da estrutura tecnológica necessária para suporte são 
6 - Embora as agências tragam os seus próprios planos de áreas com elevado potencial para aperfeiçoamento na simula-
emergência, gerando um plano de emergência modular me- ção de resposta à emergência.
nos complexo, é necessário um plano elaborado para identifi-
car a função e o papel de cada agência em resposta à emer- Portanto, um sistema proativo de gerenciamento de segurança 
gência nuclear. Uma análise do PEE atual pode aperfeiçoar a usando conceitos da engenharia de resiliência deve fornecer à 
resiliência de simulação. organização meios eficazes para balancear segurança e objeti-

vos de alta produtividade, através da reestruturação das intera-
7 - Há uma deficiência na estrutura tecnológica visual e de co- ções entre níveis para melhor balancear segurança com pres-
municação utilizada por todos os agentes envolvidos no Plano sões de produção. Para isso, segurança precisa ser tratada 
de Emergência para entender e compartilhar a situação de como algo fundamental, monitorando continuamente o modelo 
emergência. Todas as descrições dos eventos e das atividades de risco e decisões de sacrifício que as pessoas usam em suas 
são feitas verbalmente. A estrutura tecnológica visual e de co- atividades diárias.
municação é importante para entender o contexto e para a to-
mada de decisão quando o tempo de resposta é curto (Scho- Essas organizações resilientes devem fugir do viés da falta de 
enwald, Trent, Tittle & Woods, 2005). prevenção, situação na qual temos que esperar por acidentes 



92 Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges

para pensar em segurança. De fato, como indicado por Weick Francis.
“safety is a dynamic non event”, (Weick, 1993), ou em outras Hong, L. & Page, S. (2004). Groups of diverse problem solvers can 
palavras, o nível de segurança vigente permanece despercebi- outperform groups of high-ability problem solvers. New York: New 
do se não acontecer nada. Ao invés de ver o sucesso passado York University.
como um indicador de um bom nível de segurança, organiza- Klein, G. (2001). Features of team Coordination. In M. McNeese, E. 
ções resilientes devem continuar a investir em antecipar mu- Salas, M. Endsley (Eds.), New Trends in Cooperative Activities: 
danças para prevenir falhas potencias, compreendendo sempre System Dynamics in Complex Environments. Santa Monica, CA: 
que seu conhecimento é imperfeito e que seu ambiente muda Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Press.
constantemente. Perin, C. (2005). Shouldering risks: the culture of control in the nuclear 

power industry. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Schoenwald, J., Trent, S., Tittle, J. & Woods, D. (2005). Scenarios as a tool 

for design envisioning: Using the case of new sensor technologies 
Referências Bibliográficas for military urban operations. Columbus: Ohio State University.

Snook, S. (2000). Friendly Fire: The Accidental Shootdown of US Black 
Adamski, A. & Westrum, R. (2003). Requisite imagination. The fine art of Hawks Over Northern Irak. New Jersey: Princeton University 

anticipating what might go wrong. In E. Hollnagel (Ed.), Handbook Press.
of cognitive task design (pp.193-220). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Weick, K. (1993). The Collapse of Sense Making in Organizations: the 
Erlbaum Associates. Mann Gulch Disaster. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, (4), 

CAIB (2003). Columbia Accident Investigation Board. Report, 6 vols. 628-652.
Washington DC: Government Printing Office. Woods, D. (2005). Creating Foresight: Lessons for Resilience from 

Carvalho, P., Santos, I., Gomes, J. & Borges, M. (2008). Micro incident Columbia. In W. H. Starbuck and M. Farjoun (Eds.), Organization 
analysis framework to assess safety and resilience in the operation at the Limit: NASA and the Columbia Disaster. Malden, MA: 
of safe critical systems: a case study in a nuclear power plant. Blackwell.
Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries, 21/3, 277- Woods, D. (2006). Essential Characteristics of Resilience for Organizations. 
286. In E. Hollnagel, D. Woods and N. Leveson (Eds.), Resilience Engineering: 

Carvalho, P., Gomes, J., Huber, G. & Vidal, M. (2009). Normal people Concepts and Precepts. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
working in normal organizations with normal equipment: system Woods, D. & Hollnagel, E. (2006). Joint Cognitive Systems: Patterns 
safety and cognition in a mid-air collision. Applied Ergonomics, in Cognitive Systems Engineering. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and 
40, 325-340. Francis.

Carvalho, P., Santos, I. & Vidal, M. (2006). Safety implications of 
cultural and cognitive issues in nuclear power plant operation. 
Applied Ergonomics, 37, 211–223.

Carvalho, P., Vidal, M. & Carvalho, E. (2007). Nuclear power plant Resiliencia y Fragilidad de los Sistemas 
communications in normative and actual practice: A field study de Trabajo y Sustentabilidad: estudios 
of control room operators’ communications. Human Factors in de caso de sistemas socio-técnicos 
Ergonomics and Manufacturing, 17, 43-78.

Cook, R., Render, M. & Woods, D. (2000). Gaps in the continuity of care and complejos en Brasil en la área nuclear, 
progress on patient safety. British Medical Journal, 320, 791-794. aviación y emergencia

Costa et al., (2008). Resilience and Brittleness in a Nuclear Emergency 
Response Simulation: Focusing on Team Coordination Activity. In 
Prodeedings of the 3rd Resilience Engineering Symposium, Juan- Resumo A Engenharia de Resiliência tem como propósito tor-
les-Pins, France. nar pessoas e organizações atentas e sensíveis aos modelos 

Crandall, B., Klein, G. & Hoffman, R. (2006). Working Minds: a Practitioners de riscos adotados e às estratégias adaptativas usadas para 
Guide to Cognitive Task Analysis. Cambridge: MIT Press. controlar a emergência e os percursos das falhas. Uma orga-

Dekker, S. (2006). Resilience Engineering: Chronicling the Emergence of nização resiliente deve proporcionar meios para a gestão das 
Confused Consensus. In E. Hollnagel, D.D. Woods and N. Leveson adaptações, monitorando, entendendo, refletindo e aprenden-
(Eds.), Resilience Engineering: Concepts and Precepts. Aldershot, do a partir dessas estratégias, identificando ameaças e riscos 
UK: Ashgate. à segurança. Falhar em aplicar esses princípios leva a orga-

Engeström, Y. & Middleton, D. (Eds.) (1996). Cognition and communication nização a atuar em um modo reativo, numa condição de luta 
at work. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. constante contra o perigo. Os estudos de caso apresentados 

Gomes, J., Woods, D., Carvalho, P. & Borges, M.(2009). Resilience and neste artigo procuram aplicar os conceitos e métodos de enge-
brittleness in the offshore helicopter transportation system: The nharia resiliência, bem como relacioná-los com o conceito de 
identification of constraints and sacrifice decisions in pilots’ work. sustentabilidade dos sistemas sócio-técnicos complexos, num 
Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 94, 311-319. país de desenvolvimento industrial recente como é o caso do 

Hollnagel, E. & Woods, D. (2005). Joint Cognitive Systems: An Brasil. Os casos abordam os domínios nuclear, aviação e emer-
Introduction to Cognitive Systems Engineering. Oxford: Taylor & gência e utilizam a Análise do Trabalho Cognitivo (ATC) como 



Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sustentabilidade | José O. Gomes, Paulo V. R. Carvalho, David D. Woods, Tahar Hakim Benchekroun, Marcos R. S. Borges 93

base metodológica. Os estudos permitiram identificar fatores Resilience and Brittleness of Work Sys-
de resiliência e fragilidade nos diversos domínios abordados, 
mostrando ainda que um sistema proativo de gerenciamento tems and Sustainability: Brazilian case 
de segurança, usando conceitos da engenharia de resiliência, studies in nuclear, aviation, and emer-
pode fornecer às organizações meios eficazes para balancear gency domains
segurança e objetivos de alta produtividade.

Palavras-chave resiliência, Segurança de sistemas com- Abstract Resilience Engineering aims to make people and 
plexos, Análise do trabalho cognitivo organizations sensitive to the risk models adopted and to the 

adaptive strategies used to control the emergency and failure 
paths. A resilient organization must provide means to manage 
the adaptations by monitoring, understanding, reflecting and 

Résilience et fragilité des systèmes de learning from these strategies, and by identifying threats and 
risks to safety. The failure to apply such principles leads the or-

travail et développement durable: étu- ganization to act in a reactive model, in an endless fight against 
des de cas de systèmes socio-techni- danger. The case studies presented in this article seek to apply 

ques complexes au Brésil dans les do- the concepts and methods of resilience engineering, relating 
them to the concept of complex socio-technical systems´ sus-

maines du nucléaire, de l’aviation et de tainability, in a recently industrialized country like Brazil. The 
l’urgence cases approach the domains of nuclear, aviation, and emer-

gency, using Cognitive Task Analysis as the methodological 
basis. The studies have allowed identification of the resilience 

Résumé Les concepts et le cadre théorique de l’ingénierie and brittleness factors in several domains researched, pointing 
de la résilience visent à sensibiliser les individus et les orga- out that a proactive safety management system based on resil-
nisations aux modèles du risque adoptés, ainsi qu’aux straté- ience engineering concepts may provide the organizations with 
gies d’adaptation choisies, pour contrôler l’émergence de dé- an effective means to balance safety and productivity goals.
faillances ainsi que les voies par lesquelles elles surviennent. 
Une organisation résiliente doit donner les moyens aux acteurs Keywords resilience, safety of complex systems, cognitive 
du système de gérer ces adaptations par la surveillance, la work analysis
compréhension, la réflexion, et l’apprentissage à partir de ces 
stratégies, identifiant les menaces et les risques existants en 
termes de sécurité. Ne pas appliquer ces principes pousse l’or- Como referenciar este artigo?
ganisation à agir suivant un mode réactif, à lutter constamment 
contre le danger. Les études de cas présentées dans cet article Gomes, J. O., Carvalho, P.V. R., Woods, D.D., Benchekroun, T.H. & Borges, 
cherchent à appliquer les concepts et méthodes de l’ingénierie M.R.S. (2009). Resiliência e Fragilidade dos Sistemas de Trabalho e Sus-
de la résilience, mais aussi à les rattacher au concept du déve- tentabilidade: estudos de casos de sistemas sócio-técnicos complexos no 
loppement durable des systèmes sociotechniques complexes Brasil na área nuclear, aviação e emergência. Laboreal, 5, (1), 84-93.
dans un pays d’industrialisation récente tel que le Brésil. Ces http://laboreal.up.pt/revista/artigo.php?id=48u56oTV65822346:3346454552

études de cas proviennent des domaines de l’industrie nucléai-
re et de l’aéronautique et s’appuient sur le cadre méthodologi-
que de l’analyse des activités cognitives. Ces études ont permis 
d’identifier des facteurs de résilience et de fragilité dans ces Manuscrito recebido em: Fevereiro/2009
divers domaines, et soulignent qu’un système proactif de ges- Aceite após peritagem em: Junho/2009
tion de la sécurité fondé sur les concepts de l’ingénierie de la 
résilience peut fournir des moyens efficaces pour équilibrer les 
objectifs de sécurité et de productivité.

Mots-clé résilience, sûreté de systèmes complexes, analyse 
du travail cognitif



A

d
w
a
r
a
d
f
l
p
©

K

1

h
i
a
z
e
i
e
s
p
d

(
W
m

0
d

Accident Analysis and Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434

Routes to failure: Analysis of 41 civil aviation accidents from the Republic
of China using the human factors analysis and classification system

Wen-Chin Li a, Don Harris b,∗, Chung-San Yu c

a Psychology Department, National Defense University, No. 70, Sec. 2, Jhongyang N. Rd., Beitou District, Taipei City 112, Taiwan, ROC
b Department of Human Factors, School of Engineering, Cranfield University, Cranfield, Bedford MK43 0AL, United Kingdom

c Ministry of Defense, Taipei Postal Mailbox No. 90251-9, Taiwan, ROC

Received 28 November 2006; received in revised form 17 July 2007; accepted 17 July 2007

bstract

The human factors analysis and classification system (HFACS) is based upon Reason’s organizational model of human error. HFACS was
eveloped as an analytical framework for the investigation of the role of human error in aviation accidents, however, there is little empirical
ork formally describing the relationship between the components in the model. This research analyses 41 civil aviation accidents occurring to

ircraft registered in the Republic of China (ROC) between 1999 and 2006 using the HFACS framework. The results show statistically significant
elationships between errors at the operational level and organizational inadequacies at both the immediately adjacent level (preconditions for unsafe
cts) and higher levels in the organization (unsafe supervision and organizational influences). The pattern of the ‘routes to failure’ observed in the

ata from this analysis of civil aircraft accidents show great similarities to that observed in the analysis of military accidents. This research lends
urther support to Reason’s model that suggests that active failures are promoted by latent conditions in the organization. Statistical relationships
inking fallible decisions in upper management levels were found to directly affect supervisory practices, thereby creating the psychological
reconditions for unsafe acts and hence indirectly impairing the performance of pilots, ultimately leading to accidents.

2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

ficatio

H
m
f
b
d
t
s

t
c
i
b
c
F

eywords: Accident analysis; Human error; Human factors analysis and classi

. Introduction

When investigating the causes of aviation accidents, the
uman factors focus has now shifted away from investigat-
ng skill deficiencies and has moved toward other factors such
s decision-making, attitudes, supervisory factors and organi-
ational culture (Diehl, 1989; Jensen, 1997). This change in
mphasis has resulted in human error frameworks and accident
nvestigation schemes being developed that investigate and cat-
gorise the organizational factors and psychological precursors
urrounding the accident in an attempt to develop a more com-
lete understanding of the circumstances and hence aid in the
evelopment of effective prevention strategies.

The human factors analysis and classification system

HFACS) (Shappell and Wiegmann, 2001, 2003, 2004; c

iegmann and Shappell, 1997, 2001a,b,c, 2003) is perhaps the e
ost widely used human factors accident analysis framework. h

s
u

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1234 758227; fax: +44 1234 758209. c
E-mail address: d.harris@cranfield.ac.uk (D. Harris). s

001-4575/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
oi:10.1016/j.aap.2007.07.011
n system (HFACS)

FACS was developed from Reason’s organizationally based
odel of human error (Reason, 1990, 1997). In this model active

ailures (errors) of front-line operators (in this case pilots) com-
ine with latent failures lying dormant in the system to breach its
efences. These latent failures are spawned in the upper levels of
he organization and are related to management and regulatory
tructures.

HFACS addresses human errors and the factors underpinning
hem at four levels. The framework is described diagrammati-
ally in Fig. 1. Level-1 (unsafe acts of operators—active failures)
s the level at which the majority of accident investigations have
een focused in the past. These are the behaviours of the flight
rew on the flight deck that contribute directly to the accident.
ailures at this level can be further classified into two sub-
ategories: errors and violations. Errors fall into three basic
rror types (skill-based, decision and perceptual). Violations,
owever, are instances of the willful disregard of rules, which

ubsequently result in an accident. Level-2 (preconditions for
nsafe acts—latent/active failures) addresses the psychologi-
al pre-cursors to the active failures at level-1, such as the
ubstandard conditions of the operators and the operating envi-



W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analysis and

a
f
t
a
U
t
c
e
P
b
i

t
t
n
l
t
a
o
u
a
T
d
D
s
t
T
t
b

F H
t

b
t

r b
( R
e n
s i
d s
m b
t s
l t
R e
t a
b d
I a
c
t (
h t
t a

t
f H
v p
i t
G l
a
t
d
t

ig. 1. The HFACS framework. Each upper level is proposed to affect items at
he lower levels (Wiegmann and Shappell, 2003).

onment which predispose them to making an error. Level-3
unsafe supervision—latent failures) traces the causal chain of
vents producing the unsafe acts up to the level of the front-line
upervisors. Level-4 (organizational influences—latent failures)
escribes the contributions of fallible decisions in upper levels of
anagement that directly affect supervisory practices, as well as

he conditions and actions of front-line operators. Each higher
evel affects the next downward level in HFACS framework.
einach and Viale (2006) argue that the use of a classifica-

ion system to investigate incidents and accidents has several
enefits compared to a less structured, more ad hoc process.
t provides a consistent and format for accident/incident data
ollection and analysis; it ensure the accident and incident inves-
igations are undertaken systematically and comprehensively; it
elps counteract investigator’s heuristics and biases and it allows
he comparisons of contributing factors across industries.

Wiegmann and Shappell (2001b) claim that the HFACS
ramework bridges the gap between theory and practice by pro-
iding safety professionals with a theoretically based tool for
dentifying and classifying the human errors in aviation mishaps.
iven that the system focuses on both latent and active failures
nd their inter-relationships, it facilitates the identification of p
he underlying causes of human error. HFACS was originally r
esigned and developed as a human error framework for inves- s
igating and analysing human error accidents in US military o
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434 427

viation operations (Shappell and Wiegmann, 2001) however the
ramework’s developers have also demonstrated its applicability
o the analysis of accidents in US commercial aviation (Shappell
nd Wiegmann, 2001; Wiegmann and Shappell, 2001a,c) and
S general aviation (Shappell and Wiegmann, 2003). The sys-

em has also been used to analyse the underlying human factors
auses in accidents involving remotely piloted aircraft (Tvarnyas
t al., 2006); air traffic control incidents (Scarborough and
ounds, 2001) and has been further developed to investigate
oth maintenance error in aircraft (Krulak, 2004) and for the
nvestigation of railroad accidents (Reinach and Viale, 2006).

Although the HFACS framework has received wide accep-
ance as a tool for investigating and analysing aircraft accidents
here have been some criticisms of it. Beaubien and Baker (2002)
oted that it was often difficult to collect information about the
atent conditions from incident or accident reports. Furthermore,
hey added that all the evidence collected relating to its reliability
nd validity had been collected and analyzed by the developers
f the framework. However, other authors have now successfully
sed and proven the system outside the US, for example, in India
nd the Republic of China (Gaur, 2005; Li and Harris, 2005a).
hese studies have also shown the framework to have a high
egree of inter-rater reliability when coding accident narratives.
ekker (2001) suggested that the HFACS framework has only a

light link between human error and working environment and
here is some confusion between categorization and analysis.
he simple assignment of errors to categories has no explana-

ory power and suggests neither what contributes to these errors
eing made nor remedial actions to avoid them in the future.
e added that the framework merely repositioned human errors
y shifting them from the forefront to higher up in the organiza-
ion instead of finding solutions for them. Although HFACS was
ased directly on the organizational theory of failure espoused by
eason (1990, 1997) at the time it was derived there was little or
o quantitative data to support the theoretical model upon which
t was based. However, recently several studies have uncovered
tatistical relationships describing the cause/effect relationships
etween various components at the different levels in the analy-
is and classification system, giving support to the underpinning
heory behind the framework (Li and Harris, 2006a,b; Tvarnyas
t al., 2006). These analyses begin to describe statistically how
ctions and decisions at higher managerial levels promulgate
own through the organization to result in operational errors
nd accidents.

However, it needs to be noted that the studies by Li and Harris
2006a,b) and Tvarnyas et al. (2006) were undertaken in the con-
ext of military flight operations and the operation of uninhabited
ir vehicles and only in the case of the Li and Harris papers, did
he analyses progress to the highest organizational levels. Li and
arris (2006a) clearly showed that deficiencies in organizational
rocesses and organizational climate (HFACS level-4) increased
he likelihood of deficiencies in inadequate supervision (HFACS
evel-3) 13-fold. The category of ‘inadequate supervision’ had a

articularly strong association with the level-2 category of ‘crew
esource management’ (CRM). It was suggested that failures of
enior officers in supervisory positions to provide guidance and
perational doctrine to pilots by promoting good CRM prac-



4 is and

t a
A B
C p
e (
f a
l i
s r
f (
c
c

2
t
A
f W
H (
l t
l a
t e
m L
f a
H s
l i
K ‘
o 3
A i
a i
o ‘
e w
c t
i c
m
s
s 2
f
a
c r
n t
o t

i
i d
c i
c t
u a
s i

j
2 d

a
2 u

a
a

a
a evaluated from the narrative of each accident report. Each
p HFACS category was counted a maximum of only once per acci-
d
t
O
i

28 W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

ices was indirectly associated with active, operational failures.
gain, the odds ratios suggested failures as a result of poor
RM were almost 13 times more likely to occur in the pres-
nce of a concomitant failure in the category of ‘supervisory
ailure’. Finally, Li and Harris (2006a) observed that several
atent pre-conditions for unsafe acts (at HFACS level-2) showed
trong associations with active failures at level-1. These level-2
actors exhibited Reason’s classic ‘many to one’ mapping of psy-
hological precursors to active failures in several of the level-1
ategories.

As stated in the previous paragraph, this research applied
he HFACS framework to analyse Republic of China (ROC)
ir Force accidents. The objective was to provide probabilities

or the co-occurrence of categories across adjacent levels of the
FACS to establish how factors in the upper (organizational)

evels in the framework affect categories in lower (operational)
evels. It was suggested that once the significant paths were iden-
ified the development of intervention strategies should proceed

ore rapidly and effectively. Civil airlines have very quite dif-
erent organizational imperatives and organizational structure.
arris and Morley (2006) argue that military aviation is a much

ess open system than is commercial civil aviation (see Katz and
ahn, 1978). The armed forces exert far more control over flight
perations and, at least in peacetime, the operating environment.
ir Forces are responsible for much of the maintenance of the

ircraft they fly; they operate their own airfields and provide their
wn air traffic control services; they train their own pilots and
ngineers and all personnel are indoctrinated into the military
ulture and way of working. In contrast, civil airlines operate
nto a wide range of airports (none of which they own); aircraft

aintenance is often provided by third parties; aircraft ramp
ervicing is almost invariably provided by a range of external
uppliers and ATC is provided by the air traffic services providers
rom the countries into which they either operate or overfly. From
n organizational perspective, airlines can be considered to be
onsiderably more ‘open’ than military aviation. As a result, it
eeds to be established if the same routes to failure exist in the
peration of commercial aircraft.

This study examines 41 accidents occurring to civil aircraft
n the ROC using the HFACS framework. Using data from ROC
ivil aviation accidents allows a direct comparison (without any
ultural confounding effects) of the organizational routes to fail-
re with the earlier work undertaken with the air force of the
ame country.

. Method

.1. Data

The aviation accident reports were obtained from ROC Avi-
tion Safety Council between 1999 and 2006. A total of 41
ccidents and reportable incidents occurred within this time
eriod. All accidents and serious incidents conformed to the

efinition within the 9th edition of the Convention on Interna- d
ional Civil Aviation, Annex 13 (International Civil Aviation o
rganisation, 2006). There were 24 different types of aircraft

nvolved in the accidents analysed, including commercial jets a
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434

irliners (Airbus A300, A320 and A330; Boeing B737 and
747; McDonnell-Douglas MD11, MD82, MD83 and MD90):
rivate jets (Bombardier BD700): turbo-prop powered aircraft
ATR 72-200; De Havilland Canada DASH-8-300, Fokker 50)
nd commercial helicopters (Bell UH-1H, 206 and 430; Boe-
ng 234; Eurocopter BK117). Full copies of all these accident
eports may be found on the ROC Aviation Council web site
http://www.asc.gov.tw/asc en/accident list 1.asp).

.2. Classification framework

The version of the HFACS framework described in
iegmann and Shappell (2003) was utilised in this study

see Fig. 1). Level-1 of the HFACS categorises events under
he headings of ‘unsafe acts of operators’ that can lead to
n accident. This comprises four sub-categories of ‘decision
rrors’; ‘skill-based errors’; ‘perceptual errors’ and ‘violations’.
evel-2 of HFACS is concerned with ‘preconditions for unsafe
cts’. This has seven sub-categories within it: ‘adverse mental
tates’; ‘adverse physiological states’; ‘physical/mental lim-
tations’; ‘crew resource management’; ‘personal readiness’;
physical environment’ and ‘technological environment’. Level-

of HFACS is concerned with ‘unsafe supervision’ which
ncludes the four categories: ‘inadequate supervision’; ‘planned
nappropriate operation’; ‘failure to correct known problem’ and
supervisory violation’. Level-4, the highest level in the frame-
ork is labelled ‘organizational influences’ and comprises of

hree sub-categories: ‘resource management’; ‘organizational
limate’ and ‘organizational process’.

.3. Coding process

Two aviation human factors specialists coded each accident
eport independently. The analysts had previously been trained
ogether on the use of the analysis and categorization framework
o ensure that they achieved a detailed and accurate understand-
ng of it. This training consisted of three half-day modules
elivered by an aviation psychologist. The training syllabus
ncluded an introduction to the HFACS framework; explana-
ion of the definitions of the four different levels of HFACS;
nd a further detailed description of the content of the eighteen
ndividual HFACS categories. Subsequent to this the raters then
ointly analysed 2 years of the ROC air force accident data to
evelop a shared understanding of the categorization process
nd achieve a common understanding of the categories. Prior to
ndertaking the present study these analysts also undertook the
nalysis of 523 ROC air force accidents reported elsewhere (Li
nd Harris, 2006a,b).

The presence or the absence of each HFACS category was
ent, thus this count acted simply as an indicator of the presence
r absence of each of the 18 categories within a given accident.

Where there were discrepancies in the categorisation of an
ccident, the raters convened and resolved their observations.



is and

3 3

3
a
H

r t
c c
c H
r a
r m
a t
w i
1 t

v
b (
i d
d w
a i
a e
t F
b n
i a
w n
t s
2 r
i l
t c
v
a
s
a

T
F

H

L

L

L

L

N

W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

. Results

.1. Inter-rater reliability

Prior to resolution of discrepancies in coding between the
aters, the inter-rater reliabilities, calculated on a category-by-
ategory, basis were assessed using Cohen’s Kappa. In half the
ategories the Kappa values was in excess of 0.40, which is
egarded as being acceptable (Landis and Koch, 1977). For the
emainder of the categories, though, the Kappa value failed to
chieve this level. Values for Kappa range between 0 and 1.00,
here 0 represents complete independence between raters and
.00 is indicative of perfect agreement (Cohen, 1960).

Below 0.40 is regarded as a poor level of inter-rater relia-
ility. However, Cohen’s Kappa has several weaknesses as an
ndex of inter-rater reliability. Low observed frequencies can
istort Kappa values, deflating its value where there is actually
very high level of agreement. Cohen’s Kappa becomes unreli-
ble when the vast majority of observations fall into just one of
he categories and there is also a high percentage of agreement
etween raters in this category (as in the category ‘adverse phys-
ological states’—see Table 1). In such a case Cohen’s Kappa
ill be low as the statistic is based upon expected probabili-

ies calculated from the marginal observed totals (Huddlestone,
003). Gwet (2002a,b) also observed that Kappa does not take
n account raters’ sensitivity and specificity. Gwet also observed
hat Kappa becomes unreliable when raters’ agreement is either

ery small or very high. As a result, inter-rater reliabilities were f
lso calculated as a simple percentage rate of agreement. These r
howed reliability figures of between 63.4 and 95.1%, indicating r
cceptable reliability between the raters. l

able 1
requency counts (post-rater resolution) and inter-rater reliability statistics (prior to r

FACS category Frequency Perce

evel-4, organizational influences
Organizational process 25 60.9
Organizational climate 9 21.9
Resource management 23 56.1

evel-3, unsafe supervision
Supervisory violation 23 56.1
Failed correct a known problem 15 36.6
Planned inappropriate operations 18 43.9
Inadequate supervision 26 63.4

evel-2, preconditions for unsafe acts
Technology environment 7 17.1
Physical environment 19 46.3
Personal readiness 8 19.5
Crew resource management 28 68.3
Physical/mental limitation 7 17.1
Adverse physiological states 1 2.4
Adverse mental states 14 34.1

evel-1, unsafe acts of operators
Violations 28 68.3
Perceptual errors 21 51.2
Skilled-based errors 29 70.7
Decision errors 29 70.7

ote that the percentages in the table will not equal 100%, because in many cases mo
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434 429

.2. Overview of analysis rationale

The data were cross-tabulated to describe the strength of
ssociation between the categories at adjacent levels in the
FACS framework. Chi-square (χ2) analyses were performed

o estimate the statistical strength of association between the
ategories in the higher and lower levels of the framework.
owever, as the χ2 test is a simple test of association these

nalyses were supplemented with further analyses using Good-
an and Kruskal’s lambda (λ) which was used to calculate

he proportional reduction in error (PRE). The lambda statistic
s a measure (ranging from 0 to 1, where 1 represents cer-
ainty) of the extent that knowledge of the category of one
ariable improves the prediction of the other variable. Lambda
Goodman and Kruskal, 1954) has the advantage of being a
irectional statistic. The lower level categories in the HFACS
ere designated as being dependent upon the categories at the

mmediately higher level in the framework, which is congru-
nt with the framework’s underlying theoretical assumptions.
rom a theoretical standpoint, lower levels in the HFACS can-
ot adversely affect higher levels. Higher levels in the HFACS
re deemed to influence (cause) changes at the lower orga-
izational levels, thus going beyond what may be deemed a
imple test of co-occurrence between categories. Finally, odds
atios were also calculated to provide an estimate of the like-
ihood of the presence of a contributory factor in one HFACS
ategory being associated with the concomitant presence of a

actor in another category. However, it must be noted that odds
atios are an asymmetric measure and so are only really theo-
etically meaningful when associated with a non-zero value for
ambda.

esolution) for each HFACS category for all 41 accidents

ntage Cohen’s Kappa Inter-rater reliability
(percentage agreement)

0.510 75.6
0.492 85.4
0.262 63.4

0.360 68.3
0.358 73.2
0.310 68.3
0.369 70.7

0.000 70.7
0.610 80.5
0.547 87.8
0.459 73.2
0.109 80.5
0.000 95.1
0.229 68.3

0.584 80.5
0.517 75.6
0.547 78.0
0.597 82.9

re than one causal factor was associated with the accident.



4 is and

3 w
‘
c

l d
H n

( a
a 3
( a
a i
E t
a S
( o
i a
t k
5
o H

f
t n
t T
U a
H t

v
H t
‘ p
s l
b
w
l
a
v

T
S
l

S
d

H

H

H

A

30 W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

.3. Results

In total 330 instances of human error, describing the under-
ying causal factors of the 41 accidents, were recorded using the
FACS framework.
Initial results found that there were 107 instances of acts

32.4% of all errors recorded) at the level of ‘unsafe acts of oper-
tors’ (level-1). Errors at this level were implicated in 85.4%
35) of accidents. There were 84 (25.4%) instances of errors
t the level of ‘Preconditions for unsafe acts’ level (level-2).
rrors recorded at this level were implicated in 82.9% (34) of
ll the accidents analysed. At the level of ‘unsafe supervision’
level-3), there were 82 (24.8%) instances of error that were
mplicated in 75.6% (31) of accidents. Finally, at the ‘organiza-
ional influences’ level in the HFACS model (level-4) there were
7 (17.3%) instances of error recorded, implicated in 68.3% (28)
f accidents in the sample (see Table 1).

To keep the overall type I error rate across the whole analysis
o p < 0.05, using a Bonferroni adjustment (Sankoh et al., 1997)
he individual alpha level for each analysis was set to p < 0.001.
sing this value, 16 relationships between categories at adjacent
FACS levels showed significant associations (see Table 2).
Analysis of the strength of association between categories at

FACS level-4 ‘organizational influences’ and HFACS level-3
unsafe supervision’ indicated that of a possible 12 relation-
hips, six pairs of associations were significant (p < 0.001)
etween categories at adjacent levels. ‘Organizational process’

as significantly associated with all four supervisory factors at a

evel-3: ‘inadequate supervision’; ‘planned inappropriate oper- 1
tions’; ‘failed to correct a known problem’; and ‘supervisory t
iolations’. Resource management was significantly associated l

able 2
ignificant Chi-square test of association (p < 0.001) and associated values for Goodm

evel categories in the HFACS framework for the data derived from the analysis of th

ignificant association between upper level and adjacent Chi
ownward level categories in the HFACS framework

Valu

FACS level-4 association with level-3 categories
Resource management × planned inappropriate operations 14.0
Resource management × inadequate supervision 10.7
Organizational process × planned inappropriate operations 15.1
Organizational process × inadequate supervision 22.5
Organizational process × failed to correct a known problem 10.4
Organizational process × supervisory violation 20.2

FACS level-3 association with level-2 categories
Inadequate supervision × CRM 9.7
Planned inappropriate operations × physical environment 8.9
Supervisory violation × personal readiness 10.7

FACS level-2 association with level-1 categories
Adverse mental states × decision error 12.4
Adverse mental states × skill based error 12.4
Adverse mental states × perceptual error 10.1
CRM × decision errors 20.8
CRM × skill-based errors 20.8
CRM × violations 17.9
Physical environment × perceptual errors 10.8

ll tests have 1 degree of freedom. All other comparisons were non-significant.
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434

ith two categories at level-3, ‘inadequate supervision’ and
planned inappropriate operations’. These statistically signifi-
ant relationships are summarized in Table 2 and are described
iagrammatically in Fig. 2. Organizational climate had no sig-
ificant associations with any level-3 categories.

It will be noted from Table 2 that in several of the tests of
ssociation performed between categories at HFACS level-4 and
very high odds ratios are observed, all of which are associ-

ted with non-zero values for lambda. Inadequate supervision
s over 10 times more likely to occur when there are organiza-
ional level issues associated with poor resource management.
imilarly, inadequate supervision is nine times more likely to
ccur in the presence of poor organizational processes, an issue
lso associated with inflating the likelihood of failing to correct
nown problems by a similar amount.

Analysis of the strength of association between categories at
FACS level-3 ‘unsafe supervision’ and level-2 ‘pre-conditions

or unsafe acts’ shows just three pairs of associations to be sig-
ificant (p < 0.001) between categories at these adjacent levels.
hese were ‘inadequate supervision’ at level-3 versus ‘CRM’
t level-2; ‘planned inappropriate operations’ at level three with
he ‘physical environment’ at level-2 and ‘supervisory violation’
ersus ‘personal readiness’. Of these comparisons it can be seen
hat poor CRM was over eight times more likely to occur in the
resence of ‘inadequate supervision’ at the higher organizational
evel.

The analysis of the strength of association between categories

t HFACS level-2 ‘pre-conditions for unsafe acts’ and level-
‘unsafe acts of operators’ shows seven pairs of associations

o be significant between the categories at these two adjacent
evels. These mainly fall into two distinct groupings. In the first

an and Kruskal’s lambda for the analysis of upper level and adjacent downward
e 41 accidents occurring to ROC commercial aircraft between 1999 and 2006

-square Lambda Odds ratio

e p-Value

09 0.000 0.500 2.500
77 0.001 0.333 10.857
05 0.000 0.500 2.813
63 0.000 0.667 9.000
08 0.001 0.200 9.500
51 0.000 0.667 3.000

44 0.001 0.231 8.250
46 0.001 0.421 7.367
52 0.001 0.000 0.000

76 0.001 0.000 0.000
76 0.001 0.000 0.000
24 0.001 0.045 12.000
82 0.000 0.583 43.333
82 0.000 0.583 43.333
73 0.000 0.583 27.778
96 0.001 0.500 10.000



W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analysis and Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434 431

F wing

g H
w w
e s
s p
u z
e w
c v
o o

w
e i
I s
i c
v i

s
4 t

o
a

m s
i o
c t
a h
6 m
m a
s p
i l
W h

f
i r
d
i
c
i
T

ig. 2. Paths between categories at the four levels in the HFACS framework sho

roup the level-2 category ‘CRM’ was significantly associated
ith three categories of unsafe act: ‘decision errors’; ‘skill-based

rrors’ and ‘violations’. In the second grouping ‘adverse mental
tates’ was also significantly associated with three categories of
nsafe act: ‘decision errors’; ‘skill-based errors’ and ‘perceptual
rrors’. The final relationship was between the HFACS level-2
ategory of the ‘physical environment’ and the level-1 category
f ‘perceptual error’.

Of particular note are the downward relationships the cat-
gory of poor CRM has with the three level-1 categories.
nspection of the associated odds ratios show between (approx-
mately) a 30–40-fold increase in the likelihood of error or
iolation in the presence of poor CRM practices.

. Discussion

It can be seen from the data presented in Table 1 that the
ajority of HFACS categories had large enough numbers of

nstances of occurrence in the data set to allow reasonable
onfidence in the pattern of results obtained. All categories
lso exhibited good levels of inter-rater reliability ranging from
3.4% for the HFACS level-4 category of ‘resource manage-
ent’ to 95.1% for the level-2 category of ‘adverse physiological

tates’. These were as good as, or in excess of the levels reported
n previous studies (e.g. Gaur, 2005; Li and Harris, 2005a;

iegmann and Shappell, 1997).
Reason (1990, 1997) proposed that latent conditions promot-

ng unsafe acts are inevitably present in all systems. The original
ecision on how to allocate resources made at the highest levels

n the organization may originally have been based on sound ‘
ommercial arguments but such inequities can create reliabil- e
ty or safety problems in other, operational parts of the system. d
he analyses in this paper clearly show that inadequacies at e
the significant associations (p < 0.001) using Chi-square (χ2) and lambda (λ).

FACS level-4 (‘organizational influences’) had associations
ith further inadequacies at HFACS level-3 (‘unsafe supervi-

ion) (see Table 2 and Fig. 2). The category of ‘organizational
rocess’ is a particularly important factor at this highest organi-
ational level. Poor ‘organizational processes’ were associated
ith inadequacies in all categories at the level of ‘unsafe super-
ision’ and hence indirectly were ultimately at the root of many
perational errors resulting in accidents. In the HFACS frame-
ork inadequacies in ‘organizational processes’ includes such

ssues as imposing excessive time pressures on staff; poor mis-
ion scheduling; poor incentivization; management failing to set
learly defined objectives; poor risk management programmes;
nadequate management checks for safety and failing to establish
afety programmes. ‘Resource management’ (which involved
he selection, staffing and training of human resources at an
rganizational level; excessive cost cutting; providing unsuit-
ble equipment, and a failure to remedy design flaws) also
howed strong relationships with the two level-3 categories
f ‘inadequate supervision’ and ‘planned inappropriate opera-
ions). Both Reason (1990) and Wiegmann and Shappell (2003)
ypothesized that inappropriate decision-making by upper-level
anagement can adversely influence the personnel and practices

t the supervisory level, which in turn affects the psychological
re-conditions and hence the subsequent actions of the front-
ine operators. This study provides statistical support for this
ypothesized relationship. A similar pattern of results was also
ound in the analysis of 523 ROC air force accidents previously
eported by Li and Harris (2006a,b).

The level-2 (‘preconditions for unsafe acts’) category of

CRM’ was perhaps the key factor in HFACS framework. CRM
ncompasses issues such as a lack of teamwork on the flight
eck; poor communication between flight crew; failures of lead-
rship and inadequate crew briefings. Inadequacies in CRM



4 is and

p s
‘ b
w p
t 2
t w
u S
a
w r
r A
( t
w f
t p

a
b t
t a
l a
s v
l l
e M
a S
s f
i (
t d
e t
s l
g c
s H
p
w f
d u
i a
a I
o t
f o
m v
c w

F
o s
a a
w n
t w
s d
i r
a b
v s
z h
t p
i O
T t
w d
s p
A a
i F
i
e
d
p

32 W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

ractices were particularly influenced by the level-3 category of
inadequate supervision’. This category in the HFACS frame-
ork encompasses issues such as a failure to provide proper

raining or adequate rest periods; a lack of accountability; failure
o track qualifications and performance of personnel; the use of
ntrained supervisors and a general loss of situation awareness
t the supervisory level). The risk of ‘inadequate supervision’
as itself greatly inflated by poor organizational processes and

esource management issues. The earlier study of Li and Harris
2006a,b) also observed that the issue of inadequate supervision
as the key link between inadequacies at the higher organiza-

ional levels and poor CRM.
Reason (1990) suggested that human behaviour is governed

y the interplay between psychological and situational fac-
ors. In particular two pre-conditions for unsafe acts (HFACS
evel-2—‘CRM’ and ‘adverse mental states’) showed a strong
tatistical relationship with the active failures of the operators at
evel-1 (see Table 2 and Fig. 2). This was also observed in the
arlier study of ROC air force accidents. Poor CRM is associ-
ted with ‘decision errors’ (instances in this category included,
electing inappropriate strategies to perform a mission; improper
n-flight planning; making an inappropriate decision to abort a
ake-off or landing, or using improper remedial actions in an
mergency) and ‘skill based errors’ (for example, inappropriate
tick and rudder coordination; excessive use of flight controls;
lideslope not being maintained, and adopting an improper air-
peed or altitude). However, it is also noticeable that poor CRM
ractices are associated with the level-1 category of ‘violations’,
hich encompasses issues such as intentionally ignoring stan-
ard operating procedures (SOPs); neglecting SOPs; applying
mproper SOPs; and diverting from SOPs. Adverse mental states
re those conditions that affect pilot performance, such as loss
f situational awareness; task fixation; distraction and mental
atigue due to stress. It is perhaps not too surprising that such
ental states pre-dispose accident involved pilots to all the main

ategories of human error.
Reason (1990, 1997) has suggested that there is a ‘many to

ne’ mapping of the psychological precursors of unsafe acts
nd the actual errors themselves, making it difficult to predict
hich actual errors will occur as a result of which precondi-

ions. The results of this study using the HFACS framework
upport this assertion. It is also evident that accidents rarely
nvolved just a single error. Overall every accident involved an
verage of over eight individual errors distributed across the
arious organizational levels and even across different organi-
ations. These erroneous actions need not be confined to either
he flight deck or the airline. For example, the report on the
nvestigation of the runway incursion occurrence involving a
ransAsia Airways aircraft (flight GE543) concluded that there
as inadequate planning and implementation in airport con-

truction safety procedures by both the Taiwanese Civil Aviation
uthority (CAA) and the Military Authorities (both problems

n ‘organizational process’, HFACS level-4); there was an error

n issuing an approval to land after the curfew time (‘decision r
rror’, HFACS level-1) and insufficient cooperation and coor- e
ination between the CAA and the military base authorities r
rior to commencing construction work (‘inadequate supervi- fi
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434

ion’, HFACS level-3). There was also a lack of communication
etween ATC and workers on the ground (a coordination and
ersonnel resource management [‘CRM’] issue, HFACS level-
) and finally there was the action of workers to enter the airfield
ithout approval by ATC (‘violation’, HFACS level-1) (Aviation
afety Council, 2004).

The errors finally resulting in an accident may also be sepa-
ated by considerable periods of time. To illustrate, in the China
irlines CI-611 accident, the principal causal factors could be

racked back to a failure to follow the Structural Repair Manual
or the repair of a tail strike occurring to the aircraft 22 years
rior to the accident. It was concluded that there was no work
udit system and a failure to provide both flight safety inspection
raining and a handbook for inspectors (‘resource management’
nd ‘organizational process’ issues, HFACS level-4). There was
lso inadequate supervision when conducting the Corrosion Pre-
ention and Control Program (‘inadequate supervision’, HFACS
evel-3). There was a failure of communication between the

aintenance Operation Center and the Maintenance Planning
ection in the airline (a ‘CRM’ issue, HFACS level-2) and a
ailure to provide adequate equipment for structural inspections
‘technology environment’, HFACS level-2). This contributed
irectly to the line operator’s failure to detect structural defects in
he rear pressure bulkhead (‘perceptual’ and ‘skill-based errors’,
evel-1). The pressure bulkhead finally ruptured causing the air-
raft to break up in flight (Aviation Safety Council, 2002; Li and
arris, 2005b).
There are statistically significant associations between causal

actors at the higher organizational levels, psychological contrib-
tory factors and errors in decision-making, skilled performance
nd the violations committed by pilots (see Table 2 and Fig. 2).
t can even be suggested that poor organizational processes at
he highest levels in the organization result in poor supervisory
versight, which itself results in poor CRM resulting in wilful
iolations of the SOP. However, some care needs to be taken
hen interpreting the statistical relationships presented within
ig. 2. In a few categories the frequency counts are moderately
mall. Furthermore, the frequency counts within categories were
ll derived from accidents. It is unknown (and at the higher orga-
izational levels perhaps it is unknowable) how often instances
ithin the various HFACS categories have occurred in day-to-
ay operations that have not resulted in an accident. Thus, the
elationships between HFACS levels and categories should not
e interpreted outside the accident causal sequence. However,
ome insight into the relative frequency of instances of error that
ave not resulted in an accident at HFACS levels 1 and 2 may
erhaps be gained by the retrospective analysis of LOSA (Line
perations Safety Audit) data. These are data gained through

he observation (by trained observers) of crews on the flight
eck engaged in everyday line operations, undertaken for the
urpose of identifying the day-to-day threats to commercial avi-
tion safety (see Klinect et al., 1999; Helmreich et al., 2001).
or example, in LOSA data collected by Thomas (2003) it was

eported that in line operations, crews often did not demonstrate
ffective error detection. More than half of all errors observed
emaining undetected by one or both of the flight crew. Further,
ne-grain analysis of this type of data may give some insight



is and

i B
t
d

C
a
t D
t

D

5
G

e
e G

e
G

s
e
t .
z G

f
b
R H
c
r
a

H
n
t
w
r H

2 I
F
e J
e
i

K
o
s K
i
c
t

K
o
m L
l
b L

t
o L
t
a
p L

s
b L

R

A R

A

W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

nto the frequency with which undetected errors committed at
he lower HFACS levels do not subsequently result in an acci-
ent. Nevertheless, the results of this study of civil aviation
ccidents occurring in the ROC show a remarkable similarity
o the study of military accidents conducted in the air force of
he same country (Li and Harris, 2006a,b).

. Conclusions

This study provides an understanding, based upon empirical
vidence, of how actions and decisions at higher managerial lev-
ls in the operation of commercial aircraft in the ROC result in
rrors on the flight deck and subsequent accidents. The results
how clearly defined, statistically described paths that relate
rrors at level-1 (the operational level) with inadequacies at both
he immediately adjacent and also higher levels in the organi-
ation. To reduce significantly the accident rate these ‘paths to
ailure’ relating to these organizational and human factors must
e addressed. This research draws a clear picture that supports
eason’s (1990) model of active failures resulting from latent
onditions in the organization. Furthermore, the mechanisms
elating to operational errors seem to be common to both civil
nd military operation in the ROC despite the different orga-
izational imperatives and organizational structures underlying
hese types of operation (see Harris and Morley, 2006). Further
ork needs to be undertaken to establish if a similar pattern of

esults are found in other countries and cultures.
The results suggest that interventions at HFACS levels 1 and

would only have limited effect in improving overall safety.
or example, CRM inadequacies are associated with subsequent
rror in three out of four categories at HFACS level-1. How-
ver, improving CRM practices alone is unlikely to have a major
mpact on safety unless the supervisory processes (level-3) and
rganizational processes (level-4) are in place to provide things
uch as training facilities; the mechanisms to oversee CRM train-
ng and monitor its effectiveness, and respond to any further
hanges required in the training program. All of these activi-
ies require organizational commitment and capacity, which can
nly be provided by the highest levels of management. Further-
ore, on a ‘bang for the buck’ basis, interventions at higher

evels are likely to be the most cost effective in the net safety
enefits they realize. Remedial safety actions should be aimed at
he higher organizational areas that share the greatest numbers
f associations with factors at lower organizational levels, in
his case ‘organizational processes’ and ‘resource management’
t HFACS level-4. These are the categories at the root of the
aths of association with many other HFACS categories. This
trongly suggests that the greatest gains in safety benefits could
e achieved by targeting actions in these areas.

eferences

viation Safety Council, 2002. In-flight breakup over Taiwan Strait Northeast

of Makung, Penghu Island China Airlines Flight CI-611. Report no. ASC- R
AOR-05-02-001. Aviation Safety Council, Taipei, ROC.

viation Safety Council, 2004. TransAsia Airways Flight 543 Runway Incur- R
sion Investigation Report. Report no. ASC-AOR-04-10-001. Aviation Safety
Council, Taipei, ROC.
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434 433

eaubien, J.M., Baker, D.P., 2002. A review of selected aviation human factors
taxonomies, accident/incident reporting systems and data collection tools.
Int. J. Appl. Aviat. Stud. 2, 11–36.

ohen, J., 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ. Psychol.
Meas. 20, 37–46.

ekker, S.W.A., 2001. The re-invention of human error. Hum. Factors Aerospace
Saf. 1, 247–266.

iehl, A., 1989. Human performance/system safety issues in aircraft accident
investigation and prevention. In: Proceedings of 11th International Sympo-
sium on Aviation Psychology, Columbus, OH.

aur, D., 2005. Human factors analysis and classification system applied
to civil aircraft accidents in India. Aviat. Space Env. Med. 76, 501–
505.

oodman, L., Kruskal, W.H., 1954. Measures of association for cross-
classifications. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 49, 732–764.

wet, K., 2002a. Kappa statistics is not satisfactory for assessing the extent
of agreement between raters. In: Statistical Methods for Inter-rater
Reliability Assessment, No. 1. Retrieved on 24 November 2006, from
http://www.stataxis.com/files/articles/kappa statistic is not satisfactory.pdf

wet, K., 2002b. Inter-rater reliability: dependency on trait prevalence
and marginal homogeneity. In: Statistical Methods for Inter-rater
Reliability Assessment, No. 1. Retrieved on 24 November, from
http://www.stataxis.com/files/articles/inter rater reliability dependency.pdf.

arris, D., Morley, F.J.J., 2006. An open systems approach to safety culture:
actions, influences and concerns. In: Keynote Address to Evolving Sys-
tem Safety 2006 (7th International Symposium of the Australian Aviation
Psychology Association), Manly, November 9–12.

elmreich, R.L., Klinect, J.R., Wilhelm, J.A., 2001. System safety and threat
and error management: the line operations safety audit (LOSA). In: Proceed-
ings of 11th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH.

uddlestone, J.A., 2003. An evaluation of the training effectiveness of a low-
fidelity, multi-player simulator for Air Combat Training. Unpublished Ph.D.
Thesis. College of Aeronautics, Cranfield University, England.

nternational Civil Aviation Organisation, 2006. Convention on International
Civil Aviation ICAO. Document 7300/9, ninth ed. ICAO, Monteal, Canada.

ensen, R.S., 1997. The boundaries of aviation psychology, human factors,
aeronautical decision making, situation awareness, and crew resource man-
agement. Int. J. Aviat. Psychol. 7, 259–268.

atz, D., Kahn, R.L., 1978. The Social Psychology of Organizations, second
ed. John Wiley, New York.

linect, J.R., Wilhelm, J.A., Helmreich, R.L., 1999. Threat and error man-
agement: data from line operations safety audits. In: Proceedings of 10th
International Symposium on Aviation Psychology, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH.

rulak, D.C., 2004. Human Factors in maintenance: impact on aircraft mishap
frequency and severity. Aviat. Space Env. Med. 75, 429–432.

andis, J.R., Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data. Biometrics 33, 159–174.

i, W.C., Harris, D., 2005a. HFACS analysis of ROC air force aviation accidents:
reliability analysis and cross-cultural comparison. Int. J. Appl. Aviat. Stud.
5, 65–81.

i, W.C., Harris, D., 2005b. Where safety culture meets national culture: the how
and why of the China Airlines CI-611 accident. Hum. Factors Aerospace Saf.
5, 345–353.

i, W.C., Harris, D., 2006a. Pilot error and its relationship with higher organi-
zational levels: HFACS analysis of 523 accidents. Aviat. Space Env. Med.
77, 1056–1061.

i, W.C., Harris, D., 2006b. Breaking the chain: an empirical analysis of accident
causal factors by human factors analysis and classification system (HFACS).
In: Proceedings of International Society of Air Safety Investigators Seminar
2006, Cancun, Mexico, September 11–14.

eason, J.T., 1990. Human Error. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

eason, J.T., 1997. Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. Ashgate,

Aldershot, UK.
einach, S., Viale, A., 2006. Application of a human error framework to con-

duct train accident/incident investigations. Aviat. Space Env. Med. 30, 396–
406.



4 is and

S T

S W

S W

S
W

S
Wiegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 2001c. Human error perspectives in aviation.

Int. J. Aviat. Psychol. 11, 341–357.

T

34 W.-C. Li et al. / Accident Analys

ankoh, A.J., Huque, M.F., Dubey, S.D., 1997. Some comments on frequently
used multiple endpoint adjustments methods in clinical trials. Stat. Med. 16,
2529–2542.

carborough, A., Pounds, J., 2001. Retrospective human factors analysis of
ATC operational errors. In: Proceedings of 11th International Symposium
on Aviation Psychology, Columbus, OH.

happell, S.A., Wiegmann, D.A., 2001. Applying reason: the human factors
analysis and classification system (HFACS). Hum. Factors Aerospace Saf.
1, 59–86.

happell, S.A., Wiegmann, D.A., 2003. A human error analysis of general avi-
ation controlled flight into terrain accidents occurring between 1990 and
1998. Report no. DOT/FAA/AM-03/4. Federal Aviation Administration,
Washington, DC.

happell, S.A., Wiegmann, D.A., 2004. HFACS analysis of military and civil-
ian aviation accidents: a North American comparison. In: Proceedings of
International Society of Air Safety Investigators, Australia, Queensland,

November 2–8. W

homas, M.J.W., 2003. Improving organisational safety through the integrated
evaluation of operational and training performance: an adaptation of the Line
Operations Safety Audit (LOSA) methodology. Hum. Factors Aerospace
Saf. 3, 25–45.
Prevention 40 (2008) 426–434

varnyas, A.P., Thompson, W.T., Constable, S.H., 2006. Human factors in
remotely piloted aircraft operations: HFACS analysis of 221 mishaps over
10 years. Aviat. Space Env. Med. 77, 724–732.

iegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 1997. Human factors analysis of postaccident
data: applying theoretical taxonomies of human error. Int. J. Aviat. Psychol.
7, 67–81.

iegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 2001a. Human error analysis of
commercial aviation accidents: application of the human factors anal-
ysis and classification system. Aviat. Space Env. Med. 72, 1006–
1016.

iegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 2001b. Applying the human factors analysis
and classification system to the analysis of commercial aviation accident
data. In: Proceedings of 11th International Symposium on Aviation Psy-
chology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
iegmann, D.A., Shappell, S.A., 2003. A Human Error Approach to Aviation
Accident Analysis: The Human Factors Analysis and Classification System.
Ashgate, Aldershot, UK.



Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Cement & Concrete Composites

journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /cemconcomp
Probabilistic modeling of chloride-induced corrosion in concrete structures
using first- and second-order reliability methods
Bassem Saassouh ⇑, Zoubir Lounis
National Research Council Canada, Institute for Research in Construction, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0R6

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t
Article history:
Received 3 March 2011
Received in revised form 3 April 2012
Accepted 4 May 2012
Available online 11 May 2012

Keywords:
Chloride ingress
Corrosion initiation
Uncertainty modeling
First- and second-order reliability methods
Importance factor
Probability of corrosion
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 613 993 6290.
E-mail address: bassem.saassouh@nrc.gc.ca (B. Saa

0958-9465/$ - see front matter Crown Copyright  2
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2012.05.001
Concrete structures are subjected to chloride-induced corrosion that can lead to shortened service life.
Reliable predictions of life cycle performance of concrete structures are critical to the optimization of
their life cycle design and maintenance to minimize their life cycle costs. This paper presents two simpli-
fied semi-analytical probabilistic models based on the first- and second-order reliability methods to
model the uncertainty of the key parameters including surface chloride concentration, chloride threshold,
cover depth and diffusion coefficient, which govern the chloride ingress into concrete and corrosion of
reinforcing steel. A case study of a reinforced concrete highway bridge deck is used to illustrate the capa-
bility and efficiency of these simplified probabilistic models in modeling the uncertainty and predicting
the time-dependent probability of corrosion. The models enable to quantify the impact of the different
governing parameters on probability of corrosion and service life, which can be used to develop cost-
effective management strategies.

Crown Copyright  2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

The main cause of deterioration of different types of concrete
structures (bridges, marine structures, off-shore platforms, parking
garages, etc.) is due to chloride-induced corrosion of the steel rein-
forcement. The primary source of chlorides is from the external
environment, either from deicing salts using during the winter
months or from seawater. The rate of ingress or penetration of
chlorides is dependent primarily on the quality of concrete and
more particularly on the water–cement ratio of the concrete mix,
the presence of supplementary cementing materials (e.g. silica
fume, fly ash, or slag), and/or protective systems that delay or slow
down chloride ingress (e.g. protective membrane). In porous med-
ia, such as concrete, chlorides can penetrate concrete via different
physical mechanisms, such as diffusion, capillary absorption, elec-
trical migration, presence of cracks and permeation due to hydrau-
lic pressure heads [25]. Furthermore, the penetration process is
also influenced by chemical reactions, such as chloride binding.

The corrosion of the steel reinforcement leads to concrete frac-
ture through cracking, delamination and spalling of the concrete
cover, reduction of concrete and reinforcement cross sections, loss
of bond between the reinforcement and concrete, and reduction in
strength and ductility. As a result, the serviceability, strength,
safety and service life of concrete structures are reduced.
ssouh).

012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
In the last three decades, chloride-induced corrosion has been
extensively studied [43,39,8], particularly, as a result of the high
costs of highway bridge repair in North America and Europe from
the effects of chloride-induced corrosion and deterioration of con-
crete infrastructure. Most of these studies are based on the assump-
tion of a process of diffusion for predicting the time and space
variations of chloride content in concrete and on the concept of
chloride threshold to define the corrosion resistance of reinforcing
steel to chloride attack. Despite the large amount of research, the
design of concrete structures for durability is mainly based on pre-
scriptive rules, such as specifying minimum concrete cover depth
(depending on the environmental exposure), maximum water-to-
cement ratio (to achieve low chloride diffusivity), use of more cor-
rosion resistant reinforcing steels (e.g. stainless steel), and use of
protection systems. However, a considerable level of uncertainty
may be associated with one or more of the above parameters. This
is due to: (i) heterogeneity and aging of concrete with temporal and
spatial variability of its chloride diffusivity; (ii) variability of con-
crete cover depth, which depends on quality control, workmanship
and size of the structure; (iii) variability of surface chloride concen-
tration, that depends on the severity of the environmental expo-
sure, precipitation, washing of structure; and (iv) uncertainty in
chloride threshold level that depends on the type of reinforcing
steel, type of cementing materials, test methods, etc. [1]. It is clear
that the combination of these uncertainties leads to a considerable
uncertainty in the model output i.e. the time to corrosion initiation
or service life. This uncertainty in the model output could have seri-
ous consequences in terms of inadequate design, planning of
rights reserved.



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1083
inspection and maintenance which in turn will shorten the service
life of the structure and increase the life cycle cost [50,11]. There-
fore, for an effective performance-based life cycle design that in-
cludes the use of mechanistic service life models will lead to a
minimization of cost at the same time provides the level of service
life required.

The objectives of this paper are threefold: (i) present a perfor-
mance-based approach to durability or life cycle design based on
mechanistic models for chloride ingress into concrete and onset
of steel reinforcement corrosion; (ii) present simplified semi-ana-
lytical probabilistic models based on first-order and second-order
reliability methods (FORM/SORM) that take into account the
uncertainty and variability in the governing parameters and prop-
agate it to predict the time-dependent probability of chloride con-
tamination of concrete cover and probability of corrosion of steel
reinforcement; and (iii) to assess the efficiency of the simplified
analytical FORM and SORM methods by comparing their predic-
tions to those obtained by using Monte Carlo simulation (MCS)
with a large number of simulations on a typical highway concrete
bridge deck exposed to deicing salts during winter.
2. Overview of mechanisms of chloride ingress into concrete
structures

Since concrete is a porous medium, chlorides can penetrate con-
crete through a number of mechanisms. First, if the concrete is not
fully saturated, the salt solution is absorbed into the unfilled
spaces by capillary action [19]. As the chlorides migrate into the
concrete, some chlorides are absorbed onto concrete and react
with the cement hydrates [38], which slows down the rate of chlo-
ride migration [31]. When the surface dries, the salt crystallizes.
With successive cycles, there may be a progressive build-up of salts
at the surface and in the near surface layers until, after few cycles, a
limiting value is reached [36]. The time it takes to achieve a stable
surface level will, however, depend on the severity of exposure. In
addition to this early absorption, the chloride ions migrate further
into the concrete by diffusion through the pore water that is driven
by the concentration gradient between the surface and the sub-
surface layers. As the chlorides migrate further, so the process of
‘‘binding’’ continues to remove chlorides from the pore solution
[2]. In concrete, which is permanently submerged and saturated,
this diffusion process is the only means of transport after the initial
wetting. However, even without drying there may be a build-up of
chlorides in the pores water to a level above that of the surround-
ing saline solution, due to a process defined as chloride ‘‘condensa-
tion’’ [35]. This is may be due to the physical adsorption of
chlorides onto the pore surfaces by the electric double layer in ce-
ment and can result in chloride concentrations, which can be two
to four times those of the solutions to which the concrete is ex-
posed. These are commonly referred to as loosely-bound chlorides.

Therefore, in the absence of shrinkage phenomena, the main
transport mechanisms of chlorides into concrete are diffusion
and adsorption [25]. However, adsorption occurs in concrete sur-
face layers that are subjected to wetting and drying cycles, and it
only affects the exposed concrete surface down to 10–20 mm
[44], so beyond this adsorption zone, the diffusion process will
dominate [44,14].

Otherwise, if the concrete cover presents a considerable amount
of cracking, two modeling options might be proposed:

 In a cracked concrete cover with relatively few and small cracks,
the effect of cracks on the chloride ingress can be considered, by
using the same diffusion model with a modified ‘‘apparent’’ dif-
fusion coefficient that takes into account the effect of cracks on
the diffusion as in [12,17,16,6].
 In a cracked concrete cover with several and large cracks, diffu-
sion may not be the governing mechanism and the effect of
cracks may lead to ‘‘permeability’’ as a mechanism for chloride
transport that, by itself, needs to be modeled. This article does
not take into account this case.

The chloride diffusion phenomena is a transfer of mass by ran-
dom motion of free chloride ions in the pore solution, resulting in a
net flow from regions of higher to regions of lower concentration
[10]. The rate of chloride ingress is proportional to the concentra-
tion gradient and the diffusion coefficient of the concrete (Fick’s
first law of diffusion). Since in the field, chloride ingress occurs un-
der transient conditions, Fick’s second law of diffusion can be used
to predict the time variation of chloride concentration for one-
dimensional flow. This law can be expressed as a relationship be-
tween the diffusion coefficient and the gradients of concentration,
by direct analogy with the equations of heat conduction [10], as
follows:  
@Cx;t ¼ @ @C

D x;t ð1Þ
@t @x @x

where Cx, t is the concentration of chlorides at depth x and time t; D
is the diffusion coefficient of chlorides, which is assumed to have a
constant value, called ‘‘apparent’’ (or ‘‘effective’’) diffusion coeffi-
cient [2].

In fact, at early age, the diffusion coefficient presents a wide
range of scatter (especially with respect to the 28-day value); how-
ever this scatter becomes less significant, especially after 5 years.
All types of remaining uncertainties, such as time and space varia-
tion are supposed to be captured by the probabilistic model pro-
posed. Therefore, the diffusion coefficient used is taken as a
random variable having its characteristics based on, an ‘‘effective’’
time-invariant mean value, which is a good fit in the diffusion
model, and varies in a narrow range of standard deviation to take
into account the remaining uncertainties, that are induced by the
effects of chloride binding and concrete aging.

Under the assumptions of a constant diffusion coefficient, a con-
stant surface chloride concentration Cs as the boundary condition,
and the initial condition specified as Cx, t = 0 for x > 0, t = 0, Crank’s
solutionyields [10]:

Cx;t ¼ Cs 1 pxerf ffiffiffiffiffi ð2Þ
2 Dt

where erf(.) is the error function or Gauss error function, which is
very similar to the standard normal (or Gaussian) cumulative distri-
bution function [U(.)]. erf(.) and U(.) differ only by scaling and
translation as follows:

pffiffiffi
erf ðxÞ ¼ 2Uðx 2Þ  1 ð3Þ
In modeling the chloride ingress as a Fickian process, the following
assumptions are made:

 Some phenomena (e.g. capillary flow, chloride binding, etc.) are
not explicitly considered.
 Crank’ solution for a plane sheet assumes dealing with plane

isotropic concrete structures, i.e. one dimensional diffusion.
 The diffusion coefficient and surface chloride concentration are

assumed time-invariant.
 Initial concentration of chlorides in the concrete is negligible.
 Interaction with other ions and with electrical double layer is

ignored [9].

These conditions are not necessarily satisfied, for many reasons.
For example, the diffusion coefficient is not constant because it is
influenced by the following factors [25]: (i) concrete is not



1084 B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093
homogenous with some micro-cracks or some shrinkage-induced
cracks; (ii) moisture is unlikely to be uniform, and its input can
be considerable when the degree of saturation is high; (iii) some
chlorides are bound by cement hydrates; (iv) D is influenced by
concentration of chlorides content; and (v) chloride binding
changes with time.

Therefore, to minimize the error in assuming time-invariant diffu-
sion coefficient and surface chloride concentration, concrete cores are
usually taken from the concrete structure to determine the ‘‘apparent’’
or ’’effective’’ diffusion coefficient and ‘‘apparent’’ surface concentra-
tion by fitting the field data to Fick’s 2nd law of diffusion.

3. Overview of mechanism of corrosion of steel reinforcement
in concrete structures

The corrosion of conventional carbon or ‘‘black’’ steel reinforce-
ment embedded in concrete structures is an electrochemical pro-
cess in which the steel is dissolved [46]. In the general corrosion
process of steel in concrete, the steel loses its ions at the anode
by the oxidation reaction (Fe ? Fe++ + 2e). The electrons are re-
leased and transported to the cathode for the reduction of oxygen
(O2 + 2H2O + 4e? 4OH). The flow of ions through the concrete
pore solution and electrons form an electrical current for the reac-
tions to proceed. As a result, the electrical resistivity of concrete,
availability of oxygen, and chemistry of the pore solution are the
determining factors for the corrosion kinetics of the carbon steel
in a concrete medium [43,50]. The concrete pore solution is natu-
rally alkaline with a pH level between 12.5 and 13.5. Embedded in
such an environment, the steel is protected from corrosion by pas-
sivity, which is a condition for corrosion resistance of an active me-
tal caused by the formation of a thin surface film of corrosion
products [46]. The composition of the passive film is uncertain, it
is either ferrous (Fe2+) or ferric (Fe3+) oxides.

The hydroxyl ions (OH) act as a corrosion inhibitor in concrete
that is opposing the corrosive action of chloride ions, which destroy
the protective passive film. Although, the interaction mechanism be-
tween the chlorides and passive film is not well understood, the
mechanism can be analyzed from various viewpoints, including:

(i) Disruption of the passive film: The presence of chlorides
changes the composition, thickness, and density of the pas-
sive film, and increases its water content [33]. This facilitates
chloride penetration and consequently breaks down the pas-
sive film;

(ii) Reduction of the pH level: The pH level or concentration of
OH and Cl are two competing forces in the corrosion pro-
cess. The pH is reduced by an acid hydrolysis reaction as fol-
lows [23]:

Fe2þ þ 2H2Oþ 2Cl ! FeðOHÞ2 þ 2HCl ð4Þ
(iii) Catalyst of oxidation: Chlorides act also as a catalyst for the
oxidation of the steel by taking an active part in the reac-
tions [46]:

2Feþ 6Cl ! 2ðFeCl3Þ þ 4e ð5Þ
2ðFeCl3Þ þ 2OH ! FeðOHÞ2 þ 3Cl ð6Þ
The reactions consume OH ions and then release Cl ions back
into the solution. It results in a concentration of Cl and a reduc-
tion of pH at the point of corrosion initiation, which accounts for
pitting corrosion. The role of chlorides, more specifically free Cl,
in inducing corrosion is generally thought to be a competing
process with OH- that stabilizes the passive film. Therefore, a
relative high ratio of OH/Cl is critical to maintain the integrity
of the passive film. The quantity of chloride ions that initiate
corrosion is referred to as the ‘‘threshold chloride concentration’’
(Cth).
Corrosion in concrete structures can be described as a two
stage process [43]: (i) corrosion initiation; and (ii) corrosion prop-
agation. The corrosion initiation stage corresponds to the process
of chloride ions (chlorides) ingress into concrete (and/or carbon-
ation) while the steel remains passivated. The corrosion propaga-
tion stage starts after the initiation of active corrosion, and it
often occurs after the chloride concentration on the steel surface
reaches a certain threshold value (so-called ‘‘chloride threshold’’
Cth [43]) which depassivates the steel. Ideally, the corrosion initi-
ates at time Tei , which corresponds to an amount of chlorides (at
the steel level), which is greater than or equal to the chloride
threshold as follows:

C
d;e P Cth ð7Þ

Ti

where d represents the concrete cover depth of the steel. From Eq.
(7), the time to corrosion initiation can be deduced as follows:

Tei ¼ h d2 i2 ð8Þ
4D erf1 1 Cth

Cs

In this deterministic model, four parameters are assumed as
well-defined independent design parameters that are critical for
corrosion initiation: (i) structural parameter: concrete cover depth
d; (ii) material parameters: chloride diffusion coefficient D, which
is an indicator of the rate of chloride penetration into concrete, and
chloride threshold value Cth, which is an indicator of the corrosion
resistance of reinforcing steel; and (iii) environmental parameter:
surface chloride concentration Cs, which is a measure of the corro-
sion load or exposure risk of concrete structures. Given the inher-
ent complexity and heterogeneity of concrete as a corrosion
medium, there exists large uncertainty in the above mentioned
parameters and in the proposed model. The next section deals with
the uncertainty in chloride ingress and corrosion initiation, and
proposes efficient and practical methods of modeling it and pre-
dicting the probability of corrosion of concrete structures.
4. Uncertainty in mechanisms of chloride ingress into concrete
and steel corrosion

4.1. Overview of epistemic and aleatory uncertainties

Many factors contribute to the uncertainty in predicting the
chloride concentrations at different depths and times, as well as
in predicting the time to initiation of steel corrosion, which can
be grouped into the following two broad categories:

(a) Aleatoric or statistical uncertainties: The word aleatory is
derived from the Latin word ‘‘alea’’, which means the ‘‘roll-
ing of dice’’. Thus, aleatoric uncertainties are those pre-
sumed to be due to the intrinsic randomness in samples
and parameters, such as variability in chloride diffusivity
and concrete cover depth [22,37,13]. These uncertainties
are inherent and cannot be eliminated by more accurate
measurements.

(b) Epistemic or systematic uncertainties: The word epistemic
derives from the Greek ‘‘episteme’’, which means knowl-
edge. Thus, an epistemic uncertainty is one that is presumed
as being caused by lack of knowledge about fundamental
phenomena, such as the lack of knowledge about the true
mechanism of ingress of chlorides into concrete and the
mechanism of corrosion initiation by chloride attack. This
uncertainty can be reduced by improving the fundamental
physical models, calibrating the measures or adding more
explanatory variables to the model (more knowledge).



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1085
According to [22,37,13], the classification of the nature of
uncertainty depends on the context of application. In other
words, if the modeler can identify a way to reduce errors by col-
lecting data or adding new explanatory variables, then these er-
rors are epistemic. For example, more knowledge on the
composition and structure of the passive film and its mechanism
of deterioration may provide more reliable models to predict the
chloride threshold or onset of corrosion, and then the error in
prediction model can be categorized as epistemic. Another
example about the distinction between the two categories is
about a basic random variable describing a material property,
such as the chloride diffusivity. Should the uncertainty in the
chloride diffusivity be categorized as aleatory or epistemic?
The answer depends on the circumstances. If the diffusivity is
that of a concrete is in an existing structure, then the uncer-
tainty should be categorized as epistemic if cores taken from
the structure can be tested, yielding information about the diffu-
sivity. The testing may, of course, involve random errors of mea-
surement, particularly if non-destructive methods are used. This
measurement uncertainty should also be categorized as episte-
mic, if there is possibility of considering alternative methods of
measurement. On the other hand, the uncertainty in the chloride
diffusivity should be categorized as aleatory, if there will be no
attempts to make more detailed control of mix design and the
control of the quality of workmanship in the construction of
the structure. For the modeling of chloride ingress and corrosion
initiation, the following sources of uncertainty can be identified:

(i) Inherent uncertainty of the basic model variables

– Chloride threshold (Cth): It depends on the type of rein-

forcement, electrochemical environment in concrete,
and testing method and consequently, a considerable
variation is expected for this parameter. Recent studies
of the chloride threshold show that, for every kind of
reinforcement (stainless steel, galvanized, carbon fiber,
etc.) that normally characterizes the chloride threshold
there is considerable variability, and it’s related to
other external variables [49] (e.g. w/c ratio, humidity,
aggregates, supplementary cementing materials like sil-
ica-fume (SF) and pulverized fuel ash (PFA)). Bamforth
et al. report [2] presented some values of reduction of
chloride threshold with respect to the percentage
added of SF and PFA.
The chloride threshold depends on the humidity of the
concrete; this implies that for structures in a marine
environment, the chloride threshold value is higher
than for highway bridges. The chloride threshold level
to cause initiation of corrosion is also lacking a stan-
dard test method to quantify it. Glass and Buenfeld
suggest that a chloride threshold value for carbon steel
can be expected to fall into a range of 0.03–0.07% of
total chlorides by mass of concrete [4,18]. Bamforth
et al. reported a variation, by weight of cement, from
0.06% to 2.2% for the chloride threshold for carbon steel
[2]. Even though [4,18,2] acknowledge the variation
and dependency of Cth, however they use a mean value
ignoring all variability. In this paper, Cth is modeled as
a random variable with a standard deviation based on
the variability of data obtained.

– Concrete cover (d): Its variability depends on the quality
of workmanship and control during construction. For
example, the associated variation of the concrete cover
depth for bridge decks built in the sixties and seventies
can vary from 10% to up to 50% [27].
– Chloride diffusion coefficient (D): This material property is
a measure of the rate of chloride penetration into con-
crete. The value of D depends on concrete mix design,
such as water/cement ratio, quantity of mineral admix-
tures, aggregate fraction, and other parameters such as
temperature and age of concrete [3,42]. The typical val-
ues of D for normal concrete (e.g. w/c = 0.4) were
reported between 1012 m2/s and 1011 m2/s [42,5], e.g.
D = 4  1012 m2/s for a normal concrete with w/c = 0.4
and D = 1011 m2/s for w/c = 0.55 [5]. The incorporation
of mineral admixtures (e.g. fly ash, slag, silica fume);
however, can lead to orders of magnitude reduction of
D in the long term [42]. Furthermore, D is time-indepen-
dent and as such should be modeled using a more com-
plex mathematical model such as a stochastic process.

– Surface chloride concentration (Cs): there is a considerable
variability in the surface chloride concentration between
one region and another; it can vary from 0 kg/m3 to
25 kg/m3. Weyers et al. classified the corrosive environ-
ments surrounding bridge decks into four categories in
terms of surface chloride concentration: Light, Moderate,
Heavy, and Severe Exposures [48]. However, within the
same structure, the variation can be also significant (var-
iation coefficient of 30% [4]). Therefore, the study should
be separated by regions or provinces by considering a
case by case study (geographically, regulatory, etc.), then
the variability in each region can be modeled.
(ii) Uncertainty in the physical model: resulting from selection of the
physical sub-models used to describe the derived variables due
to the assumption that chloride transport is the mainly diffusion
process and ignoring other phenomena as the adsorption or the
permeability due to cracks. Nevertheless, some of these phe-
nomena are captured through the use of the so-called ‘‘appar-
ent’’ or ‘‘effective’’ diffusion coefficient.

(iii) Statistical uncertainty: This results from the selection of the
probabilistic sub-model (e.g. fX(Cth, d, D, Cs), such as the
assumption of a random variable instead of a stochastic pro-
cess or random field, and the estimation of its parameters
(estimation of mean values), type of distribution to describe
the basic variables.

(iv) Uncertainty in measurement: Resulting from errors in mea-
suring the key parameters, based on which the parameters
are estimated. These include errors involved in indirect mea-
surement, e.g., the measurement of a quantity through a
proxy, as in non-destructive testing of concrete cover depth.

4.2. Need for uncertainty modeling using probabilistic approaches

As mentioned above, the model and its associated parameters
can exhibit a considerable level of uncertainty (e.g. chloride thresh-
old), which may have coefficients of variation of 20% or higher,
while some other variables (e.g. concrete cover depth, diffusion
coefficient, etc.) may present a narrower scatter with coefficients
of variation of 20% or lower [47,15,41,28]. The values of these
parameters used in deterministic models are mainly based on the
mean values or some conservative characteristic values of the vari-
ables (e.g. lower values for the ‘‘resistance‘‘ parameters such as the
chloride threshold, and higher values for the ‘‘loading’’ parameters,
such as Cs). The deterministic models can predict two states only
for each performance measure or limit state investigated, i.e. fail-
ure or non-failure (e.g. corroded or non-corroded). A limit state is
the border that separates the desired state of performance of a sys-
tem from the ’’failed’’ state. For illustration purposes, an example
of the limit state of corrosion of reinforcing steel is given. If after



1086 B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093
a period of time, the mean value (cd, t) of the chloride concentration
at the steel level (Cd, t) is found lower than the mean value (cth) of
chloride threshold level (Cth), as shown in Fig. 1, the deterministic
model of Eq. (8) predicts no corrosion (i.e. the steel is in the passive
state). Conversely, if cd, t is found higher than cth, then the model
predicts that the reinforcing steel is corroded. In actual field condi-
tions, the measurements of chloride concentrations at the steel le-
vel can be represented by a scatter diagram or frequency
distribution or probability density function (pdf); similarly, the
chloride threshold concentration has also a scattered distribution
with a pdf as shown in Fig. 1. From Fig. 1, it can be seen that the
deterministic statements ‘‘corroded’’ or ‘‘non-corroded’’ are not
anymore valid. Instead, there is a distinct zone or shaded area
where Cd, t and Cth overlap , where the chloride concentration at
the steel level is higher than the chloride threshold value, which
is then defined as the probability of corrosion. Hence, the extent
of corrosion is neither zero nor 100%, as assumed in the determin-
istic prediction models, but is equal to a finite value, which starts at
zero at the start of the chloride ingress stage and increases with
time and ultimately can reach 100%.

It is therefore clear that the use of deterministic models cannot
predict the actual chloride levels at different depths and times and
cannot predict the level of corrosion. Hence, such models present
serious shortcomings regarding the selection of appropriate
design, maintenance and rehabilitation strategies that will ensure
a long service life. A probabilistic modeling of the performance of
RC structures has much to offer with regard to simplicity as
compared to attempts to formulate purely deterministic models
[34,15,26,28].
5. Probabilistic modeling of chloride-induced corrosion in
concrete structures using semi-analytical first- and second-
order reliability methods

5.1. Formulation of limit state function for corrosion initiation

As previously mentioned, a limit state is the border that sepa-
rates the desired state from the failed state. The term ‘‘failure’’ is
used, in this paper, in its general sense and refers to the violation
of any specified performance requirement of the concrete structure
at any stage during its service life. For example, failure can be de-
fined as the event when ’’chloride concentration exceeds the
threshold chloride level at the steel location’’, or ‘‘chloride concen-
tration at a given depth exceeds some specified limit’’. Critical
(Cd,t)

Corrosion 
domain

(Cth)

cd,t cth Cl- Concentration

Fig. 1. Deterministic vs. probabilistic predictions of corrosion.

Frequency
structural states or limit states otherwise are in principle divided
into two categories: (i) ultimate limit states (ULSs) and (ii) service-
ability limit states (SLSs).

Ultimate limit states relate generally to the loss of static equi-
librium and collapse and limit state functions may be formulated
to express the boundary between a safe and unsafe condition for
factors such as bending, tensile, shear and compressive strength.
Serviceability limit states restrict the normal use of structure and
can include excessive deformation, excessive vibration, excessive
local damage (e.g. cracking, spalling, corrosion, etc.). Limit state
functions for serviceability can be formulated to describe the dif-
ferent phases associated with damage initiation and accumulation
in concrete structures, which can include corrosion initiation,
cracking, spalling and delamination of the concrete. Other service-
ability limit states can relate to phenomena which have an effect
on durability such as deformations due to excessive loads. Events
associated with serviceability limit states are often further distin-
guished into irreversible and reversible states [14,30]. Irreversible
limit states refer to events after which the structure cannot recover
or return to its condition before the event (e.g. corrosion). Revers-
ible limit states, on the other hand, refer to events after which the
structure may regain its previous condition (e.g. deformations that
are not excessive i.e. before cracking) [30].

Depending on the variable of interest, the corresponding per-
formance function can be formulated, generally, as the difference
between a term that is equivalent to a ‘‘resistance’’ and a term
that is equivalent to a ‘‘load or load effect’’. For example, the term
‘‘resistance’’ can be used to refer to the maximum permissible
chloride concentration at the steel level, or chloride threshold
level Cth which defines the resistance to corrosion of a given rein-
forcing steel type, or resistance of the concrete cover to corrosion-
induced cracking, or spalling, or delamination. Similarly, the term
‘‘load effect’’ can be used to refer to the chloride concentration at
the steel level Cd, t, or the corrosion-induced stresses that lead to
cracking, spalling, etc. The values of both parameters Cth and Cd, t
can be functions of several variables (e.g. cover depth d, time t,
diffusion coefficient D, water cement ratio, etc). Therefore, the
limit state function for corrosion initiation can be formulated as
follows:

gðCs;d;D;CthÞ ¼ Cth  Cd;tðCs; d;D; tÞ ð9Þ

Hence:

g(Cs, d, D, Cth) = 0 = ‘‘limit state’’.
g(Cs, d, D, Cth) > 0 = ‘‘desired state’’, or ‘‘un-corroded state’’.
g(Cs, d, D, Cth) < 0 = ‘‘corrosion state’’, or ‘‘failure state’’.

The limit state equation g(Cs, d, D, Cth) = 0 can be represented
geometrically by an n-dimensional surface, which is referred to
as a ‘‘failure surface’’ or in this case ‘‘corrosion initiation surface’’.
Using Fick’s second law of diffusion of Eqs. (7) and (8), the limit
state function for the corrosion initiation time can be formulated
as a function of four variables, which include the concrete cover
(d), diffusion coefficient (D), surface chloride concentration (Cs)
and chloride threshold (Cth), and one parameter which is the time,
as follows: 
gðCs;d;D;CthÞ ¼ Cth  Cs 1 pderf ffiffiffiffiffi ð10Þ

2 Dt

For example, for the case of predicting the probability of corrosion
after a specific time ti,g(X) can be written as follows:

gðCs;Cth; ti;D;dÞ ¼ h d2 i2  ti ð11Þ
4D erf1 1 Cth

Cs



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1087
5.2. FORM and SORM methods for predicting corrosion probability

The probability of corrosion at time (t) as expressed in Eq. (11)
corresponds to the integral of the probability density function fX(x)
on thZe corrosion domain, as follows:

Pf ¼ fXðCs;d;D;CthÞdx ð12Þ
gðCs ;Cth ;t;d;DÞ<0

For illustration purposes, Fig. 2 shows a model with two input
variables that characterize the limit-state function g(X1, X2) (two-
dimensional representation). To calculate this integral (i.e.
probability of corrosion Pf), several methods can be used. The most
obvious and simple to implement is the Monte Carlo simulation
(MCS). It consists of simulating outcomes of the limit state and
counting the number of corrosion events obtained. In other words,
random sampling of input variables [(Cs, d, D, Cth) or as in the
example in Fig. 2 is represented by (X1, X2)] allows to collect a
number of realizations for g(X1, X2). If n is the number of simula-
tions, the frequency of corrosion observation (represented by the
ratio between the number of realizations verifying g(X1, X2) < 0
over the total number of simulations (n)), tends toward the proba-
bility of corrosion when n increases. This method attempts to char-
acterize the whole domain of failure so it needs an important
number of simulations (i.e. slow convergence rate). Advanced
methods use an intelligent way to select simulations, also very effi-
cient, which are based on two main concepts: (i) Approximation of
the nonlinear state function and (ii) ‘‘smart’’ way of doing the sim-
ulations (e.g. experimental designs). Below are the most important
features of these advanced methods:

 Approximate FORM/SORM methods: They are based on the Tay-
lor’s expansion series of the limit state function near the so-
called ‘‘design point’’, which is explained in the next section.
These methods allow the analyst to compute estimates of the
probability of failure at a relative low computational cost com-
pared to Monte Carlo simulation (MCS).
X2 
x o o

x x o o o o o
x x

x x o o
o o o o o

x o
o o

x o
x x x o Corrosion 

o domain
x o o o g(X) < 0

x x x o
o o

x o
x o o

x o o o o o
o o

x x x o o o
x x x o o o o o o o o

x x x o o o o o o
x x o

o o
x o o o o o

x x o o o o o o
x x x x o o o o

x x x o o
x x x x o o

x x x x x o o o
x o o

x x x x x o o
x x o

x
x x x x x x o

x
x x x x x

X1

Fig. 2. Illustrative sketch of limit state of corrosion domain.
 Advanced simulation methods, including: Importance Sampling
[20], Directional Simulation, Latin Hypercube Sampling [32]
and subset simulation method and Line Sampling technique
[24,40].

In this paper, the focus is on the two approximate semi-ana-
lytical methods of FORM and SORM, which are briefly presented.
Their applicability and efficiency are illustrated in the illustrative
example of the last section of the paper by comparing their
accuracy and efficiency to that of MCS. In fact, the physical vari-
ables Xi (e.g. Cth, Cd,t,) cannot be represented by a multidimen-
sional centered Gaussian density of probability with variance
equal to 1 and without any correlation; therefore, the method
presented above cannot be applied on physical variables. Hence,
a transformation of the physical variable space into a new space
of statistically independent Gaussian variables Ui called reduced
variates [21,29], with zero mean and unit standard deviations.
The mean value point in the physical space is mapped into the
origin of the Ui space and the corrosion surface in the physical
space is mapped onto its corresponding surface, as shown in
Fig. 3.

For independent variables, the transformation T can be obtained
using the equality of the distribution functions applied to their
associated variables, which means:

FC ð
th ;C c

d;t th;cd;tÞ¼UU1 ;U2 ðu1;u2Þ)ðu1;u2Þ¼U1
U1 ;U
ðFCth ;C ðc ;c 1

2 d;t th d;tÞÞ ð 3Þ

where FC Þ e r
th ;C ð: r p esents the joint distribution function of the

d;t

physical variables and UU1 ;U2 the independent standard Gaussian
distribution. This transformation [i.e. Tð:Þ ¼ U1

U1 ;U
oFCth ;C ð:Þ], from

2 d;t

the physical space [e.g. (cth, cd, t)] to the standard space [e.g. (u1,
u2)], is called iso-probabilistic transformation. For the case where
the variables are not independent, a general form of the transforma-
tion has been given by Rosenblatt [29].

The aim of the iso-probabilistic transformation is to ‘‘normal-
ize’’ the input variables to get an invariant index. In other words,
the input variables are transformed into multinormal Gaussian
variables that have symmetry of revolution around the mean value
point which represents the origin of the U space. The design point
P⁄ represents the most probable failure (corrosion) point which is: (i)
a point in the corrosion domain and (ii) the closest from the origin
(i.e. means higher frequency) i.e. the point in the corrosion domain
that has maximum density (see Fig. 4).

In Fig. 4, the distance (OP⁄) separating it from the origin is
called the Hasofer–Lind reliability index bHL [21]. This index is
determined by solving the following nonlinear optimization
problem:  rffiXffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi!
Find bHL ¼min u2

i ð14Þ
i

Subject to : hðu1;u2Þ 6 0 ð15Þ

where h(u1, u2) is the transformed limit state function in the stan-
dard space (see Fig. 3).

(a) Prediction of corrosion probability using FORM
The first-order reliability method (FORM) method consists of
the approximation of the limit-state function into a hyper
plane using a first-order Taylor’series approximation of the
limit state function in order to express the probability of fail-
ure as function of the reliability index (see Figs. 4 and 5).
Using mathematical techniques (e.g. rotation of the U space
in the direction of OP⁄, and using Fubini’s theorem to sepa-
rate the integrals), the multiple integral of Pf can be reduced
to a simple integral. Therefore, the probability of corrosion
can be evaluated as follows:



1088 B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093

Fig. 3. Transformation of physical space into standard space.

Fig. 4. Illustration of most probable point of corrosion.

Fig. 5. FORM/SORM approximation of limit state function.
Z Z b 2

Þdu1du2 ¼ p
1ffiffiffiffiffiffi u

Pf ¼ fðU1 ;U2Þðu1; u e
1

2 2 du1
hðu1 ;u2Þ 2p 1

¼ /ðbÞ ð16Þ
with /(.) is the cumulative distribution function of the Gauss-
ian or normal distribution. In conclusion, the probability of
corrosion calculated using FORM is:
Pf ;FORM ¼ /ðbÞ ¼ 1 /ðbÞ ð17Þ

The advantage of this method is that it does not need a large
number of iterations because it searches for one point (the
design point) instead of characterizing the whole domain.
Furthermore, it can be used with only two input data for each
parameter, namely their mean value and coefficient of varia-
tion (assuming normal distribution), which is a major advan-
tage over MCS that requires the probability distribution
functions of all parameters. Such data are not readily
available.
(b) Prediction of corrosion probability using SORM
The second-order reliability method (SORM) (also called cur-
vature-fitting) consists of establishing a second order Taylor
series of the series expansion of the limit state function
around the design point. This requires the computation of
the second order Taylor series at the design point. Similar
to FORM, a suitable rotation allows the design point P⁄ to
takes the coordinates: P⁄ = (0, 0, b). Geometrically, the limit
state hypersurface is approximated by a paraboloid at the
design point (See Fig. 5). This approximation requires the
calculation of the first n  1 curvatures of the limit state
function denoted by:
fjj; j ¼ 1; ;n 1g ð18Þ
Several approximations for the probability of failure using
SORM, were proposed [7,45]. The asymptotic formula for the
probability of failure derived by Breitung [7] is given by:
Pf ;SORM  UðbÞPn1
j¼1 ð1 bjjÞ1=2 ð19Þ



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1089

Table 1
Input data for illustrative example of RC bridge deck subjected to chlorides from
deicing salts.

Cs d D Cth

Mean value 6 kg/m3 70 mm 0.4 cm2/year 0.7 kg/m3

Coefficient of variation 30% 20% 25% 20%

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8 0.7 kg/m3

0.6
hence, SORM uses the results found by FORM for the design
point, and corrects the expression of the probability of failure
obtained by FORM.

(c) Determination of importance factors
The importance factors associated with FORM can be seen as
a specific technique for sensitivity analysis. The FORM
importance factors offer a way to rank the importance of
the input variables with respect to the probability of corro-
sion. They are often interpreted also as indicators of the
impact of modeling the input components as random
variables rather than fixed values. For the case proposed
above, the importance factor of each parameter represents
its contribution to the reliability index. In other words, the
design point P⁄ is represented by the vector OP⁄ that defines
the distance from the origin to the mosPt probable corrosion
point (P⁄); OP⁄ can be written as: OP ¼ iuiei. Every param-
eter (e.g. Cs, d, D, Cth) has its transform in the standard space
(ui)i. Therefore, the importance of the chloride surface value
CS, for example, can be written as follows:
0.4
a2
1 ¼

u2
1

OP2 ð20Þ

0.2

0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

Fig. 6. Average time-varying chloride concentration at steel level.

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5 Pf = 45%
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1
MCS: 100,000 simulations

0
0 10 20 30 40 50

Fig. 7. Prediction of time-dependent probability of corrosion using Monte Carlo
simulation.
P
Since 2

iai ¼ 1, the importance factor is expressed as a per-
centage value.

6. Illustrative example

6.1. Description of the structure

The proposed probabilistic approach for the uncertainty model-
ing and prediction of chloride concentration of concrete and rein-
forcement corrosion is illustrated on a reinforced concrete
highway bridge deck structure that is subjected to the application
of deicing salts during winter. The structure is a normal concrete
bridge deck reinforced with conventional carbon steel. Reinforce-
ment ratios of 0.3% are used for both top and bottom mats of rein-
forcement in the longitudinal and transverse directions.

The bridge deck is exposed to a corrosive environment with a
surface chloride concentration of 6 kg/m3 and a coefficient of var-
iation (cov) of 30%. The concrete cover depth for the top reinforce-
ment steel has a mean value of 70 mm and cov of 20%. The chloride
diffusion coefficient in this concrete has a mean value of 0.4 cm2/
year and cov of 25%. The chloride threshold of this carbon steel is
assumed to have a mean value of 0.7 kg/m3 and cov of 20%.

The example is used to show the applicability, accuracy and
efficiency of FORM and SORM to model the uncertainty in the
parameters governing the probability of corrosion of reinforced
concrete (RC) structures subjected to chloride attack. The main
objectives of the example include also:

 Highlight the importance of taking into account the variability
of different parameters and its impact on the probability of
corrosion.
 Compare the predictions and efficiency of FORM and SORM to

Monte Carlo simulations.
 Study the sensitivity of different parameters of the model and

their influence on the service life of reinforced concrete
structures.

The parameters values are based on data taken from field data
and literature [27,28], and are listed in Table 1.

By considering the parameters mean values, the prediction of
deterministic time to corrosion initiation can easily be found by
using the Fick’s second law of Eq. (8). Fig. 6 shows the deterministic
predictions (using mean values) of the chloride concentrations at
the steel level at different points in time within the service life of
the structure. As discussed earlier, corrosion initiates when the
concentration of chlorides at the steel level becomes greater than
the chloride threshold assumed as 0.7 kg/m3, which in this case,
occurs after 23 years and 10 months. When taking into account
the variability of different parameters, the concept of time to cor-
rosion becomes a probability of corrosion. The values obtained can
be considered as more realistic estimates than the deterministic
values. Fig. 7 shows the predictions of the time-varying probability
of corrosion using Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) with 100,000
simulations for every interval of time and assuming lognormal ran-
dom variables for all parameters. This figure shows that the prob-
ability of corrosion at the specific time determined in the previous
section (after 23 years and 10 months) is around 45%. In this study,
all the parameters assumed to be independent, i.e. correlation is
not taken into consideration.



1090 B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093

1

0.9 (a)
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
MCS: 100,000 simulations

0.1 FORM
SORM

0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

0.7
(b)

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

0.45

0.4

0.35 MCS: 100,000 simulations
FORM
SORM

20 22 24 26 28 30

Fig. 9. Comparison of accuracy and efficiency of FORM and SORM with MCS.
6.2. Corrosion probability predictions using FORM

As it can be seen, the diffusion-based corrosion initiation model
is a non-linear function of the four key parameters, which requires
an important number of MC simulations to be characterized. In this
section, the first order reliability method (FORM) is applied to the
example presented above. The aim is to test its efficiency for this
kind of highly nonlinear problems. The first one, taken as the refer-
ence solution, is performed using MCS with 100,000 simulations.
Second, FORM was implemented. It requires only 300 iterations
to provide satisfying results (smooth curve). The third analyses
were done using MCS with the same number of simulations
needed to determine the design point with the FORM method.
Fig. 8 shows that FORM yields almost the same probability curve
as the MCS with a negligible error that overestimates the probabil-
ity of failure. Therefore, its error is on the conservative side.

6.3. Corrosion probability predictions using SORM

As mentioned above, SORM uses the curvature of the failure
surface at the design point (second derivative), so it is more accu-
rate than FORM and requires more iterations. In Fig. 9a, the two
methods FORM and SORM are compared. By considering the inter-
val 20–30 years, it can be seen that the difference between the two
methods is not significant as shown in Fig. 9b.

6.4. Sensitivity of corrosion probability to governing parameters

To show the influence of the variability of the parameters on the
probability of corrosion, the same example is considered at a spec-
ified time and by varying the precision of one or more of the
parameters.

(a) Impact of cover depth: By varying the variation coefficient of
the cover depth only (i.e. keeping everything else the same
as in Table 1), its impact on the corrosion probability after
15 years is evaluated using FORM and MCS, which is shown
on Fig. 10a. Fig. 10a shows that an increase of up to 25% in
the probability of corrosion when the coefficient of variation
of the cover depth is varied from 0% to 40%. By comparison
with the previous analysis, this variation of 25% in the corro-
sion probability is equivalent to an uncertainty of 10 years
(from 15 to 25 years in Fig. 9a).

(b) Impact of chloride threshold: A change in the variation coeffi-
cient of the chloride threshold has a much lower impact on
the probability of corrosion than that of the cover depth. The
1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
MCS: 100,000 simulations

0.1 FORM
MCS: 300 simulations

0
0 10 20 30 40 50

Fig. 8. Comparison of accuracy and efficiency of FORM and MCS in predicting
corrosion probability.
same range of variation was noticed for the diffusion coeffi-
cient (D) and surface chloride concentration (Cs). In terms of
the efficiency of FORM vs. MCS, the results are also satisfying
in the case of change of the coefficient of variation (cov).

6.5. Importance factors of different parameters

This section presents the study of the influence of every param-
eter and its contribution to the probability of corrosion or reliabil-
ity index, by calculating the importance factors. First, an example
of calculation of the importance factor for the above case is pre-
sented. The next paragraphs show how the influence of each
parameter can change with time and how its importance depends
also on its coefficient of variation even for similar mean values. The
parameters (Cs, d, D, Cth) are assumed to be independent and follow
lognormal distributions with the mean and coefficients of variation
values presented in Table 1. Taking the example of t = 20 years, the
corresponding Hasofer–Lind reliability index bHL = 0.43 and associ-
ated probability of corrosion is 33%. The importance factor of each
parameter is shown in Fig. 11. Fig. 11 shows the dominance of the
cover depth on the other factors. In the major examples studied,
this remains valid even if the probability law used is normal (or
Gaussian) instead of lognormal and even for slightly different
mean values of the parameters.

These importance factors are influenced by two key parame-
ters; (i) time within the design life of the structure and (ii) the coef-
ficient of variation of some parameters. In the next paragraphs
these two cases are discussed.



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1091

0.35
(a)

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05 MCS:100,000 simulations
FORM: ~=150 Iterations
MCS: ~=150 simulations

0
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4

0.2 (b)
0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1 MCS: 200,000 simulations
FORM:~= 160 iterations
MCS:~= 160 simulations

0.08
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4

Fig. 10. Impacts of parameter variability on corrosion probability: (a) impact of
cover depth; (b) impact of chloride threshold level.

d: 58.9 %

Cs: 12.6 %

Cth: 5.7 %

D: 22.8 %

Fig. 11. Importance factors of governing parameters to corrosion probability.
(a) Sensitivity of importance factors to time
Importance factor Importance factor
– The importance factors were calculated throughout the
service life. For the reference case study (in Table 1),
Fig. 12a shows that the importance factor of the cover
depth remains slightly unchanged.

– In case of light exposure to chlorides (e.g. for Cs 6 2 kg/
m3), the Cs importance factor becomes more significant
with time. In other words, more attention should be
given to obtain accurate estimates of the chloride surface
in case of long service life design. For example, at
50 years, the importance factor of Cs is about 30% which
becomes as important as the cover depth (Fig. 12b).

– In case of a more severe exposure (e.g. Cs P 12 kg/m3),
the use of stainless steel reinforcement (e.g. Cth  4 kg/
m3) may be more appropriate to compensate for the
severe exposure [same range of values for the probability
of corrosion as in the case above (Cth  0.7; Cs  2 kg/
m3)], and the importance factors of the cover depth and
Cs keep the same shapes with respect to the service life
(see Fig. 13).
(b) Sensitivity of importance factor to coefficient of variation
At a given time, (e.g. 20 years), the influence of the coef-
ficient of variation on the importance factors and the
probability of corrosion can be evaluated. By assuming
the mean values of the parameters as the same as in Table
1, and after varying the coefficient of variation of every
parameter, three remarks can be made:

(i) An increase in the coefficient of variation (from 0% to
40%) of any parameter increases its importance fac-
tor, therefore increases its importance with respect
to the other parameters, especially the importance
Reference case (Tab.1) Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d

C  =  6 kg/m3 3
s    &  C th =0.7 kg/m Imp Factor D

Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM

0 10 20 30 40 50
years

Relatively Light exposure Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d

C  =  2 kg/m3 3
s    &  C th =0.7 kg/m Imp Factor D

Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM

0 10 20 30 40 50
years

Fig. 12. Impact factors of model parameters on service life.

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8



1092 B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093

Imp Factor Cs Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d Imp Factor d
Imp Factor D Imp Factor D
Imp Factor Cth Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM curve Pf FORM

0 10 20 30 40 50 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
years D variation coefficient

Fig. 13. Impact factors of model parameters on service life for cases of severe Fig. 16. Sensitivity of impact factor to variability of diffusion coefficient.
exposure and carbon steel reinforcement.

Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d
Imp Factor D
Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM

Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d
Imp Factor D
Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Cover depth variation coefficient

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Fig. 17. Sensitivity of impact factor to variability of cover depth.

Cs variation coefficient

Fig. 14. Sensitivity of impact factor to variability of surface chloride concentration
(kg/m3).

Imp Factor Cs
Imp Factor d
Imp Factor D
Imp Factor Cth
curve Pf FORM

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Ct h variation coefficient

Fig. 15. Sensitivity of impact factor to variability of chloride threshold.

Importance factor Importance factor Importance factor
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

Importance factor Importance factor 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
factor of the cover depth, which accounts for almost
all the increase of the importance factor of interest
(see Figs. 14–17).

(ii) The importance factor of the cover depth increases
at a higher rate when its variation coefficient is
increased (see Fig. 17). In other words, the increase
in the importance factor for the parameters Cs and
Cth remain in a range of 20%, for the diffusion coeffi-
cient D in the range of 40% (see Figs. 14–16), but for
the cover depth, an 80% increase is noticed for 40%
increase in its variation coefficient (Fig. 17).
(iii) The probability of corrosion is affected margin-
ally by a change in the variation coefficient of
the three parameters Cs, D and Cth; its range of
variation does not exceed the 5%; however
exceeds 20% in case of change in the cover depth
variation coefficient (see Fig. 17).
7. Summary and conclusions

This paper presented two simplified semi-analytical probabilis-
tic methods based on the first- and second-order reliability meth-
ods (FORM/SORM) to model the uncertainty of the parameters that
govern the chloride ingress into concrete and onset of corrosion of
reinforcing steel in reinforced concrete structures subjected to
chlorides from deicing salts. A case study illustrated the main capa-
bility and efficiency of the FORM & SORM models for the life cycle-
based design and management of reinforced concrete structures.
These models can be used to help designers quantify how changes
to the structural design and maintenance will affect its probability
of corrosion and service life.

The paper and the case study highlighted the benefits of proba-
bilistic models to predict the service life of reinforced concrete
structures when compared to deterministic models. The illustra-
tive example showed that the simplified FORM and SORM methods



B. Saassouh, Z. Lounis / Cement & Concrete Composites 34 (2012) 1082–1093 1093
can be applied even for highly non-linear problems, which is the
case of the chloride ingress and corrosion problems. It illustrated
the efficiency of FORM vs. Monte Carlo simulation especially when
the coefficients of variations are relatively low (less than 50%).

The proposed methods enables also to study the sensitivity of
the corrosion probability to different parameters, including their
mean values and coefficients of variation. It is found that in order
to achieve a low corrosion probability and durable design, the con-
crete cover depth is the most influencing parameter. More specifi-
cally, the variability of the cover depth makes it very important vs.
the other parameters (importance factor increases of 80% for 40%
increase in its coefficient of variation). In terms of probability of
corrosion, an increase of 20% is noticed for a change in the coeffi-
cient of variation, which is relatively high with respect to other
parameters (5%).

It is also found that it is important to identify the severity of the
environment, type of concrete, and type of reinforcement to define
different classes of durability designs of concrete structures built in
chloride-laden environments. However, for effective life cycle de-
sign of structures, the life cycle costs associated with the changes
in each design parameter should be evaluated in order to determine
the optimum service life design of reinforced concrete structures.
References

[1] Alonso C, Andrade C, Castello M, Castro P. Chloride threshold values to
depassivate reinforcing bars embedded in a standardized opc mortar. Cem
Concr Res 2000;30:1047–55.

[2] Bamforth P, Price W, Emerson M. An international review of chloride ingress
into structural concrete. Contractor report 359. Transport Research Laboratory,
United Kingdom; 1997.

[3] Bentz D. Influence of silica fume on diffusivity in cement based materials, ii.
Multi-scale modeling of concrete diffusivity. Cem Concr Res 2003;30:1121–9.

[4] Bentz E. Probabilistic modeling of service life for structures subjected to
chlorides. ACI Mater J 2003;100(5):391–7.

[5] Bijen J. Benefits of slag and fly ash. Construct Build Mater 1996;10(5):309–14.
[6] Boulfiza M, Sakai K, Banthia N, Yoshida H. Prediction of chloride ions ingress in

uncracked and cracked concrete. ACI Mater J 2003;100(1):38–48.
[7] Breitung K. Asymptotic approximation for multinormal integrals. J Eng Mech

1984;110(3):357–66.
[8] Cady P, Weyers R. Chloride penetration and deterioration of concrete bridge

decks. Cem Concr Aggreg 1983;5(2):81–7.
[9] Chatterji S. On the applicability of Fick’s second law to chloride ion migration

through portland cement concrete. Cem Concr Res 1995:299–303.
[10] Crank J. The mathematics of diffusion. 2nd ed. London: Oxford University

Press; 1975.
[11] Cusson D, Lounis Z, Daigle L. Benefits of internal curing on service life and life-

cycle cost of high-performance concrete bridge decks – a case study. Cem
Concr Compos 2010;32(5):339–50.

[12] Cusson D, Lounis Z, Daigle L. Durability monitoring for improved service life
predictions of concrete bridge decks in corrosive environments. Comput-Aid
Civil Infrastruct Eng 2011;26(7):524–41.

[13] Der Kiureghian A, Ditlevsen O. Aleatory or epistemic? Does it matter. Struct Saf
2009;31:105–12.

[14] DuraCrete. Design framework. BRITE-EURAM-Project BE95-1347/R1; 1997.
[15] Frangopol D, Lin K, Estes A. Reliability of reinforced concrete girders under

corrosion attack. ASCE J Struct Eng 1997;123(3):286–97.
[16] Frantois R, Arliguie G. Effect of microcracking and cracking on the

development of corrosion in reinforced concrete members. Mag Concr Res
1999;51(2):143–50.

[17] Gérard B, Marchand J. Influence of cracking on the diffusion properties of
cement-based materials : Part i: Influence of continuous cracks on the steady-
state regime. Cem Concr Res 2000;30(1):37–43.

[18] Glass G, Buenfeld N. Chloride threshold levels for corrosion induced
deterioration of steel in concrete, chloride penetration into concrete. In:
Nilsson L, Ollivier J. editors, Proceedings of the RILEM international workshop
on chloride penetration into concrete; 1997. p. 429–52.

[19] Grace W. Chloride penetration in marine concrete – a computer model for
design and service life evaluation. In: Parkins RN, editor. Life prediction of
corrodible structures, vol. 1. NACE; 1994. p. 527.
[20] Harbitz A. Efficient and accurate probability of failure calculation by the use of
the importance sampling technique. In: Proc fourth int conf on applications of
statistics and probability in soil and structural engineering; 1983. p. 825–36.

[21] Hasofer A, Lind N. Exact and invariant second-moment code format. J Eng
Mech Div, ASCE (EM1) 1974;100:111–21.

[22] Hofer E. When to separate uncertainties and when not to separate. Reliab Eng
Syst Saf 1996;54(2–3):113–8.

[23] Jones DA. Principles and prevention of corrosion. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall; 1992.

[24] Koutsourelakis P, Pradlwarter H, Schueller GI. Reliability of structures in high
dimensions, part i: Algorithms and applications. Prob Eng Mech 2004; 19:
409–17.

[25] Kropp J. Chlorides in concrete. In: Performance criteria for concrete durability.
RILEM Report 12 E& FN SPON; 1995. p. 138–64.

[26] Lounis Z. Reliability-based life prediction of aging bridge decks. In: Naus D,
editor. life prediction and aging management of concrete structures. Rilem
Publications; 2000. p. 229–38.

[27] Lounis Z. Uncertainty modeling of chloride contamination and corrosion of
concrete bridge. In: Ayyub B, Attoh-Okine NO, editors. Applied research in
uncertainty modeling and analysis. Springer; 2004. p. 491–511 (Chapter 22).

[28] Lounis Z, Mirza M. Reliability-based service life prediction of deteriorating
concrete structures. In: Concrete under severe conditions; 2001. p. 965–72.

[29] Madsen HO, Krenk S, Lind, NC. Methods of structural safety, NJ ed. Prentice-
Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs; 1986.

[30] Malioka V. Condition indicators for the assessment of local and spatial
deterioration of concrete structures. Ph.D. thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich; 2009.

[31] McCarter W, Ezirim H, Emerson M. Absorption of water and chloride into
concrete. Mag Concr Res 1992;44(158):31–7.

[32] McKay M, Beckman R, Conover W. A comparison of three methods for selecting
values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code.
Technometrics 1979;2:239–45.

[33] Montemor M, Simoes A, Ferreira M. Analytical characterization of the passive
film formed on steel in solutions simulating the concrete interstitial
electrolyte. Corrosion 1998;54(5):347–53.

[34] Mori Y, Ellingwood B. Time-dependent system reliability analysis by adaptive
importance sampling. Struct Saf 1993;12(1):59–73.

[35] Nagataki S, Otsuki N, Wee T, Nakashita K. Condensation of chloride ions in
hardened cement matrix materials and on embedded steel bars. ACI Mater J
1993;90(4):323–32.

[36] Oshiro T, Horizono Y, TaniGawa S, Nagai K. Experimental and analytical studies
on penetration of chloride ions in concrete. Trans Jpn, Concr Inst
1987;9:155–62.

[37] Paté-Cornell E. Uncertainties in risk analysis: six levels of treatment. Reliab
Eng Syst Saf 1996;54(2-3):95–111.

[38] Roberts M. Effects of calcium chloride content on the durability of
pretensioned wire in concrete. Mag Concr Res 1962;14(42):143–54.

[39] Rosenberg A, Hansson C, Andrade C. Mechanisms of corrosion of steel in
concrete. In: skalny J, editor. Materials science of concrete I. Westerville,
OH: The American Ceramic Society, Inc.; 1989. p. 285–313.

[40] Schueller G, Pradlwarter H. Benchmark study on reliability estimation in
higher dimensions of structural systems – an overview. Struct Saf
2007;29:167–82.

[41] Stewart M, Rosowsky D. Structural safety and serviceability of concrete
bridges subject to corrosion. ASCE J Infrastruct Syst 1998;4(4):146–55.

[42] Thomas M, Bamforth P. Modeling chloride diffusion in concrete – effect of fly
ash and slag. Cem Concr Res 1999;29:187–495.

[43] Tuutti K. Corrosion of steel in concrete. Stockholm: Swedish Cement and
Concrete Research Institute; 1982.

[44] Tuutti K. Chloride induced corrosion in marine concrete structures. In:
Durability of concrete on saline environment, Uppsala; 1996. p. 81–93.

[45] Tvedt L. Distribution of quadratic forms in normal space – applications to
structural reliability. J Eng Mech 1990;116(6):1183–97.

[46] Uhlig H. Corrosion and corrosion control. John Wiley & Sons Inc.; 1963.
[47] Weyers R, Fitch M, Larsen E, Al-Qadi I. Chamberlain WP, Hoffman PC. concrete

bridge protection and rehabilitation: chemical and physical techniques –
service life estimates. Strategic Highway Research Program, National Research
Council SHRP-S-668; 1994.

[48] Weyers R, Prowell B, Sprinkel M, Vorster M. Concrete bridge protection, repair,
and rehabilitation relative to reinforcement corrosion: a methods application
manual. SHRP-S-360. Strategic Highway Research Program. National Research
Council; 1993.

[49] Zhang J, Lounis Z. Sensitivity analysis of simplified diffusion-based corrosion
initiation model of concrete structures exposed to chlorides. Cem Concr Res
2006;36(7):1312–23.

[50] Zhang J, Lounis Z. Nonlinear relationships between parameters of simplified
diffusion-based model for service life design of concrete structures exposed to
chlorides. Cem Concr Compos 2009;31(8):591–600.



Accepted Manuscript

Factors in offshore planning that affect the risk for major accidents

Sizarta Sarshar , Stein Haugen , Ann Britt Skjerve

PII: S0950-4230(14)00221-6
DOI: 10.1016/j.jlp.2014.12.005
Reference: JLPP 2874

To appear in: Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries

Received Date: 4 November 2014
Revised Date: 9 December 2014
Accepted Date: 10 December 2014

Please cite this article as: Sarshar, S., Haugen, S., Skjerve, A.B., Factors in offshore planning that affect
the risk for major accidents, Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries (2015), doi: 10.1016/
j.jlp.2014.12.005.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Factors in offshore planning that affect the risk for major accidents 

1, 2 1 2
Sizarta Sarshar , Stein Haugen , Ann Britt Skjerve  

1
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway 

2
Institute for Energy Technology (IFE), Halden, Norway 

(sizarta.sarshar@hrp.no, stein.haugen@ntnu.no, ann.britt.skjerve@hrp.no) 

Abstract 

The purpose of this paper is to systematically analyse a typical planning process in the offshore 
industry from the perspective of causes of major accidents, with the ultimate aim of identifying 
factors that affect the risk for major accidents occurring. We first study and describe a typical 
planning process for offshore oil and gas operations in Norway. Then we analyse a number of 
theories of major accidents, to see how the different theories and their explanations of causes and 
contributing factors can be of relevance for future plans and planning processes. Finally, we review 
accident investigations to search for evidence of how weaknesses in planning processes can 
contribute to major accidents through the above identified factors. Also, we try to identify any 
additional factors that have not been recognised through the theoretical review. This provides 
empirical support for the theoretical basis. Thirteen factors which directly or indirectly can influence 
the planning process causing a major accident potential are identified. These are exemplified through 
a review of investigation reports. The paper suggests that planning process should focus more on 
increasing quality in the plans at an early phase, with examples from incidents, and illustrate the 
relation between planning quality and potential for major accidents. 
 
Keywords Offshore oil and gas, planning processes, major accident theories, incident reports 
Paper type Research paper 
 
1. Introduction 
Major accidents are characterized by a complex interaction of technical, human, organizational and 

environmental factors. These types of accidents have been given a lot of attention in the last 20-30 

years, starting with Turner (1978) and are being followed by a number of different authors proposing 

different theories about how these accidents occur and how they may be prevented (e.g. Perrow, 

1984; Reason, 1997; La Porte and Consolini, 1991; Weick, 1995; Hollnagel et al., 2011). Much of the 

work has been focused on operation, “the sharp end”, but has shifted the blame away from the 

operators by showing how the context, represented by the technology, the organizational structure, 

the culture etc. influences operations.  

The Petroleum Safety Authority in Norway point out that the preparations for performing work 

activities offshore, i.e. the planning process, also can play an important role in major accidents: 

Inadequate planning, insufficient work descriptions, information that is not put forward during the 

planning process etc. are all factors that potentially can lead to unsafe performance of the work (PSA, 

2012). The purpose of this study is to explore the relationship between planning of offshore activities 

and the potential for major accidents. In this paper, we describe a typical planning process in the 

offshore industry, from the perspective of causes of major accidents with the ultimate aim to identify 

factors that affect the risk for major accidents.  

1.1 Scope and limitations 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
The scope of this paper is limited to the planning processes for operational, work order and work 

permit planning. Execution of the work that has been planned is not studied as such, although an 

important outcome of a good plan is its safe execution.  

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the research methodology applied in this 

study is described, followed by a brief description of a typical planning process in Section 3. Section 4 

and 5 present the main results from the research, covering theoretical analysis and empirical 

evidence respectively. Section 6 provides discussion, followed by conclusions in Section 7. 

2. Method 
The method that has been applied is as follows: 

1. Study and describe a typical planning process for offshore oil and gas operations in Norway.  

The planning process described is a typical process based on the concept of Integrated 

Operations which is used on the Norwegian Continental Shelf. This is based on a document 

review (Witkin and Altschuld, 1995) including work flows and management systems at 

several operating companies, and these documents described the steps in the processes, 

roles and purpose. Interviews of personnel involved in the planning processes at two 

operating companies were also conducted, with both onshore (six interviews) and offshore 

(eight interviews) personnel; and the first author  also attended  meetings in the planning 

processes onshore and offshore to get a better understanding of the planning processes. The 

data obtained from the interviews were organized using codes (as for Grounded Theory: 

Strauss and Corbin, 1998) on the different aspects related to meeting preparations, the 

meetings themselves, the results from the meetings, and aspects that could influence the 

plan or the planning process. The findings from the interviews of offshore personnel are 

reported in (Sarshar et al., 2013). The result of step one of our method is a described in 

Section 3. 

2. Analyse a number of theories of major accidents, to see how the different theories and their 

explanations of causes and contributing factors can be of relevance for plans and planning 

processes. The hypothesis is that these factors influence the quality of plans and planning 

processes from the perspective of managing major accident risk, and that by controlling 

these factors we can also control how planning influences major accident risk. This then 

forms the theoretical basis for the work. Factors that the different theories focus on 

regarding accident causation and explanation or factors that contribute to why accidents do 

not occur is studied and described in Section 4. We review the planning process from the 

perspective of each of the selected theories on major accidents to identify factors in the 

various steps of the planning process that may contribute to reduce the potential for major 

accidents associated with a completed plan. 

3. Review accident investigations (as for descriptive analysis: Zikmund, 1994) to search for 

evidence of how weaknesses in planning processes can contribute to major accidents 

through the above identified factors and also to identify any additional factors that have not 

been identified through the theoretical review. This provides empirical support for the 

theoretical basis. We reviewed investigation reports of hydrocarbon leakages for the period 

2011 - 2013 from the Norwegian Continental Shelf. 24 reports were reviewed whereof 18 

were found to have potential relations to the plan or planning processes. The review was 

performed in two iterations. In the first iteration the analysis consisted of extracting from the 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
reports aspects identified as direct and indirect causes. These aspects were then combined 

with the ones from the theoretical review and a selection of thirteen influencing factors was 

chosen (based on their applicability on the incident reports) for the empirical review. In the 

second iteration of the analysis, aspects identified as direct and indirect causes in the 

investigation reports which could be related to planning or plans were grouped as best could 

fit into the thirteen influencing factors. This step is described in Section 5. 

The study of incidents in Step 3 focuses on hydrocarbon leakage incidents. A leakage in the process 
equipment on an offshore installation which contains large quantities of hydrocarbons under 
pressure has a potential to become a major accident. A causal analysis from the Norwegian 
continental shelf has shown that a significant proportion of hydrocarbon leaks relate to human and 
operational errors when planning work on process equipment, executing this work and reinstating 
the equipment in order to restart the process plant (Norwegian Oil and Gas, 2012; 2013). 
 
3. The planning process 
Production, operation and maintenance activities are carried out daily during offshore operation. The 
control room operators control the production as well as the initiation of maintenance activities, 
crane operations and helicopter and vessel transportation. Safe operation and production is of key 
importance. Thus, the planning process for all offshore activities, the quality of the plans and the 
quality of their execution and end controls are important aspects which need to be managed (as 
described in Sarshar et al., 2013). Activities must be assessed individually and for concurrent 
execution with respect to Health, Safety and Environment (HSE).  
 
The planning process described here is a standardized process based on the operational concept 
Integrated Operation (IO).  IO has been defined as “real time data onshore from offshore fields and 
new integrated work processes” (NOG, 2008) and was introduced with the purpose of achieving 
(NOG, 2005): increased recovery, accelerated and increased production, reduced operational cost, 
longer lifespan, and increased safety. IO may also be known as Intelligent Fields and has been 
gradually introduced by petroleum companies operating on the Norwegian continental shelf.  
 
With respect to planning IO implies that several planning tasks were moved from offshore to 
onshore, and an increased need to integrate offshore and onshore based personnel in the planning 
process and thus collaboration across geographical locations.  
 
Planning is performed with different time horizons in mind and our focus will be on the latter three:  

• a main plan has a span of several years,  

• a yearly plan spans for one year,  

• an operational plan spans for three months,  

• a work order plan spans  for one or two weeks and  

• a work permit/day plan which covers the next 24 hours.  

The operational plan contains the most important information about maintenance, operations and 
modifications which fall under the following categories:  

• major tasks within HSE,  

• production related tasks that require shut-down,  

• tasks requiring external resources,  

• 1
tasks requiring additional bed capacity ,  

                                                          
1
 Bed capacity: An important constraint for performing work offshore is the capacity of the offshore installation 

to accommodate people. “Bed capacity” is therefore and important issue in offshore operations. 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• tasks requiring coordinated actions (e.g. heavy lift operations), and  

• tasks requiring monitoring.  

Operational plan meetings are held every two weeks and include participants from onshore and 

offshore who evaluate simultaneous activities and the total activity level with focus on risk and 

production. This meeting also facilitates the coordination of activities with the production and well 

intervention plan.  

The objective of the operational plan is to: 
• Assure that decisions and activities from the main plan are performed 

• Set the framework for activities on underlying levels (top-down planning) 

• Assure coordination to ensure the installations risk picture is acceptable with respect to 

major accident and production 

• Assure coordination with respect to risk levels, prioritization and resource management 

within and across installations 

• Assure that the activity level on the installation is implemented within framework conditions 

External framework conditions, status on technical barriers and risk of activities must be analysed 

and seen together to ensure that the installation’s risk picture is acceptable. External conditions can 

include infrastructure and dependencies between installations and risk of activities can include 

activity level, high risk activities and simultaneous activities. The analysis shall provide an overview of 

simultaneous activities in each area, high risk activities that limit accomplishment of the tasks, 

consequences of high activity level, relevant dependencies that exist, and identified deviations from 

framework conditions. 

The work flow process for updating the operational plan is illustrated in Figure 1 while Table 1 

describes these briefly and whether major accident risk is considered in these activities. The 

highlighted steps in the figure represent steps which consider and manage major accidents to some 

extent. 

Figure 1: The work flow process for updating the operational plan 

Table 1: Description of the steps for updating the operational plan and major accident analysis performed in these 
activities. 

The work order plan is based on the operational plan. In this phase activities are prepared and 

planned in detail in coordination with logistics and contractors and involve both onshore and 

offshore staff. The risk evaluation in this step includes special attention to HSE and area/module 

specific risks (normally a printout of a simplified version of the quantitative risk analysis for a given 

module). Logistics and personnel-on-board planning are coordinated activities with the preparation 

of work order plans. 

The objective of the work order plan is to plan for safe, effective and reliable execution of work on 
the installation: 

• Coordinate work to avoid lag in the maintenance of safety and production critical systems 

• Assure coordination of work execution between different actors 

• Plan for safe execution of simultaneous activities and operations 

• Assure good resource utilization 

• Minimise downtime on safety and production critical systems 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• Collect work that are on the same system or part of the installation 

• Avoid delay and waiting time for access to systems at the installation 

• Coordinate access to equipment at the installation 

A work order defines the need for work and is a formal request for the work that shall be done. A 

work order describes a job package and can normally be divided into subtasks that can be carried out 

in sequence. Before any of these can be performed, the personnel that shall execute a task must 

apply for a work permit. A work permit is a permission to perform a specific work. 

The work permit system was established to maintain control over which activities are to be carried 

out on the installation and to manage their risk. Activities that typically require a work permit are 

maintenance work on the process equipment, pipes or structure of the platform. There are two main 

categories; corrective (to correct failures that have occurred) or preventive (to prevent failures to 

occur) maintenance. Work permits are divided in two levels to differentiate between their impacts 

on risk. High-risk jobs which e.g. require welding are classified as level 1 while lower risk jobs are 

level 2, e.g. mounting personnel protection on a flange. Jobs that have been identified as no risk 

activities do not require a work permit and typically include jobs inside the living quarter, in office 

spaces or in workshops. 

The work flow process for updating the work order and work permit plan is illustrated in Figure 2 and 

Table 2 describes these in brief and whether major accident risk is considered in these activities. The 

highlighted steps in the figure represent steps which consider and manage major accident to some 

extent. 

Figure 2: The work flow process for updating the work order and work permit plan 

Table 2: Description of the steps for updating the work order and work permit plan and major accident analysis 
performed in these activities. 

From the review of steps involved in the planning process and considerations made on risk for major 

accidents in these, we see that risks associated with the jobs tasks are considered when establishing 

the work order and work permit; on the other hand, coordination and its associated risks are 

considered when approving work permits. Approving work permits is the last step in the planning 

process and has a critical role considering major accident risks.  

4. Theoretical basis 

Major accidents are seldom born from one factor, but from a combination of factors: design factors, 

operational factors, maintenance factors, organisational factors etc. We seek to contribute to major 

accident prevention in the petroleum industry by developing strategies to address the maintenance 

factor. 

Based on accident investigations and the absence of accidents, major accident theories have arisen 

to explain the causation of the accidents occurred and why some organizations do not encounter 

accidents. The most acknowledged theories which form the theoretical basis of our work include the 

energy and barrier perspective (Gibson, 1961; Haddon, 1980), conflicting objectives (Rasmussen, 

1997), man-made disasters (Turner, 1978; Turner and Pidgeon, 1997), normal accident theory 

(Perrow, 1984), high reliability organisations (La Porte and Consolini, 1991) and resilience 

engineering (Hollnagel et al., 2011).  

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
The theoretical study of relating the major accident theories to the planning processes performed in 

this section highlight some factors which can influence the processes with respect to major 

accidents. These include: 

• Energy and barrier: Risk assessment, barrier control, hazardous operations, simultaneous 

activities  

• Conflicting objectives: Goal conflict, pressure towards efficiency, workload, work practice 

• Man-made disasters: Information flow, communication, misunderstandings, plan quality, 

overview of activities,  

• Normal accident theory: Couplings and complexity 

• High reliability theory: Commitment, redundancy, learning culture 

• Resilience engineering: Preparedness, learning culture, ability to steer activities, awareness, 

goal conflict, buffering capacity, anticipation, monitoring, responding 

In Section 5, a selection of these factors will be used to group and relate the studied incidents to the 

planning phases. The following sub sections review these theories to see how their explanations of 

causes and contributing factors can be of relevance for plans and planning processes. These are then 

analysed together, and a summary of relevant contributions is given in the last subchapter. 

4.1 The energy and barrier perspective 
The energy and barrier perspective provides an explicit view of the immediate causes of accidents 

(Gibson, 1961; Haddon, 1980). The perspective builds on defence in depth and barriers to prevent 

accidents in its safety design. The perspective has proven useful in hazard identification and as basis 

for identifying hazard control strategies. It is further the basis for analytical risk control. Safety 

management for both major and minor accidents is based on the energy and barrier perspective. 

The notion of root causes for major accidents for this perspective is failure to establish and maintain 

adequate barrier functions and dependencies among barrier functions and the risk reduction 

strategies should ensure that compensating measures are taken when barriers are unavailable 

(Rosness et al., 2010). 

The energy and barrier principle is originally based on a physical understanding of the term ”barrier”, 

and with such an understanding it is hard to see how plans can be influenced by this principle. 

However, the understanding has been extended to cover a wide range of measures to control risk, 

including organizational issues (Reason, 1997). With an understanding like this, we may look at how 

plans and the planning process can contribute to introduce additional barriers that can prevent 

major accidents from occurring.  

To identify in which steps in the processes there are barriers that reduce or control major accident 

risk, a systematic review of the planning process from Table 1 and Table 2 is performed. During the 

operational plan process risk that can affect the accomplishment of activities shall be identified and 

reported in relevant risk management tool. Analysis is required on hazardous operations, 

simultaneous operations, barrier weaknesses and compensating measures. During the work order 

process, task specific aspects that can take out an existing barrier and necessary compensatory 

measures are identified. Work operation type can present a major accident risk.  

4.2 Conflicting objectives 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Organisational safety is influenced by regulatory and commercial pressures, the working 

environment and management demands. The behaviour of those operating the systems, the roles 

and actors in the processes, is influenced by the conditions they work in and by the behaviours of 

others, particularly those in managerial positions (Flin et al., 2008). 

Rasmussen (1997) suggests that we might think of the handling of conflicting objectives in terms of 

activities migrating towards the boundary of acceptable performance. Different boundaries that can 

affect decision making for different actors include: management pressure towards efficiency, 

gradient towards least effort and workload, boundary of locally and conditionally acceptable or 

unconditionally safe state of affairs. Actions within one activity might change the boundary of 

acceptable performance for another activity.  

Causation of accidents may be seen as the result of actors transcending the operational envelope of 

the systems they operate. Actors cross boundaries towards unacceptable risk in an effort to locally 

optimise behaviour. Organisational accidents in distributed systems typically involve several actors, 

each seeking local optimisation based on incomplete view of the system. Major accidents thus tend 

to arise from situations where separated adaptation processes interact in a way that was not 

foreseen by the actors. 

To apply the conflicting objectives perspective a systematic review of the planning processes is 

performed to identify 

• in which steps one can expect considerations and discussions on safety vs cost and time and 

• in which steps it is likely that risk is not considered or the focus is entirely on cost and time.  

The steps from Table 1 and Table 2 which address potential conflicting objectives include: 

• Perform operational plan meeting – Management’s focus on efficiency can put (time and 

cost) pressure (vs safety) or prefer production optimization operations ahead of 

maintenance operations (including maintenance on production critical equipment ahead of 

safety critical equipment).  

• Steps for establishing and approving work orders and work permits – Management’s focus 

on efficiency can put (time and cost) pressure (vs safety): not taking necessary time to 

prepare the work, not considering all aspects of the work (e.g. with respect to HSE, 

resources, or competence needed). 
• Steps for establishing operational plan, work order plan and work permit plan – Risk is not 

considered in these steps, the focus is entirely on scheduling and date/time the work. 

The conflicting objective perspective has focus on the processes and not on the product of the 

processes – the plans. However, if the focus in the process is more on cost and time than safety that 

will clearly also have an impact on the plan: It may result in a plan with reduced safety margins. 

When such a plan is implemented, it may lack needed robustness to prevent a major accident should 

anything fail during the task execution process. Thus, in the end a plan with reduced safety margins 

may result in higher cost both with respect of human health, financial expenses and in terms of 

reputation loss for the company. 

4.3 Man-made disasters 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
The critical assumption in Turner’s theory (1978; 1997) concerns the process leading up to a disaster, 

the onset. However, the man-made disaster model also includes stages after the actual disaster, 

including rescue and a final stage of full cultural readjustment to the surprise associated with the 

event. The starting point is a situation where matters are reasonably normal implying that a set of 

normative prescriptions, ranging from informal norms to laws and regulations are culturally accepted 

as being advisable and necessary precautions to keep the risks at an acceptable level. This is followed 

by the incubation period which is characterized by the accumulation of an unnoticed set of events or 

events that are misunderstood causing misperception of danger signals. An important factor here is 

the structure of communication networks, in particular the boundaries where knowledge is not 

shared or where it is simplified. The incubation period is brought to conclusion by a precipitating 

event, which is by definition unpredictable for those sharing the culturally accepted beliefs about the 

system, a dramatic event such as an explosion. 

Accidents and disasters develop through a long chain of events leading back to root causes such as 

lack of information flow and misperception among individuals and groups. To control risk a key factor 

is to make intensive efforts to collect and analyse information about hazards and what we do not 

know.  

An important contribution of the information system perspective is Turners finding (Turner, 1997) 

that during the incubation period; there is nearly always someone who is aware of the danger. This 

may be related to conflicting objectives in the previous section were e.g. time pressure can make one 

withdraw information, whether it is on purpose or not.  

The theory explains causation of major accident with: 

• Breakdown of information –  

o For the planning process this means that information do not flow between the 

activities in the process and between the roles and actors.  

o For the plan it means that it does not contain all relevant information needed. The 

type of information important to share is e.g. hazardous operations and what makes 

them hazardous. 

• Misperceptions – Many of the steps in the planning processes are collaboration activities and 

foster information sharing and discussions. Information must flow between the activities and 

between the roles and actors, and discussions should address misunderstandings. 

• Lack of communication – For the planning process this means lack of communication 

channels or feedback channels between the activities in one process and between its roles 

and actors but also across processes: between the operational plan, work order and work 

permit processes.  

Tuner also saw managerial and administrative difficulties in handling information in complex 

situations that blurred signal with noise. This is sustained in high-reliability theory: Failure means that 

there was a lapse in detection. Someone somewhere did not anticipate what and how things could 

go wrong. Something was not caught as soon as it could have been caught (Weick and Sutcliffe, 

2007). 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
To apply the man-made disaster perspective a review of the planning process is performed to 

identify what type of information shall be flowing through the process and to whom and what type of 

information shall the plans contain? 

The information availability when establishing work order and work permit is important to cover all 

aspects of the job. The information flow between the planning activities and the mechanisms and 

channels for this must allow for information sharing and avoid misunderstandings and 

misperception. The information type and format must support the activity it is used in and for. 

Communication channels must be in place to allow easy access to necessary roles and actors in the 

processes. However, this is not sufficient alone; we are not also tackling the problem of promoting a 

safety culture that precedes having channels open. While one does spur the other, no one will use 

the channels unless safety is of a major concern to everyone involved. This again relates back to the 

previous section on conflicting objectives. 

Further, good information has some characteristics that should be in place as described by Westrum 

(2014): 

• It provides answers to the questions that the receiver needs answered. The information 

should respond to the needs of the receiver, not the sender. 

• It is timely. If not it may lead to a wrong decisions since information is used in decision 

making. 

• It is presented in such a way that it can be effectively used by the receiver. 

 4.4 High reliability theory 

The high reliability theory says little explicitly about the nature of accident causation, but their 

implicit idea is that accidents are triggered by errors that have not been recovered in time. If one 

considers the slowness of bureaucracy and the incubation time from Turners theory as described in 

the previous section, unrecovered errors could be due to wrong prioritization, misunderstandings or 

poor information flow. 

HR theory focus more on why accidents do not happen rather than on causes of accidents. Accidents 

can be prevented through good organisational design and management: 

• Commitment to and consensus on production and safety as concomitant organizational goals 

• Redundancy enhances safety – Build organisational redundancy as a means to build fault 

tolerant organisations with overlapping tasks and competence 

• Decentralised decision making is needed 

• Monitor the structural and cultural preconditions for organisational redundancy 

• Culture of reliability: Build cultures that combine requirement for fault-free performance 

with openness to the fact that errors do occur 

• Learn from the daily operations and the normal procedure, but incidents/accidents may 

demonstrate the absence of the preconditions 

• Downsizing may affect the preconditions for organisational redundancy 

For the planning process: 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• The bullet points above applies to all the planning process but is specially focused on in the 

operational plan meeting 

• The steps in the processes which are collaboration activities works as organisational 

redundancy with overlapping tasks and competence, eye-to-eye contact and which easily 

communicate with each other 

• The work permits approval and daily plan are managed offshore but their work order plans 

are approved in collaboration between onshore and offshore 
• The evaluation and quality assurance of the work order plan is facilitated as a collaboration 

activity involving different key responsibilities/actors. This can make the work order plan 

approval process redundant in the way that more than one actor is involved. This, however, 

requires that involved personnel do not think in “silos” but that they rather take 

responsibility to represent their domain and expertise. Some organisations include the 

offshore lead technicians in this step and hence include decentralised decision making. 

HR theory suggests organisations should take expertise seriously, listen to minority viewpoints and 

remain less concerned with strategy and more sensitive to daily operations. 

4.5 Resilience engineering 
Accidents, according to this perspective, are not the product of normal system malfunction or 

breakdown, but rather a breakdown in the adaptive capacity necessary to cope with the real world of 

complexity. Risk reduction is achieved by increasing coping ability rather than eliminating variability. 

Organizations should build and maintain the abilities to anticipate, attend, respond and learn. The 

purpose is to assess the preparedness of the system, not only to respond to unforeseen events, but 

also to manage known threats and pressures. 

Resilience concepts (from various chapters in Hollnagel et al., 2006, referred to in Ferreira et al., 

2011): 

• Ability to adapt to changing conditions – the system has to be flexible enough to respond to 

external changes and pressures 

• Ability to cope with complexity – the system must be capable of maintaining normal 

operation whilst coping with changing conditions 

• Ability to manage continuous stresses – the system must be capable of maintaining normal 

operation, even when submitted to extreme pressure 

• Ability to respond to problems ahead of time – preparedness – the system must be able to 

react before problems cause any disruption to normal operation 

• Learning culture – willingness to respond to events by reforming and adapting as opposed to 

denying the need for change 

• Just culture – support in reporting of issues throughout the organisation avoiding behaviours 

of culpability attribution 

• Ability to steer activities – the system must be able to control activities regardless of 

operating conditions 

• Appropriate level of information about performance – awareness – the system must make 

available to its management appropriate levels of information regarding performance 

• High enough devotion to safety – safety must be considered alongside other system goals 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• Buffering capacity – the system must have available resources necessary to respond to 

arising problems and complex issues 

A resilient system knows when to sacrifice acute production goals and prioritise chronic safety goals. 

If organisations are unable to support people when they back off from economic goals in order to 

invest in safety (the sacrifice), the organisation will be acting with higher risk than it realises or wants 

(Tjørhom and Aase, 2011). 

A practice of resilience engineering requires that anticipation, monitoring, responding and learning 

are considered and addressed at all levels of the organization. The challenges in ensuring this, 

however, are many. Resilience assumes that one can foresee the changing shape of risk before 

failure or harm occurs. It requires monitoring key indicators to observe how close the organization is 

to the safety space boundary. The organization must then have the capability to respond by adapting 

or being flexible to the measured changes and opportunities. The loop is not complete until lessons 

learned are incorporated with regular revisions of performance standards.  

The steps in the planning processes analyse and evaluate operations and prioritize those which 

require the ability to adapt to changing conditions, cope with complexity, respond to problems ahead 

of time, steer activities, and devote to safety. 

4.6 Relevant contributions from the theories 
Major accident theories can contribute in different ways to major accidents monitoring and 

prevention. By applying different perspectives, we can view the problem from different angles and 

thereby possibly learn something new, which can help us manage the risk. 

The energy and barrier, conflicting objectives and man-made disaster perspectives can be related to 

the plans established and their content as summarized in  

Table 3. High reliability and the resilience engineering perspective apply more to the organisational 

level rather than the plans directly. 

Relevant contributions from the energy and barrier, conflicting objectives, man-made disaster, and 

high reliability organisation perspectives can be related to the planning processes as summarized in 

Table 4. In addition, the resilience engineering perspective is applicable to all processes since the 

steps for analysing and evaluating work, and its prioritization require the ability to adapt to changing 

conditions, cope with complexity, respond to problems ahead of time, steer activities, and devote to 

safety. The tables pinpoint possible risks in each stage by each theory.  

Table 3: Relation of the energy and barrier, conflicting objectives and man-made disaster perspective to plans and their 
content. 

Table 4: Relation of the energy and barrier, conflicting objectives, man-made disaster and high reliability organisations 
perspective to the planning processes. 

5. Empirical evidence 

The theoretical study of relating the major accident theories to the planning processes performed in 

Section 4 identified factors which can influence the processes with respect to major accidents. This 

section describes the result from a review of accident investigations to search for evidence of how 

weaknesses in planning processes can contribute to major accidents.  

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
A systematic review of the incident reports on direct and indirect causes of hydrocarbon leakages 

related to the planning processes was performed in two iterations. In the first iteration the analysis 

consisted of extracting from the reports aspects identified as direct and indirect causes. These 

aspects were then combined with the ones from the theoretical review and a selection of thirteen 

influencing factors was chosen (based on their applicability on the incident reports) for the empirical 

review. These include: 

• Information flow – When information is missing, inadequate or not passed from one step to 

another in or across planning phases 

• Communication – When communication channels is missing or is inadequate between roles 

and actors 

• Misunderstandings/misperception – When assumptions and misperceptions influence the 

quality of the work 

• Documentation – When documentation is missing or not reflecting the real system  

• Procedures – Missing, not available  or  not precise procedures 

• Planning quality – Assumed that planning processes should manage the quality of plans  

• Plan quality – Assumed that weakness in plans should be managed during assessment steps 

• Competence – When required competence is not present 

• Overview/situation awareness – Relates to overview of activities, their relations and 

complexity 

• Work practice – Assumed that poor work practices may exist that deviate from procedures or 

defined processes 

• Workload – Assumed caused by e.g. time pressure 

• Risk assessment – Inadequate analysis or actions or measures not followed up 

• Learning – Assume that one should consider learning from similar type of work when 

assessing it 

In the second iteration of the analysis, aspects identified as direct and indirect causes in the 

investigation reports which could be related to planning or plans were grouped as best could fit into 

the thirteen influencing factors. The result is presented in Table 5Error! Reference source not found. 

where columns represent the planning processes and their steps (grouped in establish, assess and 

coordinate and approve) and the rows represent the influencing factors. The content of the table 

illustrates the number of incidents that had a direct or indirect influence on these steps. There were 

18 incidents which could be related to the planning processes in one way or another. These are 

identified from A to R in the table. Some of the incidents, e.g. G, contribute more frequently (14 

times) to the occurrences in the table while some contribute few times. The explanation of this can 

be that some incidents are examined more thoroughly than others, hence direct and indirect causes 

are described in more detail, while other reports are short and only describe the incident without any 

in depth study of causation. Examples of the influencing factors from the incidents for the work order 

and work permit plan are provided in Table 6. 

Table 5: Incidents identified from A to R and their relation to the planning processes.  

Table 6: Exemplified contributing factors for the work order and work permit planning phases from the incident reports. 
The examples applicable to the work order process are also valid for the work permit process. 

6. Discussion 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
As described in Table 3 and 4, there are learnings from major accident theories that can be related to 

the planning processes described in section 2. The empirical study described in section 5 (Table 5 and 

6) further illustrates the relations between reported incidents with major accident potential and the 

planning processes. In this section, some of these relations are discussed. 

The distribution of influencing factors for each of the planning phases is illustrated in Figure 3. 

Besides the factors affecting the overall process, the work order and work permit phases has the 

highest occurrences of the factors with “learning” and “planning quality” as the highest. The factor 

“learning” occur five times in both the latest phases of planning, and all occur in steps of assessment 

in the planning processes. The examples from the incidents on this factor relate to “similar incident 

not considered during preparation of work” and that “earlier studies of similar incidents were not 

known to the personnel”. We assumed in our study that one should consider learning from similar 

type of work when assessing it, and this assessment is done in the work order and work permit 

phases which explains the need for learning from incidents in these steps.  

The factor “planning quality” occurs five times in the work order phase, an example from the steps 

for coordination and approval of work orders include “failure in prioritization of work order with 

respect to consequence”. This factor also occurs two times in the work permit phase exemplified 

with work permit being modified after approval and that an operation did not have a work permit.  

Many of the occurrences for the influencing factors are in the late phases of planning. This can show 

that the incident reports have identified more contributing factors closer to the sharp end, close to 

the incident, and fewer at the blunt end. The “entire process” may be seen as plan-related 

organisational aspects which indirectly can contribute to an incident. The occurrences of these are 

also high and can be exemplified through the incident reports as “bolt degradation not detected”, 

“weakness of valve had been reported earlier but was probably not assessed to cause mechanical 

rupture”, “operating company had no quality assurance process for the activity” and “results of tests 

performed by vendor was not requested or shared with the operating company”. These examples 

provide empirical evidence that inspection programs, risk analysis, procedures, work processes and 

communication between involved parties can be inadequate. 

Figure 3: Distribution of the influencing factors for each of the planning phases. 

Further, the different planning phases focus differently, so one cannot expect all the influencing 

factors to apply to the steps in each phase. The factors can have dissimilar weighting for the different 

phases. The factor “work load” for instance may be more important in the work permit process 

compared to the operational plan phase. In fact, only one occurrence was traced to the operational 

phase of the studied investigation reports. This occurrence concerned that a work activity was not 

followed up caused by misunderstanding in the plan assessment step. 

Figure 4 illustrates the steps in the planning processes and exemplifies how they potentially can 

relate to major accidents based on the theoretical and empirical study performed in Section 3 and 4. 

The highlighted steps in the figure represent steps which consider and manage major accident to 

some extent based on the study performed in Section 3 on the planning processes.  

As seen from Section 3, aspects from major accident theories related to planning can include 

communication, information and data sharing so that all involved parties have an adequate shared 

understanding of the thoughts behind the activities in a plan. Since the plan is made over several 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
phases, traceability of decisions and underlying information must be in place in order to better aid 

those who need to re-plan a task due to some new circumstances. Assumptions made in earlier 

planning phases must now be known so they are verified before new decisions are made. 

Example: 

Considering the influencing factor “documentation” which can be exemplified from the 
2

incidents in our study as e.g. “P&ID  not reflecting the real system”, NOG (2013) clearly states 

how crucial an accurate P&ID is when preparing work on hydrocarbon carrying systems: “[…] 

should this contain errors, no steps later in the work process will pick them up. […] – They 

assume that the latter [master P&ID] is correct. This means that routines for amending the 

master P&ID, and for ensuring that work on an isolation plan is actually based on the master 

P&ID, are critical for preventing major accidents”. 

Figure 4: Exemplifies how the steps in the planning processes potentially can relate to major accidents. 

7. Conclusions and further work 
The aim of the study was to describe a typical planning process in the offshore industry, from the 

perspective of causes of major accidents (from theories and incident reports) with the ultimate aim 

to identify factors that affect the risk for major accidents through the planning process. The study 

was conducted in three steps. (1) The planning process, its phases and steps where studied. (2) Major 

accident theories where examined and related to the planning process. (3) Investigations reports 

with major accident potential were reviewed to gather empirical evidence and examples of the 

relations between planning and major accidents. Through this study, thirteen aspects influencing the 

planning process are identified as aspects that need to be addressed and focused on: information 

flow, communication, misunderstandings/misperception, documentation, procedures, planning 

quality, plan quality, competence, overview/situation awareness, work practice, workload, risk 

assessment and learning. Further work includes proposing improvements within the mentioned 

aspects to better manage major accident risk through the planning processes. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors wish to thank the Center for Integrated Operations in the Petroleum Industry in Norway 
and the partners involved in this study. 
 
References 

Ferraira, P., Wilson, J.R., Ryan, B. and Sharples, S. (2011), “Measuring Resilience in the Planning of 

Rail Engineering Work“, in Hollnagel et al. (2011), Resilience Engineering in Practice – A Guidebook, 

Ashgate, Chapter 11. 

Flin, R., O’Connor, P., and Crichton, M. (2004), Safety at the sharp end. Ashgate. 

Gibsin, J.J. (1961), “The contribution of experimental psychology to the formulation of the problem 

of safety – a brief for basic research”, in Behavioral Approaches to Accident Research, New York: 

Association for the Aid of Crippled Children, pp. 77-89. Reprinted in W. Haddon. 

                                                          
 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Haddon, W. (1980), “The Basic Strategies for Reducing Damage from Hazards of All Kinds”, Hazard 

prevention, Sept./Oct. 1980. 

Hollnagel, E., Woods, D.D., and Leveson N.G. (2006), Resilience Engineering: Concepts and Precepts, 

Ashgate Publishing Limited. 

Hollnagel, E., Pariés, J., Woods, D. and Wreathall, J. (2011), Resilience Engineering in Practice – A 

Guidebook, Ashgate. 

La Porte, T.R. and Consolini P. (1991), “Working in practice but not in theory: Theoretical challenges 

of High-Reliability Organizations”, Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, Vol. 1, pp. 

19–47. 

Norwegian Oil and Gas (NOG) (2005) “Integrated Work Processes: Future Work Processes in the 

NCS”, 2005. 

Norwegian Oil and Gas (NOG) (2008) “Integrated Operations in New Projects”, 2008. 

Norwegian Oil and Gas (NOG) (2012) “Analysis of causes of hydrocarbon leaks in 2008-2011”. Rev 1, 

8 June 2012, Hydrocarbon leak reduction project. Preventor report nr 2011103-01. 

Norwegian Oil and Gas (NOG) (2013) “Best practice for isolation when working on hydrocarbon 

equipment: planning, isolation and reinstatement”. 

Perrow, C. (1984), Normal Accidents, New York: Basic Books. 

Petroleum Safety Authority in Norway (PSA) (2012) “Trends in Risk Level 2011”. 

Rasmussen, J. (1997), “Risk Management in a dynamic Society: A Modeling Problem”, Safety Science, 

Vol. 27, pp. 183-213. 

Reason, J. (1997), Managing the risks of organizational accidents, Ashgate. 

Rosness, R., Grøtan, T.O., Guttormsen, G., Herrera, I.A., Steiro, T., Størseth, F., Tinmannsvik, R.K., and 

Wærø, I. (2010), “Organizational Accidents and Resilient Organisations: Six Perspectives”, Rev. 2, 

SINTEF report A17034. 

Sarshar, S., Skjerve, A.B. and Haugen, S. (2013), “Towards the understanding of information needed 

when planning offshore activities”, in Proc. of the ESREL 2013 Conference, Sept. 29 – Oct. 2, 

Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 

Strauss, A.L. and Corbin, J. (1998), Basics of Qualitative Research. London: Sage Publications. 

Tjørhom, B. and Aase, K. (2011), The Art of Balance: Using Upward Resilience Traits to Deal with 

Conflicting Goals. in Hollnagel et al. (2011), Resilience Engineering in Practice – A Guidebook, 

Ashgate, Chapter 12. 

Turner, B.A.(1978), Man-Made Disasters, Wykeham Science Press, London.  

nd
Turner B.A. and Pidgeon, N.F. (1997), Man-Made Disasters, 2  Edition, London: Butterworth-

Heinemann. 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Weick, K.E. (1995), Sensemaking in Organizations, SAGE Publications, Inc. 

Weick, K.E. and Sutcliffe, K.M. (2007), Managing the unexpected: Resilient performance in an age of 

uncertainty, San Fransisco: Jossey-Bass, p.93. 

Westrum, R. (2014), The study of information flow: A personal journey. Elsevier Safety Science 67, 

2014, p.58-63. 

Witkin, B.R., & Altschuld, J.W. (1995). Planning and Conducting Needs Assessments: A Practical 

Guide. Sage Publications, Inc.   

Zikmund, W.G. (1994), Exploring Market Research, Dryden Press. 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Table 1: Description of the steps for updating the operational plan and major accident analysis performed in these 
activities. 

Step in the process Description Major accident analysis 

Define framework Communicate decisions and activities from Activity level being outside framework 
conditions the main plan and establish installation conditions, degraded technical integrity, 

specific framework conditions (e.g. logistics, higher risk for HSE incidents and wrong 
1

bed capacity). This is a collaboration activity.  prioritization between activities . 
Quality assure plan data Risk that can affect the accomplishment of In addition to the above; identify weakened 

activities shall be identified and reported in technical, operational and organizational 
relevant risk management tool. Examples barriers and failure of equipment. 
include work on hydrocarbon carrying 
systems, disabling of safety critical 
systems/barriers, and critical/heavy lift 
operations. This is a collaboration activity. 

Establish plan The planner establishes the operational plan Analysis from the above steps is considered 
based on the quality assured plan data. This at this step. This means that e.g. 
is a proposed plan which will be adjusted and simultaneous tasks can be a risk due to co-
reviewed in the following steps. ordination failures.  

Analyse plan and risk Analyse the plan and propose alternatives if In addition to the above; insufficient 
deviations exist from framework conditions. overview of the risk picture.  
This is a collaboration activity. 

Coordinate plan and risk Preparation to plan meeting, establish Analysis from the above steps is considered 
alternatives and assess economy. This is a at this step. 
collaboration activity. 

Perform operational plan The main goal is to prioritize the activities on Identify wrong prioritization.  
meeting the plan, to decide on measures and approve 

plan. This is a collaboration activity. 
Adjust plan Adjust the plan based on the activity level Identify wrong prioritization, higher risk for 

and establish reference plan as basis to HSE incidents and poor coordination between 
identify deviations in the operational plan. activities. 
This is a collaboration activity. 

Distribute plan Shall contain report from the planning Identify poor coordination between activities. 
(Gantt-diagram, manning, etc.) and decisions 
from the operational plan meeting. 

 

                                                          
1
 We will exemplify the relevance of work prioritization and major accident risk in Section 5 when reviewing 

incident investigation reports. 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Table 1: Description of the steps for updating the work order and work permit plan and major accident analysis 
performed in these activities. 

Step in the process Description  Major accident consideration 

Identify need for When a need for performing work is identified, No consideration of the risk associated with 
WO the criticality of the work is also assessed. The performing the work is done at this stage. 

criticality is however focused on whether not A corrective WO requires considerations on 
doing this work (preventive maintenance, criticality of the failure on safety and 
repair, modification) represents an increased production. The priority and criticality 
risk for the operation of the plant (e.g. because considerations come from the morning meeting 
a safety critical system is malfunctioning) or (notification/event) that triggered the need for 
whether this may impair production from the WO. 
plant.  

Establish WO The work order is focused on describing what Major accident risk is considered and required 
should be done and what equipment and risk controls are identified. 
resources are required. This would also include Work specific aspects that can take out an 
considerations of major accident risk since this existing barrier and compensating measures 
may have an impact on resources required.  needed.  

Work operation type can present a major 
accident risk. Risk analysis needed? 

Review/update WO Review the WO and change its status as e.g. No or very limited focus is placed on major 
material needs are met or dates get close to be accident risk. 
ready for next plan  

Review status for Coordinate WOs which are not on plan and 
WO plan provide input to these WOs 
Manage WOs for Evaluate last active WO plan, the status of its 
new plan WOs, coordinate these and provide status on 

active WO plan 
Date WOs on Establishing the WO plan is typically focused on 
resources needs “piecing” together all WOs into a plan that can 

be completed within the available time and 
with available resources.  

Approve WO plan Review, approve, quality assure plan and plan  
feasibility 

Establish WP plan The discipline leaders offshore make a WP plan  
for the next few days based on the WO plan for 
which activities to carry out when. Resource 
management for the discipline team. 

Establish and apply The WP serves two main purposes: To ensure Major accident risk will be considered during 
for WP that the work can be performed safely and (as the preparation of the WP.  

part of that) to ensure that the work can be Work specific aspects that can take out an 
performed safely simultaneously with other existing barrier, compensating measures 
activities (coordination).  needed.  

Work type can present a major accident risk, 
coordination needed.  
Comply with risk analysis from WO, need for 
safe job analysis or blinding list? 

Perform SJA Safe job analysis is a systematic and stepwise Focus is too often on personal safety only and 
review of all risk factors prior to a given work not on major accident risk (Leistad and Bradley, 
activity or operation, so that steps can be taken 2009). 
to eliminate or control the identified risk factors  
during preparation and execution of the work 
activity or operation. Certain categories of work 
will always require SJA to be performed based 
on regulatory and company standards, others 
do not. However, any participant in any planned 
work task has the right to demand a SJA before 
work is undertaken. 

Approve WP and The approval process takes care of both of the Major accident risk will be considered during 
day plan above purposes, including the coordination.  the approval of the WP 

Risks associated with the combination of jobs  
Risks associated with simultaneous operations 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
(drilling, helicopter, crane, boat)  
Area risk for specific jobs, weather conditions 

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Table 1: Relation of the energy and barrier, conflicting objectives and man-made disaster perspective to plans and their 
content. 

Plans Energy and barrier Conflicting objectives Man-made disasters 

Operational plan Risk that can affect the Potential conflicts at the  
accomplishment of activities shall organisational level in which there is 
be identified and reported in incompatibility between safety and 
relevant risk management tool. production goals, but also at group 
Analysis required on hazardous level when the informal norms of a 
operations, simultaneous work group are incompatible with 
operations, barrier weaknesses and the safety goals of the organisation. 
compensating measures. 

Plan operations Contains information on whether  For the plan it means that it does 
the operations repeal safety critical not contain all relevant information 
systems or barriers. needed.  

Work order plan Major accident risk is considered As above (Operational plan)  
and required risk controls are 
identified.  
 

Work order Work specific aspects that can take  The work order may not contain all 

out an existing barrier and needed relevant information needed to 

compensating measures are communicate hazards and risk. 

identified. Work operation type can 
present a major accident risk. 

Work permit plan Analysis required on hazardous Potential conflict at the group goal  
activities, simultaneous activities, conflicts, when the informal norms 
barrier weaknesses and of a work group are incompatible 
compensating measures. with the safety goals of the 

organisation, but also at the 
individual goal conflicts caused by 
preoccupation or group specific 
concerns. 

Work permit Major accident risk will be  The work permit may not contain all 
considered during the preparation relevant information needed to 
of the WP. Work specific aspects communicate hazards and risk.  
that can take out an existing barrier 
and needed compensating 
measures are identified. Work type 
can present a major accident risk, 
coordination needed.  

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Table 1: Relation of the energy and barrier, conflicting objectives, man-made disaster and high reliability organisations perspective to the planning processes. 

 Step in the process Energy and barrier Conflicting objectives Man-made disasters HRO 

Need for work No barriers in the present planning Major accident risk is considered and Information must flow between the  
process. required risk controls are identified. In this activities and between the roles and actors, 

Define conditions These steps present organisational step, management’s focus on efficiency can and discussions should address These steps are foremost collaboration 

Quality assure  barriers since major accident risk is put (time and cost) pressure (vs safety) or misunderstandings. The type of information activities which works as organisational 

Establish plan considered and required risk controls favour production optimization operations important to share is e.g. hazardous redundancy with overlapping tasks and 
are identified. ahead of maintenance operations. operations and what makes them 

Analyse  competence, eye-to-eye contact and 
 hazardous. Communication channels and which easily communicate with each 

Coordinate  
feedback loops not only within this process other. 

Perform operational 
but also with the WO and WP process are 

plan meeting 
necessary. 

Establish WO An organisational barrier is present in Major accident risk is considered and Major accident risk is considered and There are at least two persons with 
this stage, since major accident risk is required risk controls are identified. In this required risk controls are identified. The WO overlapping competence and with 
considered and required risk controls step, management’s focus on efficiency can may not contain all relevant information access to necessary/required 
are identified. put (time and cost) pressure (vs safety): not needed to communicate hazards and risk. information present in this activity 

taking necessary time to prepare the work: For the planning process this means that 
not considering all aspects of the work (e.g. information may not flow between the 
with respect to HSE, resources, or activities in the (onshore and offshore) 
competence needed). processes and between the roles and actors. 

Approve WO plan No or very limited focus is placed on No or very limited focus is placed on major No or very limited focus is placed on major The evaluation and quality assurance of 
major accident risk. No barriers. accident risk. Management’s focus on accident risk. When establishing the WO the WO plan is facilitated as a 
 production and efficiency will determine the plan, misunderstanding and misperception collaboration activity involving different 

prioritization of WOs which make it to the of information or between actors and roles key responsibilities making the approval 
plan. in the planning processes can generate low process redundant. Some organisations 

quality plans. include the offshore lead technicians in 
this step and hence include 
decentralised decision making. 

Establish and apply Major accident risk will be considered Management’s focus on efficiency can put Major accident risk will be considered As above (establish WO) 
for WP during the preparation of the WP and time and cost pressure: not taking necessary during the preparation of the WP. As for 

this is therefore also an organizational time to prepare the work: not considering establishing WO, the WP may not contain all 
barrier. Consideration in this step is to all aspects of the work (e.g. with respect to relevant information needed. This can be 
ensure that the work can be performed HSE, resources, or competence needed). directly related to poorly established WO. 
safely. One might also chose deliberately not to For the planning process this means that 

perform such assessment and take the information don’t flow between the 
necessary time for preparations or cut on activities in the (WO and WP) processes and 
safety measures because one considers between the roles and actors. 
these unnecessary.  

Approve WPs and The approval process ensures that the  Misunderstandings and misperception of The maintenance and operation leader 
day plan work can be performed safely and (as information or between actors and roles in approves WPs at level 2 while the 

part of that) ensure that the work can the planning processes can cause that WPs platform manager approves WPs at 
be performed safely simultaneously are approved based on inadequate basis. level 1.  
with other activities (coordination). This 
would therefore be an org. barrier. 

Work  order Work order plan Operational plan 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Table 1: Incidents identified from A to R and their relation to the planning processes.  

Influencing factors Entire Operation plan Work order plan Work permit plan 
process Est. Assess C&A Est. Assess C&A Est. Assess C&A 

Information flow K, M, N,          
P 

Communication A        C D 

Misunderstandings I  A     K O D 

Documentation G, H, J,        A R 
M, O 

Procedures B, C, R       G E  
Planning quality H, P    D, M  A, L, M G  D 

Plan quality     D, G   G C  
Competence      G G  D, N G 

Overview of       G   C, G, Q 
activities 

Work practice M         E, M, R 

Workload          G 

Risk assessment F, G, I         N 

Learning      A, C,   A, C,  
D, G, N D, G, N 

 
 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Table 1: Exemplified contributing factors for the work order and work permit planning phases from the incident reports. 
The examples applicable to the work order process are also valid for the work permit process. 

Contributing factors Work order process Work permit process 
Information flow M: Information and history when a need for work and work permit was established was not 

included in the further process 
N: General risk measures identified earlier in the process was not signed by involved personnel 
before the operation started 

Communication  C: Procedure was not known to all process operators 
D: Lack of communication 

Misunderstandings/ A: Misperception around the criticality of the work 
misperception  D: Work performed was not the work described in the WP 

K: Operation was seen as routine operation and safe job analysis was not 
performed and work permit not established 
O: Technicians assumed the equipment/system was a barrier and 
considered this to be sufficient 

Documentation M: Inadequate documentation and drawings of the valve 
 A: Inconsistent torque table existed 

Procedures G: Not precise procedures (which manual valves that should be opened and in which order) 
1

Planning quality D: Missing need for work for a general agreed work of replacing parts of a HC -system when these 
systems were down 

L: Failure in prioritization of work order with respect to consequence 

A: Material needs not coordinated with prioritization 

M: Lack of original parts when planning the job 

M: A new work order not established to replace the reused parts 

 G: The operation did not have a work permit 
D: Work permit modified after approval 

Plan quality G: The work description did not fit the criticality and importance of safety of the work 

D: Not precise description of new activity added to an already assessed work order 

 C: Failure in preparation of correctly establishing a barrier 
Competence G: Plant specific competence was not present during decision making 

N: There is a procedure for the work which was not known and used 

 D: Decision made based on inadequate knowledge and competence on the 
process system by mechanical team 
G: Shift of personnel which was not part of the preparations before 
execution, new personnel had no experience or competence on the 
system 

Overview of G: Onshore had no overview of activities offshore when plans were changed to include test on 
2

activities/situation ESDV , no new assessment of plan 
awareness  C: Bleed to unsafe areas was not coordinated with other activities 

G, Q: (Very) high activity level at the installation 
Work practice M: "Silent deviation" on bleed to unsafe area 

 M: Blinding list verified to be correct when it deviated from procedure 
R: Work permit approved and considered routine operation without any 
additional requirements 
R: The type of maintenance not always documented by offshore 
organisation  
E: Blinding list not established 
E: Work permit signed before job prepared 

Work load  G: High work load on operation and maintenance leader 

Risk assessment G: The segment contained large amount of gas which was not identified or considered during 
planning 

 N: The risk for the incident was not included in detailed procedure or 
handover between teams 

Learning A, C, D, G, O: Similar incident not considered during preparation of work 

 G: Earlier studies of similar incidents were not known to the personnel 

                                                          
1
 HC: Hydrocarbon carrying 

2
 ESDV: Emergency shutdown valve 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Need for Define Quality Establish Analyse plan 
work framework assure plan operation and risk 

conditions data plan 

Need to 

update 

plan 

Coordinate Perform 
Adjust plan Distribute 

plan and risk operational 
plan 

plan meeting 

 

Figure 1: The work flow process for updating the operational plan 

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Need 

Establish WO Review/ 
for 

update WO 
work 

Onshore 

personnel 

Need to 
Review status Manage WOs Date WOs on Approve WO Distribute 

update 
of WO plan for new plan resources plan WO plan 

WO plan 

Establish WP Establish and Perform SJA Approve WP Execute 

plan apply for WP and day plan work 

Offshore 

personnel 
 

Figure 1: The work flow process for updating the work order and work permit plan 

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
6

Information flow

5 Communication

Misunderstandings

Documentation
4

Procedures

Planning quality
3

Plan quality

Competence

2 Overview of activities

Work practice

1 Workload

Risk assessment

Learning
0

Entire process Operational plan Work order plan Work permit
 

Figure 1: Distribution of the influencing factors for each of the planning phases. 

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Potential conflict between 

safety and production goals 

Focus on efficiency can put time and cost 

pressure vs safety or prefer production 

optimization operations ahead of 

maintenance operations 
Work description do not 

contain all relevant information 

needed to manage risk 
Misperception around the 

Communication 
criticality of the work 

related to 

determine if a 

plan should to 

be updated Failure in prioritizing Specific competence 
work with respect to not available in 
consequence decision making 

Inadequate documentation Inadequate assessment of hazardous activities, 
and procedures simultaneous activities or barrier weaknesses 

 

Figure 1: Exemplifies how the steps in the planning processes potentially can relate to major accidents. 

 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
• We study and describe a typical planning process for offshore oil and gas operations in 

Norway.  
• Then analyse a number of theories of major accidents, to see how the different theories and 

their explanations of causes and contributing factors can be of relevance for plans and 
planning processes.  

• We review accident investigations to search for evidence of how weaknesses in planning 
processes can contribute to major accidents through the above identified factors.  

• Thirteen factors which directly or indirectly can influence the planning process causing a 
major accident potential are identified.  

• Planning process should focus more on increasing quality in the plans at an early phase. 
 

ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          149 
 

SERA E HFACS: DOIS SISTEMAS PARA ANÁLISE E CLASSIFICAÇÃO DO 
ERRO HUMANO EM ACIDENTES E INCIDENTES AERONÁUTICOS1 

Simone Figueira Sobreda2 
Paulo Afonso de Oliveira Soviero3 

 
Artigo submetido em: 29/08/2011 
Aceito para publicação em: 17/10/2011 
RESUMO: Com o constante aumento da confiabilidade da tecnologia aeronáutica, 
as falhas que ocorrem devido a equipamentos ou materiais são cada vez mais raras 
e as principais causas de acidentes são atribuíveis, hoje em dia, ao ser humano, 
conforme dados do “National Transportation Safety Board” (NTSB). Assim, a 
habilidade para investigar, classificar e detectar os fatores humanos, que se 
encontram na origem de acidentes e incidentes, passa a ter importância central no 
esforço de se evitar recorrências ou ainda no estabelecimento de defesas, de modo 
a impedir que os “erros humanos” se repitam ou se propaguem. Observa-se que, 
atualmente, existe uma tendência na utilização de modelos baseados na abordagem 
organizacional para análise e investigação de acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos. O 
objetivo deste trabalho é apresentar uma ferramenta que permita fazer a análise e a 
classificação destes erros. É apresentado para tal, o programa SERA (“Systematic 
Error and Risk Analysis”), que teve como objetivo inicial ajudar a preencher o 
sistema HFACS (“Human Factors Analysis Classification System”). Sendo um 
programa de fácil utilização, o SERA conduz o investigador, através de perguntas 
simples e diretas, à emersão das falhas ativas do operador e das pré-condições nos 
diversos níveis da organização. No presente trabalho faz-se também uma 
comparação entre os sistemas de classificação do SERA e do HFACS. 
 
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Erro Humano. HFACS. SERA. Sistema de Classificação. 
 

1 INTRODUÇÃO 

Com a evolução tecnológica e o aumento da confiabilidade das aeronaves, o 

homem foi capaz de realizar o sonho de voar longas distâncias em um intervalo de 

tempo pequeno. Porém, apesar deste aumento da confiabilidade das aeronaves, 

acidentes ainda ocorrem e, segundo o “National Transportation Safety Board” 

(NTSB, 2010) durante o período estudado de dez anos, o fator humano foi citado 

como pelo menos uma causa ou fator contribuinte para algo entre 70 a 80% das 

ocorrências com respeito a acidentes relacionados ao “Part 121”. Este regulamento 

se refere às aeronaves operadas por transportador aéreo envolvendo aviões com 

configuração para passageiros com mais de nove lugares, ou, no caso de operações 

de carga, aviões com uma capacidade de carga de mais de 7.500 libras. (ESTADOS 

                                                        
1 Artigo originalmente apresentado no 4º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo do IPEV – Instituto de 
Pesquisas e Ensaios em Voo, ocorrido em São José dos Campos, de 15 a 17 de agosto de 2011. 
2 Analista de Sistemas com mestrado em Segurança de Aviação e Aeronavegabilidade Continuada 
pelo Instituo Tecnológico de Aeronáutica – ITA. Atualmente trabalha no ITA. simone@ita.br 
3 Professor Doutor do Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica - ITA. soviero@ita.br  

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



150           Artigo Científico 

UNIDOS, 2011). Aeronaves operadas sob o “Part 121” incluem tanto operações 

regulares quanto as não regulares, de acordo com publicação do NTSB (2010). No 

Brasil o regulamento que corresponde ao “Part 121” é o RBAC 121 (Regulamento 

Brasileiro de Aviação Civil 121). Os fatores relacionados às aeronaves permanecem 

em torno de 20% e os fatores ambientais, em torno de 50%. Conforme, ainda, o 

NTSB (2010), dentro de cada ocorrência de acidente, qualquer informação que 

ajude a esclarecer por que o evento aconteceu é indicado como uma causa ou um 

fator contribuinte. 

A Figura 1 provê mais detalhes sobre as causas e fatores dentro das 

principais categorias de fatores humanos, ambientais e de aeronave no ano de 2006. 

Estes dados mostram a proporção onde uma causa ou um fator específico foi citado, 

pelo menos uma vez, no acidente, porém cada ocorrência pode ter mais de um 

causa ou fator contribuinte. Esta figura mostra no que se refere aos fatores 

humanos, que os pilotos foram citados em 32,1% das ocorrências, um índice abaixo 

de outros relacionados aos fatores humanos, como por exemplo, do pessoal de fora 

da aeronave. Estes foram citados em 57,1% dos acidentes demonstrando um índice 

de contribuição maior atribuído ao pessoal de rampa que aos próprios tripulantes. 

Conforme a “Federal Aviation Administration” (ESTADOS UNIDOS, 2009), três 

em cada quatro acidentes, portanto, cerca de 75% dos acidentes são resultantes de 

erro humano. No entanto, conforme Reason (2008) os erros não são aleatórios nem 

repentinos, ao contrário, são, na maioria das vezes, recorrentes e previsíveis. 

Indivíduos diferentes cometem os mesmos tipos de erros nas mesmas situações, 

sendo estes, então, classificados como erros sistemáticos. Através das análises das 

tendências destes erros, é possível montar um banco de dados estruturado, onde se 

possa identificar e classificar o erro, e, consequentemente, se erguer barreiras onde 

seja necessário, com isto impedindo a repetição do mesmo. 

O objetivo deste trabalho é apresentar dois sistemas que permitem a análise 

e a classificação destes erros. 

Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) fizeram um estudo das principais abordagens a 

partir das quais se estuda o erro humano; sendo estas, a abordagem cognitiva, a 

ergonômica, a comportamental, a aeromédica, a psicossocial e a organizacional. 

Destas, o modelo de Reason de causa de acidentes, baseado na abordagem 

organizacional e o modelo SHEL adaptado por Hawkins (1984) baseado na 

abordagem ergonômica, são aqueles sugeridos pelo manual da “International Civil 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          151 
 

Aviation Organization” (ICAO, 1993) para a análise de acidentes. Observou-se, a 

partir deste estudo, que não existe um consenso para utilização de uma abordagem 

para o estudo do erro humano e que estes modelos são teóricos, havendo então 

uma lacuna a ser preenchida por um modelo prático na análise de acidentes.  

 
FIGURA 1 - Principais Causas/Fatores em Acidentes do “Part 121” no ano de 2006 

Fonte: Adaptado do NTSB (2010) 
São apresentados então, dois sistemas para a investigação e a classificação 

de fatores humanos na aviação. Primeiramente, descreve-se o HFACS (“Human 

Factors Analysis and Classification System”), baseado no modelo de Reason e que 

teve sua classificação a partir de dados coletados em acidentes e incidentes sofridos 

por pilotos da Marinha Americana, sendo estes dados posteriormente 

complementados por outros órgãos, ainda americanos. A seguir é feita a descrição 

do SERA (“Systematic Error and Risk Analysis”), baseado na teoria do controle 

perceptivo e do processamento da informação.  

Esta ferramenta faz uso de um programa escrito em JAVA e simplifica o 

processo, que é feito de maneira estruturada, para análise de investigação de 

acidentes em um sistema complexo. O SERA foi originalmente desenvolvido para 

ajudar a preencher o sistema HFACS das Forças Canadenses. Ambos os sistemas 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



152           Artigo Científico 

são baseados nos conceitos de falhas ativas e condições latentes, sendo que o 

SERA faz uma ligação entre as falhas ativas e as pré-condições que levam às 

falhas. 

Segundo o conceito da abordagem ergonômica, o ser humano tem uma 

interface física ou lógica com outros elementos que podem influenciar no seu 

desempenho, em que, os fatores atuantes são: o ambiente, a máquina e os 

regulamentos que envolvem determinada atividade. Neste sistema o acidente pode 

ocorrer se há uma falha em uma destas interfaces que ligam dois ou mais elementos 

(WIEGMANN; SHAPPELL, 2003). 

A abordagem organizacional analisa o erro humano a partir de uma série de 

eventos que envolvem toda a organização. Segundo esta abordagem os acidentes 

são decorrentes de falhas no sistema organizacional, que surgem a partir de 

decisões gerenciais ou de supervisão e que podem levar um indivíduo a cometer um 

erro. Diferentemente das outras perspectivas, tal abordagem deixa de focar o 

homem ou a máquina como sendo o elemento causador do acidente. Em vez disso, 

postula que o erro cometido pela tripulação foi uma condição final na cadeia dos 

eventos que o antecederam e que este erro foi um fator contribuinte que, somado 

aos outros fatores contribuintes, levou ao acidente. 

 

2 HFACS (“HUMAN FACTORS ANALYSIS AND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM”) 

Foi desenvolvido, em 1997, por Shappell e Wiegmann, um sistema 

originalmente chamado de Taxonomia para Condições Inseguras, tendo eles 

utilizado, para isto, mais de trezentos acidentes oriundos da aviação naval e que 

foram obtidos a partir de dados do “Navy Safety Center” nos Estados Unidos. Esta 

taxonomia foi posteriormente refinada, por seus desenvolvedores, usando, para tal, 

dados de outras organizações militares e civis, a saber: o “Army Safety Center” e o 

“Air Force Safety Center”, ambas organizações militares americanas; e o NTSB e a 

FAA, ambos organizações civis e também americanas. Estes dados surgiram das 

análises de centenas de relatórios de acidentes, que continham milhares de fatores 

causais oriundos dos fatores humanos, daquelas organizações. (SHAPPELL ET AL., 

2000). 

O resultado do trabalho desenvolvido por Shappell e Wiegmann foi o 

surgimento de um sistema denominado “Human Factors Analysis and Classification 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          153 
 

System”. Este sistema foi baseado nos conceitos de falhas ativas e falhas latentes, 

descrito por James Reason em seu livro “Human Error” de 1990. O HFACS tem 

como objetivo ser utilizado como uma ferramenta na análise e investigação de 

acidentes, onde, então, é possível definir as falhas que levaram ao acidente, tanto 

aquelas ativas, dos operadores, assim como, aquelas latentes, que se originam nas 

decisões do mais alto nível de gerência da organização ou ainda, pelos diversos 

níveis de gerenciamento da mesma. 

O sistema HFACS descreve quatro níveis de falhas humanas, onde cada uma 

destas corresponde àquelas descritas por Reason (1990), em seu modelo das 

diversas contribuições humanas para a quebra de um sistema produtivo. Shappell e 

Wiegmann denominam estes quatro níveis, contados a partir do operador, como: 

atos inseguros, pré-condições para atos inseguros, supervisão insegura e influências 

organizacionais.  

2.1 Atos Inseguros 

Segundo Reason (1990), um ato inseguro é um erro ou uma violação 

cometido na presença de um perigo que, se não for corretamente controlado, pode 

levar a algum dano. Baseado neste conceito, Shappell et al. (2000) classificam os 

atos das tripulações em duas categorias, a saber, os erros e as violações. De 

maneira geral, os erros são cometidos por alguma falha nas atividades físicas e 

mentais de indivíduos, e estas falhas não permitem que estes indivíduos atinjam 

seus objetivos conforme o esperado. Por outro lado, as violações são atitudes 

tomadas por indivíduos que, voluntariamente, desrespeitam as regras e 

regulamentos que governam a segurança de aviação. 

2.1.1 ERROS 

Os erros, conforme Reason (1990) e Shappell et al. (2000), podem ser 

classificados em três tipos básicos, a saber, erros de decisão, erros baseados em 

habilidades e erros de percepção. 

2.1.1.1Erros de decisão 

Erros de decisão derivam de comportamentos intencionais, ações ou inações 

que se desenvolvem conforme a intenção do indivíduo, porém, o planejamento se 

revela inadequado ou inapropriado para determinada situação, algumas vezes, por 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



154           Artigo Científico 

falta de conhecimento, outras vezes, simplesmente, por este indivíduo se defrontar 

com diversas opções e fazer uma escolha ruim. Podem-se agrupar estes erros de 

decisão em três categorias, sendo estas, os erros de procedimentos, os erros devido 

às escolhas ruins e os erros na resolução de problemas. 

Os erros de decisão devido a procedimentos surgem no contexto de tarefas 

altamente estruturadas, onde existe uma sequência lógica para as tomadas de 

decisão. As tarefas de pilotagem, na aviação tanto militar quanto civil, fazem parte 

deste contexto, consequentemente muitas das decisões dos pilotos são baseadas 

em procedimentos durante as diversas fases do voo. A maior parte dos erros deste 

tipo ocorre quando não há um reconhecimento da situação, ou quando esta é mal 

diagnosticada, levando à execução de um procedimento incorreto. 

Os erros de decisão devido às escolhas ruins são aqueles que ocorrem 

quando decisões erradas são tomadas a partir de situações enfrentadas pelos 

tripulantes. Neste caso, normalmente, estes tripulantes estão diante de diversas 

opções que não fazem parte dos procedimentos padrões da aviação. Estes erros 

podem ocorrer com tripulações inexperientes, ou tripulantes que se encontrem em 

situações em que há pouco tempo para as tomadas de decisão, ou ainda, por 

pressões externas que fazem com que o piloto, muitas vezes, escolha bem, e, 

outras vezes, escolha mal. 

Os erros de decisão devido à resolução de problemas são os erros cometidos 

em situações novas enfrentadas pelos tripulantes. Estas situações, normalmente 

não são bem definidas, não existem procedimentos formais e as opções de 

respostas não estão disponíveis. Nestes casos, os indivíduos precisam inventar uma 

nova solução. Embora estas situações sejam raras, a proporção de erros deste tipo 

é alta, (SHAPPELL ET AL., 2000). 

2.1.1.2 Erros baseados em habilidades 

Os erros baseados em habilidades surgem a partir de falhas de memória, 

falhas de atenção e erros de técnica. As falhas de memória e de atenção ocorrem na 

execução de tarefas básicas executadas através de comportamentos automatizados 

da tripulação, tarefas estas em que o piloto está habituado a realizar. Assim sendo 

não é preciso um alto grau de raciocínio para executá-las. Erros de técnica decorrem 

de comportamentos individuais durante o voo. Indivíduos com o mesmo treinamento 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          155 
 

podem agir diferentemente em determinadas situações, pois estes erros estão 

ligados à capacidade e à aptidão, que são particulares a cada ser humano. 

2.1.1.3 Erros de percepção 

Os erros de percepção são aqueles cometidos pela tripulação a partir de uma 

percepção que difere da realidade, tornando-se então uma percepção falha. Estes 

erros, normalmente, ocorrem quando a tripulação está voando em condições 

adversas ou em voos noturnos. Estas condições podem levar um indivíduo a sofrer 

desorientação espacial, ilusões visuais, ou mau julgamento da velocidade, atitude ou 

altitude da aeronave. Quando estes eventos ocorrem, é possível que a tripulação 

seja levada a tomar decisões erradas a partir de informações recebidas pelo cérebro 

que não sejam as reais. 

2.1.2 VIOLAÇÕES 

As atividades aéreas são regidas por normas e regulamentos que garantem a 

segurança de aviação. Determinados indivíduos cometem violações a partir do 

momento em que, deliberadamente, descumprem normas e regulamentos adotados 

pela organização a qual pertencem. Estas violações, embora deliberadas, não têm a 

pretensão de causar danos ao sistema. A tentativa de causar danos ao sistema, de 

maneira intencional, denomina-se sabotagem e esta não faz parte dos estudos de 

fatores humanos na segurança de aviação. 

Reason (1997), (2008) classifica as violações em três classes, como descrito 

abaixo. Em todos os casos, a decisão de não respeitar os procedimentos para 

operações seguras é formada por ambos os fatores organizacionais e individuais, 

embora o balanço entre estas influências possa variar de uma violação para outra. 

2.1.2.1 Violações de rotina ou violações no nível de desempenho baseado em 
habilidade 

Estas envolvem os atalhos, em que o operador segue o caminho de mínimo 

esforço entre dois pontos relacionados à tarefa. Violações de rotina são promovidas 

por procedimentos malfeitos que levam a ações, ao longo de um caminho, que 

parece ser mais comprido que o necessário. Estes atalhos se tornam uma parte 

habitual do comportamento da pessoa, particularmente onde o ambiente de trabalho 

é relativamente indiferente, ambientes aqueles que raramente punem violações ou 

recompensam os que seguem as normas. 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



156           Artigo Científico 

Violações de otimização “ou violações em busca de emoções” também é uma 

característica das violações no nível de desempenho baseado em habilidade. Estas 

refletem o fato de que as ações humanas cumprem uma variedade de objetivos 

motivacionais e que alguns destes não estão relacionados com os aspectos 

funcionais da tarefa. Deste modo, seja o objetivo prático de um motorista que é ir do 

ponto A ao ponto B. No entanto, durante o processo ele pode priorizar o prazer de 

correr ou satisfazer seus instintos agressivos. Tendências em priorizar os objetivos 

pessoais, em vez dos que são funcionais, podem se tornar uma parte incorporada 

ao estilo de desempenho de um indivíduo. Estas violações são características de 

grupos demográficos particulares, tais como o de jovens motoristas do sexo 

masculino. (WIEGMANN E SHAPPELL, 2003). 

2.1.2.2 Violações necessárias ou situacionais ou ainda, violações no nível de 
desempenho baseado em normas 

Enquanto que violações de rotina e de otimização estão nitidamente ligadas à 

realização de objetivos pessoais, que são o mínimo esforço, e as emoções, as 

violações necessárias, que são as que têm suas origens básicas em situações 

particulares do trabalho, situações estas que criam condições para uma violação 

necessária ou situacional. Aqui o não cumprimento é visto como essencial e, em 

muitos casos, as violações são as únicas maneiras que permitem a realização do 

trabalho. Violações necessárias são comumente provocadas por deficiências da 

organização no que diz respeito ao local de trabalho ou ao sistema. Além disto, tais 

violações também podem prover um jeito mais fácil de trabalhar, o que pode fazer 

com que, frequentemente, estas violações se tornem parte do desempenho baseado 

na habilidade natural de uma pessoa. 

2.1.2.3 Violações no nível de desempenho baseado em conhecimento 

Estas violações acontecem em situações novas ou atípicas, para as quais é 

improvável que exista algum treinamento ou orientação de procedimentos. 

Instrutores ou aqueles que escrevem os procedimentos só podem tratar de 

situações previsíveis ou conhecidas. Existem situações que, embora tenham sido 

cobertas pelo treinamento, podem nunca ter sido enfrentadas pelo operador, o que 

leva este, ao cometimento de violações. Esta é uma área na qual as violações 

podem se transformar em recuperações heroicas. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          157 
 

Os autores do sistema HFACS (WIEGMANN E SHAPPELL, 2003) classificam 

as violações baseando-se em Reason (1990). Portanto, o sistema classifica como 

violações de rotina aquelas que são cometidas habitualmente, e violações 

excepcionais aquelas que são cometidas ocasionalmente e que são produtos de 

uma ampla variedade de condições locais. Estas classificações englobam as três 

descritas nos parágrafos anteriores, Reason (1997), (2008). Alguns erros e violações 

são exemplificados abaixo, conforme o trabalho dos autores do Sistema HFACS 

(SHAPPELL ET AL., 2000), (WIEGMANN E SHAPPELL, 2003). 

 

Exemplos de Erros: 

a) Erros baseados em habilidades: Falha na supervisão visual; falha em priorizar a 

atenção; utilização inadvertida dos comandos de voo; omissão de um dos passos do 

procedimento; omissão de um item do “checklist”; técnica ruim; controle excessivo 

da aeronave; confiança exagerada na automação; sobrecarga de tarefas; distração; 

hábitos negativos; falhas em ver e evitar. 

b) Erros de decisão: Procedimento ou manobra inapropriada; conhecimento 

inadequado de sistemas ou procedimentos; habilidade excedida; resposta errada em 

emergência; emergência mal diagnosticada; decisão ruim. 

c) Erros de percepção: devido à ilusão visual; devido à desorientação espacial, 

vertigem; devido a mau julgamento da distância, da altitude, da velocidade, da 

separação. 

Exemplos de Violações: 

a) Rotineiras: “briefing” inadequado para o voo; falha ao usar o alerta de radar do 

controle de tráfego aéreo; execução de uma aproximação não autorizada; violação 

das regras de treinamento; voo VFR (“Visual Flight Rules”) em condições 

meteorológicas marginais; desobediência aos manuais; violação de ordens, 

regulamentos, SOPs (“Standard Operating Procedures”); falha em inspecionar a 

aeronave após alerta luminoso durante o voo. 

b) Excepcionais: realização de manobra acrobática não autorizada; técnica de 

decolagem imprópria; falha em obter informações confiáveis sobre o clima; exceder 

os limites da aeronave; falha em completar os cálculos de desempenho para o voo; 

aceitar um perigo desnecessário; falta de qualificação ou atualização para o voo; voo 

não autorizado em desfiladeiro à baixa altitude. 

 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



158           Artigo Científico 

2.2 Pré-Condições Para Atos Inseguros 

As pré-condições para atos inseguros ou, os precursores psicológicos, como 

descritos por Reason (1990), são aquelas situações que criam as possibilidades 

para o surgimento dos atos inseguros. No caso das investigações de acidentes, é a 

partir destas pré-condições que os investigadores buscam as causas que levaram a 

tripulação a cometer o ato inseguro. 

Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) dividem estas pré-condições para atos 

inseguros em três categorias, a saber, condições dos operadores, fatores pessoais e 

fatores ambientais. 

2.2.1 CONDIÇÕES DOS OPERADORES 

As condições físicas, mentais e fisiológicas podem afetar, e normalmente 

influenciam o desempenho profissional dos indivíduos. Shappell et al. (2000) 

atribuem três estados dos tripulantes ao elo crítico da cadeia de eventos que podem 

levar a um ato inseguro, a saber: o estado mental adverso, o estado fisiológico 

adverso e as limitações físicas ou mentais. 

Estado mental adverso refere-se ao estado mental do piloto quando este está 

sofrendo algum tipo de influência prejudicial ao seu raciocínio ou as suas tomadas 

de decisões. Por ser a aviação uma atividade que requer um trabalho mental 

elevado, é necessário que seja avaliada, em uma investigação, se determinada 

tripulação não está sob efeito de sono, fadiga mental, ou sujeita a tarefas que 

aumentem a sua carga mental de trabalho. Também se incluem aqui, traços 

negativos de personalidade, tais como, excesso de confiança, arrogância e 

impulsividade, pois os mesmos podem levar a infrações, as quais fazem parte dos 

atos inseguros. 

Estado fisiológico adverso refere-se aos estados médicos e fisiológicos nos 

quais se encontra a tripulação. Situações que afetam o organismo, tais como, 

ilusões visuais, desorientação espacial, fadiga física e, nesta classificação é 

importante que seja observado pelos investigadores, se a tripulação estava 

medicamente aeronavegável. Embora possa parecer de pouca importância, quando 

tripulantes são afetados por uma dor de cabeça ou um resfriado, estes, muitas vezes 

optam pelo uso de medicamentos sem prescrição médica. É possível que, em uma 

situação de emergência, ou com a mudança de altitudes sofrida pelas aeronaves e 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          159 
 

pelos pilotos, a fisiologia destes seja afetada pelo uso de medicamentos, que, em 

um primeiro momento, podem parecer inofensivos. 

Limitações físicas ou mentais referem-se às limitações destas capacidades, 

nos pilotos, para o cumprimento de determinada missão. Durante o processo de 

seleção estas capacidades são examinadas, pois, as operações aéreas 

constantemente exigem as melhores aptidões físicas e mentais destes 

aeronavegantes. Aspectos físicos, como a visão ou força física são fatores 

requeridos para o voo. Existem situações em que a capacidade física do piloto é 

exigida, e um piloto que se encontre fora dos limites destas exigências, pode perder 

o controle da aeronave, caso não possua os atributos necessários durante uma 

emergência. Ainda, como parte das características dos aeronavegantes, pode-se 

citar a habilidade natural para o voo e a capacidade mental que proporcione um 

processamento mental rápido, pois na atividade aérea, é necessário que as 

respostas também sejam rápidas. Porém, em diversas ocasiões, esta rapidez no 

processamento da informação, em uma situação onde o tempo disponível seja 

pequeno, pode trazer como consequência, a ocorrência de erros na tomada de 

decisão. Cabe aos investigadores descobrirem se estas limitações contribuíram para 

que o acidente ocorresse. 

2.2.2 FATORES PESSOAIS 

Estes fatores referem-se às maneiras inseguras pelas quais os operadores 

realizam as diversas atividades que estão sob suas responsabilidades. Estas 

condições que são, normalmente, inaceitáveis, eventualmente levam a ocorrência de 

atos inseguros. Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) classificam estes fatores em dois itens, 

a saber, CRM (“Crew Resource Management”) e disposição pessoal. 

O CRM, ou o gerenciamento de recursos de cabine, diz respeito às falhas na 

comunicação entre os tripulantes na cabine de pilotagem, ou entre estes e todos os 

outros personagens do amplo cenário da aviação, quer seja entre aeronaves, entre 

estas e o controle de tráfego aéreo, com o pessoal de suporte, da manutenção, 

assim como falhas no “briefing” e “debriefing”.  Falta de coordenação entre os 

membros da equipe ou falhas nas comunicações dentro e fora da cabine geram 

confusões e levam a ocorrência de falhas nas decisões, e, por consequência, aos 

atos inseguros. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



160           Artigo Científico 

Prontidão pessoal refere-se às falhas na preparação pessoal do indivíduo 

quando de sua apresentação para o trabalho, a fim de manter um nível ótimo de 

desempenho durante a realização da tarefa. No caso da aviação, os tripulantes 

devem estar física e mentalmente preparados para o voo. Para tal, é necessário que 

esta tripulação, respeite, antes do voo, os períodos de descanso, o limite de tempo 

de ingestão de bebidas alcoólicas, o uso de automedicação e que tenham uma 

alimentação adequada em função da tarefa exercida. Cabe à tripulação usar o bom 

senso para decidir se está apta ou não para o voo, pois caso estes parâmetros não 

sejam respeitados, o desempenho pode ser degradado, levando aos atos inseguros.  

2.2.3 FATORES AMBIENTAIS 

Os fatores ambientais são aqueles externos ao ser humano e que influenciam 

negativamente nas operações dos tripulantes. Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) 

classificam estes fatores em: ambiente físico e ambiente tecnológico. 

O ambiente físico refere-se aos efeitos negativos sofridos pela tripulação em 

função do ambiente da operação, tais como, terreno, altitude, clima, e também pelo 

ambiente dentro da cabine, tais como calor, vibração, iluminação, toxinas, e outros 

fatores que possam afetar o tripulante em seu local de trabalho. Estes ambientes 

adversos causam degradação do desempenho da tripulação, podendo levar, deste 

modo, a diversos atos inseguros. 

O ambiente tecnológico refere-se aos erros ocasionados a partir dos aspectos 

tecnológicos das aeronaves. Este ambiente engloba uma variedade de questões, 

incluindo o “design” de equipamentos e dos controles, características dos 

mostradores e interfaces, “layouts” dos “checklists”, fatores ligados às tarefas e 

automação. Estes equipamentos, embora projetados levando-se em conta os fatores 

humanos, e mesmo tendo o intuito de reduzir a carga mental de trabalho, têm sido 

causa de uma série de eventos que afetam o desempenho dos tripulantes, a saber, 

confusões em relação aos comandos, confiança demasiada nos sistemas e 

complacência por parte das tripulações, levando-as a cometerem erros que outrora 

não seriam cometidos. 

Algumas pré-condições para atos inseguros são exemplificadas a seguir, 

baseado no trabalho dos autores do Sistema HFACS, Shappell et al. (2000), 

Wiegmann e Shappell (2003). 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          161 
 

Exemplos de Condição do Operador: 

a) Estado mental adverso: perda de consciência situacional; complacência; estresse; 

excesso de confiança; má vigilância do voo; excesso de tarefas; alerta (sonolência); 

longo tempo fora de casa; fadiga mental; disritmia circadiana; atenção muito focada; 

distração; pressa; motivação inapropriada. 

b) Estado fisiológico adverso: doença; hipóxia; fadiga física; intoxicação; enjoo; 

efeitos de medicamentos sem receita; 

c) Limitações físicas ou mentais: limitações visuais; tempo de reação insuficiente; 

sobrecarga de informações; experiência inadequada para a complexidade da 

situação; incompatibilidade das capacidades físicas; falta de aptidão para voar; falta 

de estímulos sensoriais. 

 

Exemplos de Fatores Pessoais: 

a) CRM - gerenciamento de recursos de cabine: falha na condução de “briefing” 

adequado; falta de espírito de equipe; falta de assertividade; falha na coordenação 

ou comunicação dentro da aeronave, entre aeronaves, com o ATC (“Air Traffic 

Control”); interpretação errônea de chamadas do controle de tráfego; falha de 

liderança; falha de monitoramento entre os tripulantes; gradiente de autoridade; uso 

de terminologia padrão. 

b) Prontidão pessoal: desrespeito às normas de descanso de tripulantes; 

treinamento inadequado; automedicação; excesso de exercícios durante as folgas; 

dietas inadequadas; maus padrões de julgamento do risco. 

 

Exemplos de Fatores Ambientais: 

a) Ambiente físico: clima; altitude; terreno; iluminação; vibração; toxinas na cabine; 

estresse térmico - calor ou frio; ruído; acelerações. 

b) Ambiente tecnológico: “design” de equipamentos e dos controles; “layouts” do 

“checklist”; características dos mostradores e interfaces; automação; equipamentos 

de comunicação; interferência de equipamento pessoal; área de trabalho 

incompatível com o ser humano; restrições de visibilidade. 

2.3 Supervisão Insegura 

Conforme foi preconizado por Reason (1990), em seu modelo de causas de 

acidentes, os supervisores que estão no nível de gerenciamento têm que, como uma 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



162           Artigo Científico 

de suas funções, tomar decisões que tenham consequências seguras para as 

operações, nos seus diversos departamentos. Porém, devido a fatores diversos, 

estas decisões nem sempre são as mais adequadas para a segurança de aviação. 

Assim, os resultados destas influenciam o estado de ânimo dos pilotos, e em como 

eles executam as tarefas. Tais influências se estendem até ao ambiente no qual as 

aeronaves são operadas. 

Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) classificam em quatro categorias estas 

supervisões inseguras, a saber, supervisão inadequada, planejamento inapropriado 

de operações, falhas em corrigir um problema conhecido e as violações da 

supervisão. 

2.3.1 SUPERVISÃO INADEQUADA 

Refere-se às situações onde houve falhas por parte da supervisão em prover 

o sucesso dos operadores a ela subordinados. É importante, que, durante as 

investigações, o papel da supervisão seja considerado, e que, seja avaliado se as 

falhas de supervisão agiram como fatores causais ou contribuintes para que as 

ocorrências acontecessem. É possível considerar-se como falhas de supervisão, as 

faltas de liderança, de orientação, de treinamento, da vigilância, de incentivos, e 

outros aspectos que resultam em atitudes que afetem a segurança do voo. Uma 

supervisão inadequada, que falha em prover treinamento adequado em CRM de 

tripulantes, por exemplo, pode comprometer o desempenho de uma equipe que, 

durante um voo, seja colocada diante de uma situação adversa. É importante 

capacitar tripulantes para que estes tomem decisões e que executem suas tarefas 

de maneira individual. Porém, ao mesmo tempo em que eles devam estar 

habilitados a cumprir suas missões, a falta de orientação e vigilância pelos 

supervisores pode levar a diversas violações dentro da cabine, e, eventualmente, 

ser a causa de acidentes. 

2.3.2 PLANEJAMENTO INAPROPRIADO DE OPERAÇÕES 

Esta categoria refere-se ao planejamento inapropriado do ritmo das 

operações e da programação dos horários das tripulações. Uma supervisão insegura 

pode colocar uma determinada tripulação em situação de risco, caso escalas de voo 

de tripulantes não prevejam tempo de descanso suficiente, podendo acarretar uma 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          163 
 

redução no desempenho dos pilotos, seja por fadiga, por estresse ou, simplesmente, 

por estarem muito tempo afastados das famílias. 

2.3.3 FALHAS EM CORRIGIR UM PROBLEMA CONHECIDO 

Refere-se às falhas, por parte da supervisão, na correção de problemas que 

são conhecidos, tanto por supervisores, como por outros membros da equipe e que 

continuam sendo tolerados com o passar do tempo. Estas deficiências podem ser de 

treinamento, equipamento, de comportamentos de indivíduos durante o voo, ou 

outras deficiências, que sejam conhecidas dos supervisores, que não sejam 

corrigidas e que afetem a segurança. Falhas na correção e na disciplina destes 

comportamentos inadequados promovem um ambiente inseguro e também facilitam 

a violação de regras, podendo, com isso, ocasionar diversos acidentes. 

2.3.4 VIOLAÇÕES DA SUPERVISÃO 

Tais violações referem-se àquelas, que, deliberadamente, são cometidas pela 

supervisão, violando as normas e regulamentos preconizados pela organização. 

Fazem parte da categoria de violações da supervisão, além das falhas dos 

supervisores, nas aplicações de regras ou de regulamentos vigentes, o abuso de 

autoridade dos supervisores em relação aos seus subordinados; e a autorização de 

ações que estejam fora das normas e regulamentos. 

Alguns tipos de supervisões inseguras são exemplificados a seguir, baseado 

no trabalho dos autores do Sistema HFACS, Shappell et al. (2000), Wiegmann e 

Sappell (2003). 

Exemplos de Supervisão Inadequada: Falha em prover treinamento adequado; 

falha em prover vigilância ou orientação profissional adequada; falha em prover 

procedimentos e/ou dados técnicos adequados ou publicações atuais; falha em 

prover período de descanso adequado; percepção de falta de autoridade; falha em 

detectar qualificações; falha em monitorar desempenho; falha em prover doutrina 

operacional; supervisor sobrecarregado ou sem treinamento; perda de consciência 

situacional da supervisão. 

Exemplos de Planejamento Inapropriado de Operações: Composição de 

tripulantes inadequada; falha em prover supervisão adequada; risco superando os 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



164           Artigo Científico 

benefícios; falha em prover oportunidade adequada para descanso das tripulações; 

carga excessiva de trabalho ou de tarefas. 

 

Exemplos de Falhas em Corrigir um Problema Conhecido: Falha em corrigir 

comportamento inapropriado ou em identificar comportamento de risco; falha em 

corrigir um fator de perigo para a segurança; falha em iniciar ação corretiva; falha em 

relatar tendências inseguras. 

 

Exemplos de Falhas em Violações da Supervisão: Autorização para voo de 

tripulação que não está qualificada para tal; falha em aplicar normas e regulamentos; 

violação de procedimentos; autorização de riscos desnecessários; desrespeito 

intencional pela autoridade por parte dos supervisores; documentação inadequada. 

2.4 Influências Organizacionais 

Segundo Reason (1990), os acidentes têm seu início nas decisões falíveis 

dos tomadores de decisão. Estas falhas nas decisões, que são influenciadas por 

diversos fatores, afetam os níveis de supervisão, bem como as condições e as 

ações dos operadores. Estes erros de decisão podem passar despercebidos pelos 

profissionais da área de segurança, caso não haja um sistema que favoreça o surgi-

mento dos mesmos, permanecendo latentes até que outro fator contribuinte os ative. 

Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) dividem esta categoria em três classificações, a 

saber, gerenciamento de recursos, clima organizacional e processo organizacional. 

2.4.1 GERENCIAMENTO DE RECURSOS 

Referem-se às falhas que partem do processo decisório, quanto ao 

gerenciamento de recursos da organização, sejam estes, recursos de pessoas, 

financeiros, de equipamentos ou instalações. Decisões referentes à redução, na 

aplicação de recursos, em gerências como manutenção, equipamentos, 

treinamentos, logística e outros, afetam diretamente a segurança. Para que os 

objetivos de uma organização sejam alcançados, que, no caso da aviação, são a 

segurança e a produtividade, é necessário que se faça um balanceamento ideal dos 

recursos. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          165 
 

Caso haja falha no processo decisório que afete um destes dois aspectos, 

danos podem ocorrer tanto à segurança, através de um acidente, como à 

produtividade através de demissões, cortes de salários, ou de recursos. 

2.4.2 CLIMA ORGANIZACIONAL 

Refere-se às falhas de estruturação da organização, políticas mal definidas e 

cultura mal difundida, mal determinada ou seguindo regras diferentes das oficiais.  A 

estrutura da empresa pode ser observada pelas definições de autoridade, 

responsabilidade e pela comunicação dos tomadores de decisão com os diversos 

membros da organização. As políticas dizem respeito às diretrizes e valores da 

empresa, mas se referem, também, às políticas que não estão escritas, e que fazem 

parte do cotidiano da mesma. A cultura tem a ver com as regras não oficiais, valores, 

crenças e costumes de uma organização. Quando este clima organizacional se 

encontra em desarmonia, promove causas latentes, e, com isso, o desempenho do 

operador final poderá ser afetado. 

2.4.3 PROCESSO ORGANIZACIONAL 

Esta categoria se refere às falhas que surgem em função das normas e 

decisões das atividades operacionais diárias da organização. Erros podem ocorrer 

quando existem falhas na determinação e no uso dos procedimentos operacionais 

padronizados e, também, no caso de falhas nos métodos formais para execução da 

manutenção. Ainda, faz parte das atribuições da organização supervisionar as 

relações entre os operadores e as gerências, evitando as composições indevidas 

das tripulações; as pressões dos ritmos operacionais; e as falhas nos sistemas de 

incentivos, além de outros fatores que afetem a segurança de aviação. Cabe à 

organização prover um meio de monitoramento dos desvios operacionais, tanto de 

tripulantes, como de gerências, através de informes anônimos e auditorias de 

segurança, evitando assim que incidentes se transformem em acidentes 

catastróficos. 

Algumas influências organizacionais são exemplificadas a seguir, conforme 

trabalho dos autores do Sistema HFACS, Shappell et al. (2000), Wiegmann e 

Shappell (2003). 

 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



166           Artigo Científico 

Exemplos de Gerenciamento de Recursos: 

 

a) Recursos humanos: seleção; gerenciamento ou alocação de pessoal; 

treinamento; verificação de experiências. 

b) Gerenciamento monetário ou orçamento: corte de custos excessivos; falta de 

financiamento. 

c) Recursos de equipamento ou instalações: mau projeto da cabine ou da aeronave; 

compra de equipamentos inadequados; falha em corrigir defeitos conhecidos de 

projetos. 

 

Exemplos de Clima Organizacional: 

 

a) Estrutura: cadeia de comando; comunicação; acessibilidade ou visibilidade do 

supervisor; delegação de autoridade; responsabilidade formal por ações. 

b) Políticas: promoção; contratação, demissão, retenção; drogas e álcool; 

investigação de acidentes. 

c) Cultura: normas e regras; costumes organizacionais; valores, crenças, atitudes. 

 

Exemplos de Processo Organizacional: 

 

a) Operações: tempo operacional; incentivos; cotas; pressão de tempo; agenda. 

b) Procedimentos: padrões de desempenho; objetivos definidos claramente; 

instruções sobre procedimentos. 

c) Supervisão: programas de gerenciamento de risco e programas de segurança 

estabelecidos; monitoramento do gerenciamento e verificação de recursos, clima e 

processos de modo a garantir um ambiente seguro de trabalho. 

 

A Figura 2, a seguir, proporciona uma visualização de todas as categorias de 

fatores humanos contidas no sistema HFACS desenvolvido por Shappell e 

Wiegmann em 2000 e atualizado pelos mesmos autores em 2003. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          167 
 

 
FIGURA 2 - O sistema de classificação e análise de fatores humanos (HFACS). 

Fonte: Adaptado de Wiegmann e Shappell (2003) 
 

3 SERA (“SYSTEMATIC ERROR AND RISK ANALYSIS”) 

Foi desenvolvida, em 2002, por Keith C. Hendy, uma ferramenta para análise 

de risco e erro sistemático, denominada “Systematic Error and Risk Analysis”. Esta 

ferramenta foi originalmente concebida, para auxiliar os investigadores em 

ocorrências aeronáuticas das Forças Canadenses, nos aspectos referentes aos 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



168           Artigo Científico 

fatores humanos, ajudando a preencher o sistema utilizado por estes e descrito 

anteriormente, o HFACS. (HENDY, 2003). 

O SERA é baseado em um sistema teórico e, segundo Hendy, sólido, que tem 

suporte nos modelos da Teoria do Controle Perceptivo (PCT) e do Processamento 

da Informação (IP). Esta ferramenta é capaz de prover, através de um processo 

estruturado, a identificação das falhas ativas que ocorreram em um acidente, bem 

como as pré-condições que levaram os operadores a cometerem estas falhas ativas. 

A análise com o SERA é feita por meio de um programa que, através de seus 

diversos passos, simplifica o processo de análise da investigação. Este aplicativo foi 

escrito em JAVA e está disponível para o uso em plataformas de sistemas 

operacionais Windows e Macintosh. 

Apesar de ter sido criado para ser utilizado em conjunto com o HFACS, o 

SERA é uma ferramenta de uso independente, tanto como uma ferramenta de 

investigação, como uma taxonomia para classificação de fatores humanos em 

acidentes. O SERA oferece também uma ferramenta de gerenciamento de risco, 

tanto no nível dos operadores quanto no nível dos gerentes, porém, esta 

característica referente ao programa, não será analisada neste trabalho. 

Conforme o modelo de processamento da informação, todos os seres 

humanos têm capacidade limitada para processar informações e, por causa desta 

limitação, a carga de trabalho, o desempenho e os erros de produção acontecem em 

função da pressão do tempo. Sendo assim, os fatores que têm impacto sobre as 

cargas do trabalho cognitivo dos seres humanos, podem ter seus efeitos reduzidos 

em função da diminuição da quantidade de informações a serem processadas e do 

aumento da quantidade de tempo disponível para este processamento. Baseado 

neste modelo então, se pode observar que, o conhecimento anterior que o ser 

humano possui, influi diretamente neste processamento. 

Conforme o modelo da teoria do controle perceptivo, os seres humanos se 

comportam como se fossem compostos por várias camadas de sistemas de controle 

em circuito fechado. Os pontos de partida deste circuito de controle são as 

percepções que estão ligadas aos objetivos, portanto aquilo que se quer ver, ouvir 

ou sentir, do estado do mundo. Este estado do mundo é sentido, formando uma 

percepção do mesmo e, fazendo-se então, uma comparação com o objetivo. Se 

existe uma perturbação no sistema controlado, existe, portanto, uma diferença, entre 

a percepção e o estado desejado. A partir desta diferença, uma determinada ação é, 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          169 
 

então, formulada. Esta ação faz uma mudança no estado do mundo e tem-se, então, 

uma nova percepção. O modelo da teoria do controle perceptivo tem sua base, 

portanto, em objetivos, atenção, conhecimento e “feedback”. Uma ilustração deste 

modelo pode ser vista na Figura 3. 

 
 

FIGURA 3 - Modelo de Operador em Circuito de Controle Fechado com Diversos Níveis 
Fonte: Adaptado de Hendy (2003) 

 

3.1 O modelo combinado IP/PCT 

 

O modelo IP atua onde existe a transformação de dados ou ações no 

processamento de informações. Isto ocorre nos processos de percepção, de decisão 

e nos modelos de processos do mundo interno. Pode-se então, dizer, que, na 

combinação dos modelos de IP e PCT, a tomada de decisão do ser humano 

depende da gestão do tempo, do conhecimento e dos recursos de atenção (HENDY 

E LICHACZ, 1999 APUD HENDY, 2003). 

Os principais pontos do modelo combinado de processamento da 

informação/teoria do controle perceptivo podem ser resumidos em seis aspectos, a 

saber: 

● A pressão do tempo, em que, os fatores de produção de erro, nível de 

desempenho e percepção de carga de trabalho são dependentes da pressão do 

tempo percebida. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



170           Artigo Científico 

● Equilíbrio entre rapidez e precisão no processamento de informações dos 

seres humanos; é comumente chamado de tomada de decisão. 

 

● Redução da pressão do tempo. Isto se pode fazer por meio de tomadas de 

decisão onde existam menos informações a serem processadas ou por extensão do 

tempo antes da resposta dada. 

 

● No gerenciamento de erro, os sistemas de correção de erros são feitos por 

meio de “feedback”. 

 

● Gerenciamento de recurso, onde, as tomadas de decisão são baseadas no 

conhecimento do mundo. Este conhecimento é obtido por meio da compreensão e 

para obter a compreensão é necessário um determinado intervalo de tempo. 

 

● Ignorância não é felicidade, com relação a este aspecto pode-se dizer que, 

diversos acidentes podem ser causados por falta de conhecimento. 

 

3.2 SERA como uma ferramenta para classificação e investigação de acidentes 

 

O SERA é uma ferramenta que define um processo, ordenado, baseado em 

uma construção teórica do modelo combinado de IP/PCT, para fazer análise da 

origem do padrão de comportamento que levou diretamente a um acidente ou 

incidente, no que diz respeito ao aspecto do fator humano. 

Em todo acidente ou incidente, existe um momento em que há um desvio da 

operação segura. Um ato ou uma condição insegura que tenha a possibilidade de 

ser removida da trajetória do acidente, neste ponto da operação segura, pode evitar 

que o acidente ocorra. Diversos podem ser os atos ou condições inseguras que 

permeiam esta trajetória, porém, o mais crítico é aquele que leva diretamente à 

trajetória do acidente. Existem opções até que este ato ou condição crítica se 

consolide, porém uma vez que a decisão crítica foi tomada, o acidente se torna 

irreversível, a isto se chama, então, o ponto de irreversibilidade do acidente. Uma 

ilustração da trajetória de um acidente pode ser vista na Figura 4. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          171 
 

 
FIGURA 4 - Trajetórias segura e de acidentes ou incidentes. 

Fonte: Adaptado de Hendy (2003) 
 
 

O SERA conduz o investigador na análise de um comportamento humano 

particular, para fazer a avaliação da atitude que desencadeou o acidente, a partir de 

três perguntas, sobre o objetivo, a percepção e a ação do operador, onde, a partir 

destas questões, é possível traçar uma cadeia causal de um ato inseguro para os 

pontos de falhas ativas. As três perguntas são: 

 

a) O que o operador estava tentando realizar? Qual era a sua intenção? 

b) O que o operador acreditou que era o estado do mundo no que dizia 

respeito aos objetivos? 

c) Como o operador estava tentando alcançar os objetivos? Qual era o plano? 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



172           Artigo Científico 

 

FIGURA 5 - Degraus de decisão do SERA. Fonte: Adaptado de Hendy (2003) 
 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          173 
 

Os pontos de falhas ativas podem ser encontrados nos processos de 

estabelecimento dos objetivos, na percepção ou na seleção e execução da ação. 

Estes pontos de falhas podem ser encontrados em um destes ou em mais de um 

destes processos. A pressão do tempo e o estado do conhecimento ao qual o 

operador estava exposto, no momento da tomada de decisão, englobam o domínio, 

dentro do qual as falha ativas ocorrem. 

Estas três questões são o início de uma série de degraus de decisões, e que, 

terminam com doze tipos básicos de falhas ativas, bem como as pré-condições 

correspondentes às falhas, formando então, o processo completo no sistema de 

processamento de informação do ser humano. A Figura 5 ilustra o processo acima 

descrito. 

3.2 falhas ativas / condição ou ato inseguro 

As doze falhas ativas geradas pelos degraus de decisão no sistema de 

processamento de informação do ser humano podem ser enumeradas como se 

segue: 

1) Falhas de intenção; 

2) Falhas de atenção; 

3) Falha sensorial; 

4) Falha de conhecimento; 

5) Falha de percepção; 

6) Falha de comunicação ou de informação; 

7) Falha no gerenciamento do tempo; 

8) Falha de conhecimento durante a decisão; 

9) Falha na habilidade para resposta; 

10) Falha na seleção da ação; 

11) Deslizes, lapsos ou erros e 

12) Falhas de realimentação (“Feedback”). 

3.3 Pré-Condições para falhas ativas 

O modelo de Reason (1990), descrito no capítulo anterior, aponta para dois 

focos principais como sendo contribuições humanas para a quebra de um sistema 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



174           Artigo Científico 

produtivo, as falhas ativas e as falhas latentes que deram origem a estas falhas 

ativas. No SERA, os quatro níveis do modelo de Reason são expressos conforme a 

Figura 6. 

No primeiro nível, as falhas ativas são as classificações, em doze pontos, de 

quebra no sistema de processamento de informação do ser humano e 

correspondem ao primeiro nível, de cima para baixo, na Figura 6. 

No segundo nível, as pré-condições são os fatores que estão direta e 

imediatamente conectados ao ato ou condição insegura.  Estas podem ser definidas 

como a condição do pessoal envolvido no ato inseguro; a condição da tarefa tanto 

no que se refere às pressões do tempo quanto aos objetivos; e às condições do 

trabalho no que se refere aos equipamentos, espaço de trabalho e ambiente. 

No terceiro nível, as falhas de comando, controle e supervisão são 

definidas em termos do estabelecimento de objetivos estratégicos, das 

comunicações destes objetivos, e das provisões em corrigir erros a partir dos 

“feedbacks”. 

No quarto nível, as influências organizacionais são os fatores remotos que 

estabelecem os objetivos das atividades a serem desempenhadas, controlam os 

recursos, definem o clima dentro do qual as atividades são desempenhadas, 

estabelecem restrições que delimitam o comportamento através de procedimentos, 

normas e regulamentos e proveem a supervisão dos mesmos. 

A estrutura que descreve os três níveis de falhas latentes e o nível de falha 

ativa, conforme o SERA pode ser visto na Figura 6. A estrutura mantém os níveis 

básicos do HFACS, porém ela difere nos detalhes. Dentro deste sistema, a atividade 

do operador pode ser rastreada até os objetivos estratégicos, pode ser moldada 

pelas restrições organizacionais que fluem da missão, através dos processos de 

comando, controle e supervisão, e emerge como objetivos da tarefa. 

Esta estrutura é consistente com a teoria do controle perceptivo, na qual todos 

os sistemas humanos são sistemas motivados por objetivos premeditados. As 

influências organizacionais determinam os fatores que restringem estes sistemas, e, 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          175 
 

são estas, as influências que moldam os objetivos que são, por isso, na realidade, 

mantidos diferentes daqueles que deveriam ser perseguidos, para a conquista dos 

objetivos da missão. Em um sistema saudável e efetivo, estes objetivos seriam 

idênticos. 

O SERA pretende ser um sistema que seja suficiente para capturar a maioria 

das falhas em fatores humanos e todos os pontos de intervenção razoáveis. O nível 

de falhas ativas é diretamente rastreável pelo modelo combinado de IP/PCT neste 

sistema, e as pré-condições imediatas do SERA incluem as condições fundamentais 

de no mínimo três dos quatro fatores do modelo SHEL de Edwards adaptado por 

Hawkins (1984). No que se refere ao SERA, estes fatores são: o “Hardware”, 

recursos físicos como construções, equipamentos, veículos e materiais; 

“Environment”, o ambiente social e físico; o clima econômico e o político fazem parte 

do nível organizacional do SERA; e, finalmente, o “Liveware”, os recursos humanos. 

O quarto fator, o “Software”, que representa as normas, regulamentos, leis, ordens, 

SOPs, costumes, práticas e hábitos, está contido no nível organizacional do SERA. 

Em uma posição remota em relação ao pessoal envolvido com as falhas 

ativas, estão as pessoas dentro da organização que estabelecem os objetivos na 

instrução da missão; provê, desenvolve e dá suporte na forma de recursos para a 

execução da missão; estabelece procedimentos e práticas para a realização de 

atividades relacionadas com a missão, dentro das limitações de ambos os sistemas 

de autoridade, impostos por meio de normas e regulamentos, tanto internamente 

como externamente; e cria um clima que molda as atitudes de todos aqueles que 

servem à organização. Esta deve também, monitorar a si mesma para se assegurar 

que a missão está sendo realizada a contento. Este princípio captura a função 

primordial da organização, neste nível.  

Os processos de comando, controle e supervisão conectam dois níveis, as 

influências organizacionais e as pré-condições para atos inseguros, por meio de um 

fluxo bidirecional de informações que pode ser para baixo, através do comando e 

para cima, através de monitoramento e supervisão. 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



176           Artigo Científico 

 

FIGURA 6 - Falhas Ativas e Três Níveis de Pré-Condições 
Fonte: Adaptado de Hendy (2003) 

 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          177 
 

3.3 O nível de falhas nas pré-condições para os atos inseguros 

3.3.1 CONDIÇÃO DO OPERADOR 

A condição dos operadores pode ser descrita por sete estados que descrevem 

as condições dos indivíduos, tanto em seu trabalho individual como em seu trabalho 

em equipe. Estes estados são classificados como: fisiológico, psicológico, social, 

capacidade física, prontidão pessoal, treinamento e seleção e qualificação e 

autorização.  Juntas, estas condições afetam todos os componentes do modelo 

combinado de IP/PCT e, impactam, portanto, os tomadores de decisão. 

3.3.2 CONDIÇÃO DA TAREFA 

A condição da tarefa é descrita por dois fatores, a saber, a pressão do tempo 

e os objetivos. Estas condições em conjunto, determinam os dois fatores do modelo 

IP, isto é, a pressão do tempo sob a qual o pessoal está submetido e a quantidade 

de incerteza que há para ser resolvida. Os objetivos também definem a natureza da 

tarefa e estabelecem o direcionamento da missão e, portanto, o gerenciamento de 

riscos. 

3.3.3 CONDIÇÕES DE TRABALHO 

As condições de trabalho consideram todos os aspectos do ambiente físico 

em que o trabalho é desempenhado, incluindo a interface do operador, a 

acomodação física do espaço de trabalho e os fatores ambientais como temperatura, 

ruído, vibração, atmosfera e o tempo. As condições de trabalho são analisadas em 

termos de equipamentos, espaço de trabalho e ambiente. 

3.4 O nível de falhas no comando, controle e supervisão 

Os conceitos de comando, controle e supervisão, itens estes que são usados 

no SERA, derivam do modelo de PCT. Estes itens são essencialmente dirigidos aos 

objetivos das atividades humanas e, como tais, podem ser representados pelo 

circuito fechado de controle da percepção, demonstrado na Figura 3. Se estes forem 

estruturados conforme o PCT, pode-se observar, então, que o nível de comando 

envolve a formação e a comunicação da intenção do comandante, ao passo que, o 

nível de controle lida com os aspectos envolvidos no risco e por inferência, no 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



178           Artigo Científico 

gerenciamento. Portanto, em um processo de comando e controle há necessidade 

de dar suporte às atividades, de cima para baixo e de baixo para cima. 

A função comando caracteriza-se como um processo que estabelece 

objetivos, formando a intenção. E, a saída deste processo é caracterizada pela 

comunicação da intenção. 

A função controle caracteriza-se como sendo o processo de monitoramento e 

supervisão. 

O processo de supervisão faz parte do processo de comando e controle se, 

em uma organização, este processo é abrangente e dá suporte em formar e 

comunicar as intenções dos mais altos níveis da organização para os níveis mais 

baixos, até que estas intenções cheguem aos operadores, que são aqueles que 

realmente desempenham as atividades da missão. Portanto, um supervisor executa 

as atividades associadas ao processo de controle e comando, porém em um nível 

apropriado ao de supervisão e não no papel de comando. Para completar este 

processo de comando, controle e supervisão, aqueles que estão sendo comandados 

ou supervisionados necessitam perceber e aceitar corretamente a intenção do 

comandante ou supervisor, a forma adequada dos objetivos e a realização das 

atividades que visam satisfazê-los. 

O desempenho completo do processo de comando, controle e supervisão, 

pode ser avaliado por meio de medidas de adequação da intenção formada, no que 

diz respeito à conquista dos objetivos; por quão bem a intenção é comunicada e, 

consequentemente, quão corretamente a maneira como esta intenção é percebida 

pelos envolvidos; e por quão bem são detectadas e corrigidas, através de 

monitoramento e supervisão, as ações mal elaboradas e perturbações, as quais 

podem conduzir as variáveis do mundo para longe dos estados desejados. O 

monitoramento inclui as ações que são deliberadamente contrárias à intenção 

comunicada. 

Homens ou máquinas podem ser comandados ou supervisionados. Os 

processos discutidos acima permanecem os mesmos, embora seja possível dizer 

que a máquina tenha um conjunto de pontos de operação ao invés de um objetivo, já 

que esta é uma função essencialmente humana, e a máquina não pode, sozinha e 

dinamicamente, determinar os valores deste conjunto de pontos; porém, o ser 

humano pode determiná-los dinamicamente quando forma a intenção. De uma 

maneira geral, as máquinas meramente respondem às novas instruções do ser 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          179 
 

humano. Até o dia do surgimento de uma máquina com inteligência real, estas ainda 

continuam refletindo a intenção do ser humano, ao invés de formularem suas 

próprias intenções. 

Em resumo, no SERA, o comando, controle e supervisão são descritos pelos 

seguintes fatores: a) Formação de intenção; b) Comunicação da intenção; c) 

Monitoramento e supervisão. 

3.5 Falhas Organizacionais 

As falhas organizacionais fazem parte do nível mais alto do Modelo de 

Reason (1980). Estas afetam potencialmente as condições do pessoal, da tarefa e 

das condições de trabalho, e estão ligados às pré-condições por todo o processo de 

comando, controle e supervisão. Seis influências organizacionais foram 

identificadas, a saber: 

a) A missão. A esta se refere a quê a organização pretende atingir; 

b) Provisão de recursos. Referem-se ao quê a organização utiliza para atingir 

a sua missão; 

c) Normas e regulamentos. Faz referência às restrições sobre o processo que 

a organização utiliza para alcançar a missão; 

d) Processos e práticas organizacionais se referem à forma como a 

organização deve fazer para realizar a missão; 

e) Clima organizacional. Este estabelece as atitudes que afetam a maneira 

como as pessoas na organização percebem a missão, o que eles realmente fazem e 

como eles realmente agem para alcançá-la; 

f) Vigilância. Fornece o “feedback” para que os gerentes possam formar uma 

percepção da saúde organizacional, certificando-se assim se a organização está 

bem para que esta possa realizar a sua missão. O “feedback” é o estímulo para 

mudanças na organização. 

Estes processos são mapeados em um circuito fechado dentro do processo 

da organização. Se a organização se prepara para os desafios de uma mudança no 

ambiente do mundo, este circuito tem que se adaptar. Em outras palavras, a missão, 

a provisão de recursos, normas e regulamentos, clima e processos organizacionais, 

todos estes podem ter que se adaptar às mudanças de circunstâncias. A vigilância 

fecha o circuito e provê o “feedback” de correção de erros que direciona este 

processo adaptativo. Sem vigilância e um processo de gerenciamento de mudança, 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



180           Artigo Científico 

a organização se tornará estática e imutável. A saúde da organização é percebida 

por aqueles, no gerenciamento, que são alimentados pelos dados de “feedback”, 

através do processo de vigilância. 

3.6 As ligações entre as pré-condições e as falhas ativas 

Com a subdivisão hierárquica na estrutura apresentada na Figura 6, que 

mostra o nível de falhas ativas e os três níveis de pré-condições para as falhas 

ativas, é possível fazer uma ligação de cada falha ativa com um grupo das mais 

prováveis pré-condições que levam a estas falhas. As pré-condições marcam os 

pontos de intervenção para o sistema de segurança. Estas intervenções têm o intuito 

de prevenir a ocorrência destas mesmas falhas ativas em situações semelhantes 

àquelas que já foram observadas. 

As falhas ativas representam o que já aconteceu em um acidente ou 

incidente, porém, é possível rastreá-las até as limitações fundamentais dos 

sistemas, de processamento da informação, de resposta ou sensorial do ser 

humano. Estas falhas não podem ser evitadas com facilidade, pois fazem parte das 

capacidades e limitações humanas. Há relativamente pouca coisa que se possa 

instruir a uma pessoa, em termos de atenção e vigilância, quando esta vai executar 

uma tarefa que seja baseada em grandes períodos de atenção. Faz-se necessário, 

então, mudar a natureza da tarefa, evitando assim, as pré-condições que constroem 

o cenário para uma tarefa baseada em atenção sustentada por longos períodos. 

Pode-se dar como exemplo de mudança da natureza da tarefa, o aumento do 

número de eventos, ou, ainda, prover outros estímulos para aumentar os níveis de 

ativação e reduzir os níveis de distração ou sonolência. 

Tanto as pré-condições imediatas quanto às remotas, são uma representação 

do “porquê” as falhas ativas ocorrerem. Estas pré-condições observadas definem 

direta ou indiretamente, a condição do pessoal, a tarefa e o ambiente de trabalho. É, 

pois, com o objetivo de prevenção de reincidência, que são feitas as mudanças na 

organização. 

Conforme pode ser observado na Tabela 1, o processo de “feedback”, ou 

realimentação, que são produzidos através de monitoramento, supervisão e também 

de vigilância, ocupa um lugar de destaque. Melhoras nos processos de 

“feedforward”, ou de antecipação, deveriam reduzir o número de falhas ativas. 

 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          181 
 

TABELA 1 - Ligações entre as Falhas Ativas e as Pré-condições Inseguras 

FALHAS 

Fisiológico              

Psicológico              

Social              

Capacidade 
             

Física 
Prontidão 

             
Pessoal 
Treinamento e 

             
Seleção 
Qualificação e 

             
Autorização 
Pressão do 

             
Tempo 
Objetivos              

Equipamento              

Espaço de 
             

Trabalho 
Ambiente              

Formação da 
             

Intenção 
Comunicação da 

             
Intenção 
Monitoramento e 

             
Supervisão 
Missão              

Provisão de 
             

Recursos 
Normas e 

             
Regulamentos 
Processos 
Organiza-cionais              
e práticas 
Clima 

             
Organizacional 
Vigilância              

 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 

COMANDO CONDIÇÕES 
ORGANIZAÇÃO CONTROLE e DE TAREFA PESSOAL 

SUPERVISÃO TRABALHO 

Deslizes, lapsos ou 
erros 
Feedback 

Seleção da Ação 

Resposta 
Conhecimento - 
Decisão 
Intenção – Não 
Violação 
Intenção - Violação 
Gerenciamento do 
Tempo 
Comunicação 

Atenção 

Percepção 
Conhecimento/Perc
epção 
Sensorial 

 



182           Artigo Científico 

Porém, à medida que a incerteza é introduzida ou, à medida que a 

perturbação externa age no sistema, a atuação de prevenção na correção de erros é 

feita, basicamente, por meio de “feedback”. 

O circuito aberto de comportamento, sem “feedback”, somente funciona se 

tudo está certo, conhecido e imutável e quando as influências externas não existem, 

o que seria verdadeiro em um sistema fechado. Poucos sistemas fechados existem 

hoje em dia dentro do complexo ambiente sócio-tecnológico no qual vivemos. 

A Tabela 1 mostra as ligações entre as falhas ativas e as pré-condições que 

levam a estas falhas ativas. Nesta tabela, Hendy (2003) classifica as falhas ativas 

em treze, pois, para fazer a ligação com as pré-condições, Hendy separou a falha 

ativa classificada como intenção em duas, a saber: intenção a partir de uma violação 

e intenção sem violação. 

 

4 A PONTE ENTRE O SERA E O HFACS 

O SERA provê um sistema de classificação de acidentes e incidentes, bem 

como um processo que permite identificar os pontos de falhas ativas, fazendo o 

“link” entre estas e as pré-condições que levaram os operadores a cometerem estas 

falhas. Além de o SERA prover uma taxonomia compreensiva e exaustiva de fatores 

humanos em acidentes, ele permite também que as suas categorias sejam 

associadas às categorias similares e equivalentes que fazem parte do esquema de 

classificação modificado do HFACS, uma vez que este tem sido adotado pela 

Diretoria de Segurança de Aviação das Forças Canadenses. 

O SERA é baseado em um modelo teórico de processamento de informação 

do ser humano. O HFACS é construído basicamente sobre um modelo descritivo. O 

modelo para análise de falhas latentes de Reason provê a estrutura básica para o 

seu sistema, assim como é feito no SERA. Shappell e Wiegmann, criadores do 

HFACS rejeitam o uso de “teorias esotéricas” e com pouca ou nenhuma 

aplicabilidade prática em favor de uma abordagem pragmática e empírica. No 

entanto, os modelos empíricos podem ter seus sistemas de classificações 

incompletos, como resultado das restrições das áreas, a partir das quais, os seus 

bancos de dados foram alimentados. Ou ainda, estes modelos carregam a 

redundância e a superposição entre as diversas palavras-chaves pela ausência de 

um sistema teórico global. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          183 
 

TABELA 2 - Comparação entre as Taxonomias de Classificação de Acidentes entre HFACS e SERA 

HFACS SERA 
FALHAS ATIVAS 

ERROS FALHAS ATIVAS 

Erros de decisão Seleção da ação 
Erros baseados em habilidades Deslizes, lapsos e erros 
Erros de percepção Percepção 
 Atenção 
 Conhecimento/percepção 
 Intenção (não-violação) 
 Gerenciamento do tempo 
 “Feedback” 
 Sensorial 
 Resposta 
 Comunicação 
 Conhecimento/decisão 
VIOLAÇÕES VIOLAÇÕES 

Excepcional Intenção (violação excepcional) 
Rotina Intenção (violação de rotina) 

PRÉ-CONDIÇÕES 

CONDIÇÕES DOS OPERADORES CONDIÇÕES DOS OPERADORES 

Estado mental adverso Psicológico 
Estado fisiológico adverso Fisiológico 
Limitações físicas/mentais Capacidade física 
PRÁTICAS DOS OPERADORES CONDIÇÕES DOS OPERADORES 

CRM – Gerenciamento de recursos da Social 
tripulação 
Prontidão pessoal Prontidão pessoal 
 Treinamento e seleção 
 Qualificação e autorização 
 CONDIÇÕES DO TRABALHO 

 Equipamento 
 Local de trabalho 
 Ambiente 
 CONDIÇÕES DA TAREFA 

 Pressão de tempo 
 Objetivos 

SUPERVISÃO 

Supervisão inadequada Monitoramento e “feedback” 
Planejamento inapropriado de operações Formação da intenção 
Falhas em corrigir um problema conhecido Comunicação da intenção 
Violações da supervisão  

INFLUÊNCIAS ORGANIZACIONAIS 

Gerenciamento de recursos Provisão de recursos 
Clima organizacional Clima organizacional 
Processo organizacional Processo organizacional 
 Missão 
 Normas e regulamentos 
 Vigilância 

 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



184           Artigo Científico 

Além de o SERA ser utilizado como uma ferramenta para investigação de 
acidentes e incidentes, também provê uma taxonomia individual abrangente do erro 
humano. Com o intuito de ilustrar as diferenças na classificação entre os dois 
modelos, o SERA e o HFACS, é feita uma breve comparação entre estes modelos 
na Tabela 2, conforme Hendy (2003), onde tais diferenças podem ser observadas 
nos quatro níveis de falhas ativas e falhas latentes, descritos por Reason (1990), 
Shappell et al. (2000) e Hendy (2003). Pode-se observar desta tabela que o SERA 
fornece uma classificação mais abrangente que o HFACS no nível das falhas ativas, 
no nível das pré-condições inseguras e também no nível das influências 
organizacionais. 

O SERA pode ser usado como uma ferramenta de investigação, atuando 
como uma interface para outros sistemas de classificação, como o HFACS, por 
exemplo. Pode ser essencialmente útil como uma interface inicial para a entrada de 
dados no HFACS. Os degraus de decisão do SERA orientam o processo de 
investigação, incluindo o processo de entrevista para os pontos de falhas ativas 
através de uma série de perguntas de senso comum, como por exemplo: 

● “O que o operador acreditou que estava acontecendo?”  
● “A avaliação estava correta ou adequada?” 
● “O operador teve a capacidade de sentir ou de perceber a situação?” 
● “A pressão do tempo foi excessiva?” 

5 CONCLUSÃO 

Observa-se atualmente, que as principais causas de um acidente aeronáutico, 

são atribuíveis aos erros humanos, que existe a necessidade de um sistema que 

permita o estudo destes erros tornando-os, assim, previsíveis e, portanto, sujeitos ao 

estabelecimento de barreiras que evitem futuras ocorrências. 

Constata-se que a tendência atual no estudo destes erros, no que se refere às 

operações ligadas ao “Part 121”, é a abordagem organizacional, visto que, 

historicamente, é possível perceber a influência de decisões organizacionais e 

gerenciais nas atitudes que envolvem o operador em qualquer sistema complexo 

produtivo, como é o caso da aviação de transporte de massa.  

Observe-se que o programa SERA provê um processo estruturado para a 

identificação de erros sistemáticos, tanto nas suas falhas ativas, quanto nas pré-

condições, ou, as causas latentes, que levaram a estas falhas. A aplicação do 

programa se dá através de perguntas simples e respostas diretas. O SERA possui 

sua própria taxonomia para classificação de erros em acidentes aeronáuticos, 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          185 
 

podendo então, ser aplicado, independentemente do HFACS. Contudo, o SERA 

pode ser utilizado, ainda, como uma interface capaz de gerar resultados baseados 

na taxonomia do HFACS, uma vez que, originalmente, foi desenvolvido para ajudar a 

preencher este sistema. Constata-se ainda que o SERA provê um número maior de 

itens de classificações que o HFACS. 

Os dois sistemas, o SERA e o HFACS podem ser utilizados tanto durante o 

curso das investigações, como após este processo, ou ainda, a partir de relatórios já 

concluídos. Na segunda alternativa, os dois sistemas podem ser de extrema 

utilidade ao permitir a criação de um banco de dados que apresente classificações 

homogêneas em acidentes aeronáuticos. Como em qualquer programa que objetive 

auxiliar as investigações, o resultado do relatório destes sistemas será mais preciso 

se for possível entrevistar as pessoas envolvidas nos incidentes ou acidentes. Ainda, 

como em toda investigação, este resultado dependerá, e este é um fator crucial, da 

colaboração dos entrevistados e da confiabilidade das respostas colhidas pelos 

entrevistadores ao longo de toda a cadeia organizacional. Ressalta-se, no entanto, 

que o HFACS trata de uma metodologia de investigação e não de um programa e 

que o aplicativo SERA não faz uma verificação cruzada de possíveis 

incompatibilidades introduzidas pelo analista. Porém, se o mesmo optar por um 

caminho inadequado, o sistema o levará a responder determinadas questões que 

não são compatíveis com as evidências levantadas pela investigação do acidente.  

O ponto de partida para a aplicação do SERA é a definição do sistema a ser 

analisado. Este sistema será definido conforme o acidente e as organizações 

envolvidas. O próximo passo então é a definição do ato ou condição insegura, este 

passo é comum em todo processo de investigação e não é um passo específico do 

SERA.  

Embora, historicamente, a natureza do erro humano tenha sido alvo de 

estudos, principalmente por parte dos psicólogos, o processo de investigação em 

fatores humanos é multidisciplinar, envolvendo equipes de profissionais de diversas 

áreas, tais como: psicólogos, engenheiros, aviadores e médicos. A arquitetura do 

SERA utiliza uma linguagem simples e estruturada, facilitando com isto, o trabalho 

do investigador em fatores humanos, não requerendo que este seja um autêntico 

especialista na área. 

Fator humano não é uma ciência exata, podendo ser interpretado de maneiras 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



186           Artigo Científico 

diferentes por organismos diversos. É possível que surjam, durante as 
investigações, divergências nas análises, dependendo do observador e das 
condições políticas e econômicas que envolvem o acidente. Neste aspecto, as 
perguntas diretas do programa SERA permitem ao processo da investigação uma 
avaliação, a mais impessoal possível, da ocorrência. A partir de classificações 
estruturadas é possível prever, dentro do sistema da aviação, e mais precisamente, 
dentro das organizações, as principais falhas, sejam elas, dos operadores, 
gerenciais ou organizacionais tornando com isso possível a criação de barreiras de 
proteção contra estas falhas. Porém, estas barreiras, que são dispositivos de 
segurança, são contra a maioria das falhas previsíveis, tanto as mecânicas, quanto 
às humanas. No entanto, falhas podem acontecer em situações novas, e estas 
falhas podem ser devidas tanto ao aumento da complexidade das aeronaves quanto 
às reações humanas perante estas situações. Assim sendo, estes novos erros são 
aprendidos após um evento onde é possível a ocorrência de perdas materiais ou de 
vidas.  

Muitas das falhas encontradas em um sistema produtivo complexo são 
geradas dentro do contexto organizacional ou gerencial e podem permanecer 
latentes por muito tempo. Nestes níveis, as decisões tomadas são dependentes de 
diversos fatores sobre os quais os estudos de erro humano têm pouca eficiência. 
Estas condições latentes são, normalmente, imprevisíveis e são ainda mais 
improváveis as previsões de suas conjunções com os gatilhos que levam às falhas 
ativas. Sendo assim é, de maneira geral, muito difícil definir onde e como colocar as 
defesas contra estes possíveis erros. 

Estas decisões ou atitudes, tomadas nos níveis organizacionais e gerenciais, 
são aquelas que irão influenciar diretamente as decisões que desencadearão as 
falhas ativas dos tripulantes. E estes, finalmente, são os que estarão em condições 
onde haverá muito pouco tempo para a percepção e correção das decisões erradas. 

Muito já foi feito até hoje, com respeito ao estudo do erro humano, na tentativa 
de redução dos índices de acidentes sob esta ótica, porém estes índices ainda se 
mantêm muito elevados. O caminho para a classificação e redução dos chamados 
“erros humanos” ainda é muito longo, e longa também é a distância a percorrer para 
que se tenha um sistema que englobe todos, ou talvez, a maioria dos aspectos 
destes erros. Neste sentido o HFACS e o SERA são passos que podem auxiliar 
nesta jornada. 

 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          187 
 

REFERÊNCIAS 

AGÊNCIA NACIONAL DE AVIAÇÃO CIVIL (Brasil). Regulamento Brasileiro de Aviação Civil 
(RBAC 121). Disponível em: <http://www2.anac.gov.br/transparencia/pdf/RBAC%20121.pdf>. 
Acesso em: 18 out. 2011 

ESTADOS UNIDOS. Federal Aviation Administration. Risk management handbook. (FAA-H-
8083-2). Washington, DC, 2009.. 

______. PART 121: Operating Requirements: domestic, flag, and supplemental operations. 
Washington, DC, 2011. 

HAWKINS, F.H., Human factors education in european air transport operations. In: Breakdown 
in human adaptation to stress (v.1, for the Commission of the European Communities). 
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1984. 

HENDY, K.C. A tool for human factors accident investigation, classification and risk 
management (TR 2002-057). Toronto, Canada: DRDC, 2003.. 

INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION. Human factors digest n. 7: Investigation 
of human factors in accidents and incidents (Cir 240AN/144). Montreal: ICAO, 1993. 

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD (Estados Unidos). U.S. air carrier operations, 
calendar year 2006. Annual review of aircraft accident data (Report Number NTSB/ARC-10/01). 
Washington, DC, 2010.. 

REASON, J. Human error. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.  

______. Managing the risks of organizational accidents. Aldershot: Ashgate, 1997.  

______. The human contribution. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008.  

SHAPPELL, S. A.; WIEGMANN, D. A. The human factors analysis and classification system 
(HFACS) (DOT/FAA/AM-00/7). Washington, DC: FAA, 2000. 

WIEGMANN, D. A.; SHAPPELL, S. A. A human error approach to aviation accident analysis. 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003. 

 
SERA AND HFACS: TWO SYSTEMS FOR HUMAN ERROR ANALYSIS AND 
CLASSIFICATION IN AERONAUTICAL ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS 
 
ABSTRACT: With the ever increasing reliability of aeronautical technology, failures that 
occur on account of equipment or materials are getting increasingly rare, and the main 
causes of accidents, today, are attributable to the human being, according to the 
"National Transportation Safety Board" (NTSB). Thus, the ability to investigate, classify 
and identify the human factors that are the root cause of accidents and incidents, plays a 
central role in the efforts to prevent recurrences, and is also important in the set-up of 
defenses in order to prevent the repetition and dissemination of “human errors”. It is 
observed that there is a trend nowadays in the use of organizational approach based 
models for the analysis and investigation of aeronautical accidents and incidents. The 
objective of this paper is to present a tool which allows the analysis and classification of 
such errors. Thus, it presents the SERA ("Systematic Error and Risk Analysis") program, 
whose initial purpose was to help fill in the HFACS ("Human Factors Analysis 
Classification System") system. Being a user friendly program, the SERA program guides 
the investigator, by means of simple and direct questions, to the emergence of operator’s 
active failures and of the pre-conditions in the different levels of the organization. The 
paper also shows a comparison between the SERA and HFACS classification systems. 
 
KEYWORDS: Human Error. HFACS. SERA. Classification System. 
 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



 
 
 
 

HFACS Analysis of Military and  
Civilian Aviation Accidents:  

A North American Comparison 
 
 

Dr Scott Shappell and Dr Doug Wiegmann 
Civil Aviation Medical Institute, USA, & University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA 

 
 

Author Biographies: 
Dr. Shappell is the Human Factors Research Branch Manager at the Civil Aerospace Medical Institute of the 
Federal Aviation Administration in Oklahoma City, OK. There he manages research programs on advanced 
Air Traffic Control systems, behavioral stressors, and aircrew performance. In addition, he continues to 
conduct studies of both civil and military aviation accidents using the Human Factors Analysis and 
Classification System (HFACS) that he co-authored with Dr. Douglas Wiegmann. He has published over 60 
papers and one book in the fields of aviation accident investigation, spatial disorientation, sustained 
operations, flight deck injuries, and aircrew fatigue. 
 
Dr. Douglas A. Wiegmann is a tenured professor in the Department of Human Factors at the University of 
Illinois in Urbana-Champaign. He is an internationally recognized expert in the fields of human 
error analysis and accident investigation, and has formerly served as an aviation psychologist for the U.S. 
Navy and an accident investigator for the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). He has 
authored numerous articles and conference presentations on topics related to human performance 
and system safety. Dr. Wiegmann is a board certified human factors professional and a private pilot. 

            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    1 



HFACS ANALYSIS OF MILITARY AND CIVILIAN AVIATION ACCIDENTS: 
A NORTH AMERICAN COMPARISON 

 
Scott A. Shappell, Ph.D. 

Civil Aerospace Medical Institute 
Oklahoma City, OK 

 
Douglas A. Wiegmann, Ph.D. 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Savoy, IL 

 
Over the past several years, the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) has been 
used to analyze nearly a decade of accidents involving the U.S. military, U.S. scheduled and 
nonscheduled commercial air carriers, and U.S. general aviation (GA) aircraft. The results of these 
analyses have yet to directly compare the similarities and differences in human error trends across 
these seemingly diverse aviation communities. The purpose of this paper is to provide that comparison. 
A meta-analysis of over 16,000 accidents involving the U.S. Navy/Marine Corps (1990-1998), U.S. 
Air Force (1991-1997), U.S. Army (1992-1998), U.S. commercial air carriers (1990-1998) and U.S. 
general aviation aircraft (1990-1998) was conducted. Across all types of operations, skill-based errors 
were the primary human cause of these accidents, followed by decision errors, violations, and 
perceptual errors. Analyses revealed some differences between operation categories in terms of error 
trends across the years. This study provides the first ever comparison of human error causes of 
accidents across different types of U.S. aviation operations. These findings have direct implications for 
the development and sharing of safety programs that address specific types of human error in aviation. 

 
 

INTRODUCTION HFACS 
  

The last half-century has witnessed tremendous strides It is generally accepted that like most accidents, those 
in aviation safety as technology and science have in aviation do not happen in isolation. Rather, they are 
combined to dramatically reduce the rate of aviation often the result of a chain of events often culminating with 
accidents. However, over the last three decades that the unsafe acts of aircrew. Indeed, from Heinrich’s 
dramatic decline has slowed, reaching almost asymptotic (Heinrich, Peterson, & Roos, 1980) axioms of industrial 
levels. Some have even argued that the current rate of safety to Reason’s (1990) “Swiss cheese” model of human 
aviation accidents is “simply the cost of doing business.” error, a sequential theory of accident causation has been 
To hear them describe it, perhaps what we are witnessing consistently embraced by most in the field of human error. 
is a random accident rate that cannot be reduced constantly Particularly useful in this regard has been Reason’s (1990) 
below current rates. description of active and latent failures within the context 

That being said, almost everyone agrees that of his “Swiss cheese” model of human error. 
somewhere between 70-80% of aviation accidents are In his model, Reason describes four levels of human 
attributed, at least in part, to human error (Wiegmann & failure, each one influencing the next. Included were: 1) 
Shappell, 2003). By definition then, human error is Organizational influences, 2) Unsafe supervision, 3) 
preventable and accident rates can be reduced still further. Preconditions for unsafe acts, and 4) the Unsafe acts of 
But how? What is that 70-80% of human error? operators. Unfortunately, while Reason’s seminal work 

Since the mid-1990s we have examined the human forever changed the way aviation and other accident 
causal factors associated with military and civilian aviation investigators view human error; it did not provide the level 
accidents (Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003). As part of that of detail necessary to apply it in the real world. 
effort, we developed the Human Factors Analysis and It wasn’t until Shappell and Wiegmann, (2000, 2001) 
Classification System (HFACS) to “put a face on human developed a comprehensive human error framework, 
error.” The balance of this report will present our findings HFACS, that folded Reason’s ideas into the applied 
from the military and civilian aviation sectors in an attempt setting. The HFACS framework includes 19 causal 
to determine the human causal factors associated with categories within Reason’s (1990) four levels of human 
aviation accidents in the United States. failure (Figure 1). Unfortunately, a complete description of 
 all 19 causal categories is beyond the scope of this brief 

report. It is however, available elsewhere (Wiegmann and 
Shappell, 2003). 

            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    2 



ORGANIZATIONAL
INFLUENCES

Resource Organizational Organizational
Management Climate Process

UNSAFE
SUPERVISION

Inadequate Planned Failed to
Supervision Inappropriate Correct Supervisory

Operations Problem Violations

PRECONDITIONS
FOR

UNSAFE ACTS

Environmental Personnel 
Factors

Condition of Factors
Operators

Physical Technological Crew Resource Personnel 
Environment Environment Adverse Adverse Physical/ Management Readiness

Mental Physiological Mental
States States Limitations

UNSAFE
ACTS

Errors Violations

Decision Skill-Based Perceptual
Errors Errors Errors Routine Exceptional

 
Figure 1. The HFACS framework. 

 
Particularly germane to any examination of aviation do Y. Aviation is highly structured, and consequently, 

accident data are the unsafe acts of aircrew. For that much of pilot decision-making is procedural. That is, there 
reason, we will briefly describe the causal categories are very explicit procedures to be performed at virtually all 
associated with the unsafe acts of aircrew. A detailed phases of flight. Unfortunately, on occasion these 
discussion of the other tiers of HFACS (i.e., the procedures are either misapplied or inappropriate for the 
preconditions for unsafe acts, unsafe supervision, and circumstances often culminating in an accident. 
organizational influences) can be found elsewhere However, even in aviation, not all situations have 
(Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003). corresponding procedures to manage them. Therefore, 
 many situations require that a choice be made among 
Unsafe Acts of Operators multiple response options. This is particularly true when 
 there is insufficient experience, time, or other outside 

In general, the unsafe acts of operators (in the case of pressures that may preclude a correct decision. Put simply, 
aviation, the aircrew) can be loosely classified as either sometimes we chose well, and sometimes we do not. The 
errors or violations (Reason, 1990). Errors represent the resultant choice decision errors, or knowledge-based 
mental or physical activities of individuals that fail to mistakes, have been of particular interest to aviation 
achieve their intended outcome. Violations on the other psychologists over the last several decades. 
hand, are much less common and refer to the willful Finally, there are instances when a problem is not well 
disregard for the rules and regulations that govern the understood, and formal procedures and response options 
safety of flight. are not available. In effect, aircrew find themselves where 
 they have not been before. Unfortunately, individuals in 
Errors these situations must resort to slow and effortful reasoning 

 processes; a luxury rarely afforded in an aviation 
Within HFACS, the category of errors was expanded to emergency – particularly in general aviation. 

include three basic error types (decision, skill-based, and Skill-based Errors. Skill-based behavior within the 
perceptual errors). context of aviation is best described as “stick-and-rudder” 

Decision Errors. Decision-making and decision errors and other basic flight skills that occur without significant 
have been studied, debated, and reported extensively in the conscious thought. As a result, these skill-based actions are 
literature. In general however, decision errors can be particularly vulnerable to failures of attention and/or 
grouped into one of three categories: procedural errors, memory. In fact, attention failures have been linked to 
poor choices, and problem solving errors. Procedural many skill-based errors such as the breakdown in visual 
decision errors, otherwise known as rule-based mistakes, scan patterns and inadvertent activation of controls. 
occur during highly structured tasks of the sorts, if X, then Likewise, memory failures such as omitted items in a 
            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    3 



checklist and forgotten intentions have adversely impacted Source of Data 
the unsuspecting aircrew.  

Equally compelling is the manner or technique one uses Military and civilian data were obtained from the 
when flying an aircraft. Regardless of one’s training, cognizant database repositories. Military data was obtained 
experience, and educational background, pilots vary from the Navy, Army, and Air Force Safety Centers. For 
greatly in the way in which they control their aircraft. civilian aviation, data was obtained from databases 
Arguably, such techniques are as much an overt expression maintained by the National Transportation Safety Board 
of ones personality as they are a factor of innate ability and (NTSB) and the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) 
aptitude. More important however, these techniques can National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center 
interfere with the safety of flight or may exacerbate (NASDAC). In total, 16,077 aviation accidents associated 
seemingly minor emergencies experienced in the air. with human error were extracted for analysis.  

Perceptual Errors. While, decision and skill-based For comparison purposes the Navy/Marine Corps data 
errors have dominated most accident databases and have was further divided into fixed-wing tactical (TACAIR) and 
therefore been included in most error frameworks, rotary wing (helicopter) accidents.1 In this way, 
perceptual errors have received comparatively less USN/USMC TACAIR accident data could be compared to 
attention. No less important, perceptual errors occur when USAF TACAIR accident data, and USN/USMC helicopter 
sensory input is degraded or “unusual,” as is often the case accident data could be compared to U.S. Army helicopter 
when flying at night, in the weather, or in other visually accident data. A complete breakdown of the data is 
impoverished conditions. Faced with acting on inadequate presented in Table 1. 
information, aircrew run the risk of misjudging distances,  
altitude, and decent rates, as well as responding incorrectly Table 1. Accidents associated with human error 
to a variety of visual/vestibular illusions.   
 Type of operation Frequency 
Violations USN/USMC TACAIR 138 
 USN/USMC Rotary Wing 60 

By definition, errors occur while aircrews are behaving U.S. Air Force TACAIR 72 
within the rules and regulations implemented by an U.S. Army Rotary Wing 62 
organization. In contrast, violations represent the willful 14 CFR Part 121 & 135 - Scheduled Air 165 
disregard for the rules and regulations that govern safe Carrier 
flight and, fortunately, occur much less frequently 14 CFR Part 121 & 135 - Non-scheduled Air 452 
(Shappell and Wiegmann, 1996). Carrier 

Routine Violations. While there are many ways to 14 CFR Part 91 – General Aviation 15,128 
distinguish between types of violations, two distinct forms Totals 16,077 
have been identified, based on their etiology. The first,  
routine violations tend to be habitual by nature and are Data from these different sources have been presented 
often tolerated by authority (Reason, 1990). Consider, for elsewhere in a variety of forums, although never together 
example, the individual who drives consistently 5-10 mph and none has been published. Consequently, the years 
faster than allowed by law or someone who routinely flies involved in the analysis varied depending on when the 
in marginal weather when authorized for VMC only. Often original analysis was conducted (note however, that the 
referred to as “bending the rules,” these violations are authors were involved in the analysis and collection of all 
often tolerated and, in effect, sanctioned by authority. the data reported in this study). Therefore, this report 

Exceptional Violations. In contrast, exceptional represents a meta-analysis of the military and civilian 
violations appear as isolated departures from authority, not findings. The time frame of each set of data is presented in 
necessarily characteristic of an individual’s behavior nor Table 2. 
condoned by management (Reason, 1990). For example,  
an isolated instance of driving 105 mph in a 55 mph zone Table 2. Accident data time frame 
is considered an exceptional violation. Likewise, flying   
under a bridge or engaging in other particularly dangerous Type of operation Time Frame 
and prohibited maneuvers would constitute an exceptional USN/USMC TACAIR FY 1990-98 
violation. USN/USMC Rotary Wing FY 1990-98 
 U.S. Air Force TACAIR FY 1991-97 

 U.S. Army Rotary Wing FY 1992-98 
 14 CFR Part 121 & 135 Scheduled Air CY 1990-98 
 Carrier 
 

METHOD                                                  
 1 At the time of this writing, the civilian data were not 

broken out but will be for presentation purposes. 
            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    4 



14 CFR Part 121 & 135 Non-scheduled CY 1990-98 examination of the data was limited to the unsafe acts of 
Air Carrier operators. 

14 CFR Part 91 – General Aviation CY 1990-2000  
FY – Fiscal Year (October 01 – September 30) Analysis of skill-based errors 
CY – Calendar Year (January 01 – December 31)  
 An analysis of the data revealed that, in general, the 
Classification of accident causal factors using HFACS percentage of skill-based errors associated with GA and 
 non-scheduled commercial operations were higher than all 

The detail of the accident reports and manner in which other types of aviation (Figure 2).2 It was not surprising 
causal factors were reported varied with the data sources. that the largest percentage of skill-based errors were 
In addition, there were slight differences in the manner in associated with GA accidents given the relative amount of 
which causal factors were coded within the HFACS flight time and training logged by GA pilots. Indeed, while 
framework. For instance, for all civilian accidents, GA and there are certainly exceptions, most would agree that the 
commercial aviation pilots were recruited from the average GA pilot does not receive the same degree of 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma and Urbana, Illinois area as recurrent training and/or annual flight hours that the 
subject-matter experts (SMEs). In the case of the military typical commercial or military pilot receives. 
data, SMEs included a group of airframe rated pilots, flight  
surgeons, aerospace physiologists, and/or aerospace 100
psychologists from the respective Services. All SMEs Military Civilian
received training on the HFACS framework (roughly 16 90

hours) and were checked to ensure that a firm 80

understanding of the HFACS causal categories was 70
attained. 60

After training, SMEs were assigned accidents such that 50
at least two separate SMEs analyzed each accident 40
independently (typically more with the military data). 30
Using narrative and tabular data obtained from the various 
safety centers, the SMEs were instructed to classify each 20

human causal factor using the HFACS framework. Note, 10
however, that only those causal factors identified within 0 US Naval US Naval USAF US Army Commercial Commercial General

the accident reports were classified. That is, SMEs were TACAIR Helo TACAIR Helo Scheduled Non-sched. Aviation

instructed not to introduce additional casual factors that Figure 2. Percentage of military and civilian accidents 
were not identified by the original investigation. To do so associated with skill-based errors by type of operation. 
would be presumptuous and only infuse additional  
opinion, conjecture, and guesswork into the analysis It was also interesting that the percentage of skill-based 
process. errors associated with non-scheduled (also referred to as 

After our SMEs made their initial classifications of the “on-demand”) air carrier accidents were next highest 
human causal factors (e.g., skill-based error, decision among the aviation operations examined. One explanation 
error, etc.), the independent ratings were compared. Where for this finding may be the relative experience of these 
disagreements existed, the corresponding SMEs were pilots as well. This is not to say that these pilots are 
instructed to reconcile their differences, and the consensus inexperienced, just that relative to their military and 
classification was included in the final database for further scheduled air-carrier counterparts, there may be less 
analysis. In the end, all human causal factors associated opportunity to maintain proficiency or less overall 
with both civilian and military data were reliably classified experience. On the other hand, the increase in the 
within the HFACS framework and the resulting consensus percentage of skill-based errors may reflect inherent 
database was submitted to further analysis. differences in the aircraft being flown, since many of these 

Inter-rater reliability averaged roughly 80% agreement pilots fly smaller, less sophisticated aircraft than scheduled 
with a Cohen’s Kappa in the 70’s. For a complete air carriers or the military. 
accounting of the reliability data, see (Wiegmann & Curiously, the percentage of skill-based errors 
Shappell, 2003). Regardless of inter-rater reliability associated with USN/USMC and USAF TACAIR 
however, all disagreements were resolved through accidents were very similar to scheduled commercial air 
consensus ratings. carriers accidents (albeit, the latter was slightly less). 
 Exactly why that was the case is difficult to say. However, 

 there were even fewer skill-based errors associated with 
RESULTS & DISCUSSION                                                  

 2 Note that percentages within type of operation will not add up to 100% 
Although the accidents were associated with causal since accidents are typically associated with multiple causal factors. 

factors at all levels of the HFACS framework, this These data reflect the percentage of accidents associated with “at least” 
one instance of a particular HFACS causal category. 

            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    5 

Percentage of Accidents



U.S. Naval and Army rotary wing accidents than in any arises and recovery from errors may be less likely. Indeed, 
other type of operation. While we have not fully explored aviation at sea is inherently more dangerous than flying 
this issue directly, it is interesting to note that most ashore and much less forgiving. To some extent, this is 
USN/USMC and U.S. Army helicopters are piloted by two borne out in the data as many of the decision errors 
pilots. Furthermore, all scheduled air carrier aircraft have observed in Navy/Marine Corps accidents occurred while 
at least two qualified pilots in the cockpit. Perhaps this can operating at sea. 
explain the lower percentage of skill-based errors in these  
communities as the second pilot can back-up the first – Analysis of perceptual errors 
lending some credence to the view that “two sets of eyes  
are better than one.” Upon examination of the data associated with 
 perceptual errors (Figure 4), two things stand out. First, 
Analysis of decision errors while perceptual errors appear rare within civilian aviation 
 operations, within the military they continue to be a source 

The percentage of decision errors associated with each for concern. Second, perceptual errors appear to be more 
type of operation is presented in Figure 3. In general, prevalent among accidents involving helicopters, 
fewer decision errors were associated with civilian aviation particularly within the U.S. Army. 
accidents than seen with military aviation accidents.  
What’s more, there were only small differences observed 100
between GA and both types of commercial operations. In Military Civilian

90
contrast, there was wide variability associated with the 80
different military operations examined.  70
 

60
100

Military Civilian 50
90
80 40

30
70

20
60
50 10

0
40 US Naval US Naval USAF US Army Commercial Commercial General

TACAIR Helo TACAIR Helo Scheduled Non-sched. Aviation  
30 Figure 4. Percentage of military and civilian accidents 
20 associated with perceptual errors by type of operation. 
10  
0 It would appear then that at least for civilian operations 

US Naval US Naval USAF US Army Commercial Commercial General
TACAIR Helo TACAIR Helo Scheduled Non-sched. Aviation  that issues like spatial disorientation and visual illusions 

Figure 3. Percentage of military and civilian accidents (although still common) are not as large a problem as they 
associated with decision errors by type of operation. once were. Perhaps this is due to the enormous effort being 
 put forth to educate civilian pilots about the hazards 

One explanation why military accidents were more associated with flight into weather and other visually 
often associated with decision errors may be the relative impoverished environments. On the other hand, the nature 
number and type of decisions made in typical military of civilian aviation, where most flying occurs in low-G 
operations. That is, while both military and civilian pilots environments and involve relatively less dynamic flight 
have to make decisions regarding takeoff, landing, than seen in the military, may make perceptual errors less 
diverting to alternates, and other standard aviation likely. 
decision-making, military pilots are also confronted with a Within the military, perceptual errors continue to be 
variety of tactical decisions not seen in typical civilian associated with roughly 30% (on average) of all human 
aviation (e.g., low-level flight, high-G force maneuvering, error related aviation accidents. However, it appears to be 
etc.) thereby reducing the margin for error. This may more of a problem with the helicopter community – 
artificially inflate the number of decision errors associated particularly the U.S. Army where nearly 50% of the 
with military aviation accidents just by sheer exposure – accidents examined were associated with a perceptual 
something that is difficult, if not impossible, to control for error.  
in our data. Upon closer inspection, most of the perceptual errors 

While it is somewhat understandable why military that involved military helicopters can be attributed to the 
aviation in general is more often associated with decision effects of spatial disorientation and wire strikes. Given the 
errors, it is much less obvious why this difference is even latter, it is not surprising that the prevalence of perceptual 
more evident when USN/USMC aviation is considered. errors is elevated among U.S. Army helicopter operations 
One explanation may be that many naval operations occur since many of their missions are flown at low levels 
over water or at sea where options are limited if trouble (below 1500 ft AGL). In contrast, very few fixed-wing 
            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    6 

Percentage of Accidents

Percentage of Accidents



aircraft are routinely flown at these levels except during problem was largely the result of a small subset of naval 
takeoff and landing. This may provide more time for aviation that has since been addressed (Wiegmann & 
TACAIR pilots to recover from spatial disorientation and Shappell, 2003). The good news is just that. Since our 
thereby avoid an accident. This hypothesis is supported by initial report of the violation data associated with 
the observation that when perceptual errors occur during USN/USMC aviation, accidents associated with this 
TACAIR operations they typically occur while flying in particular unsafe act have been reduced across the board to 
visually impoverished environments or during occasional less than 15% in 2002 (Webster & White, 2004). 
low-level, terrain-following evolutions. Further good news is seen in the low percentage of 
 accidents associated with violations in the USAF. Some 
Analysis of violations have argued that this may reflect an under-reporting of 
 violations by the USAF. However, this argument was not 

Because it was particularly difficult to reliably classify supported by the data we examined. More likely, the lower 
causal factors post hoc as either routine or exceptional percentage of accidents associated with violations reflects 
violations, we chose instead to analyze the parent category a policy within the USAF of zero tolerance for violations 
of violations. Anecdotally however, the majority of the of the rules and regulations of safety. 
violations observed in the accident data appeared to be  
routine violations (habitual departures from the CONCLUSION 
rules/regulations condoned by management).  
 In some ways, these data lend support to previous 

100 beliefs, while in others it has provided new information. 
Military Civilian

90 For instance, it has long been held that GA pilots receive 
80 less training and therefore may not be as proficient or 
70 skilled as their commercial and military counterparts. To 
60 the extent that the accident data reflect the state of GA in 

the U.S., such beliefs appear to be warranted. That is, more 
50 GA accidents are associated with skill-based errors than 
40 any other type of aircraft operation. 
30 But why would a comparison between GA, 
20 commercial, and military aviation accidents be important? 
10 Consider this, prior to the late 1980’s and early 1990’s 
0 most commercial aviation pilots were recruited from the 

US Naval US Naval USAF US Army Commercial Commercial General
TACAIR Helo TACAIR Helo Scheduled Non-sched. Aviation  U.S. military that was actively downsizing after the Cold 

Figure 5. Percentage of military and civilian accidents War. However, with recent global events, recruitment 
associated with violations by type of operation. bonuses, and longer commitments after initial flight 
 training, fewer military pilots are leaving the service for 

The percentage of military and civilian aviation the lure of commercial aviation. 
accidents associated with a willful disregard for the rules So if not the military, where are commercial aviation 
and regulations of aviation safety (i.e., violations) are pilots coming from? Increasingly, today’s commercial 
presented in Figure 5. As can be seen, the percentages aviation pilots are receiving their training from within the 
varied across all types of aviation operations examined GA sector. The question is how this will impact 
ranging from a high of roughly 50% observed with commercial aviation safety. Or perhaps the better question 
USN/USMC helicopter operations to a low of less than is, “Does commercial aviation resemble GA where skill-
10% associated with USAF operations. It should also be based errors are elevated, or does it look more like military 
noted that the percentage of violations associated with aviation?” In fact, given that many of the decision errors 
civilian aviation accidents declined consistently as one seen in military aviation are specific to military operations 
moved from scheduled air carrier accidents, to non- and perceptual errors are inflated due to the dynamic flight 
scheduled air carrier accidents and GA. This latter trend seen in the military, would you rather have commercial 
may be more a reflection of the fact that there are fewer aviation look more like the military or GA? 
rules and regulations governing GA than commercial flight Regardless of your answer, the truth is that human 
and therefore may not represent a differential problem in errors associated with commercial aviation look more like 
commercial aviation. GA than the military (Figure 6). As a result, it is now more 

Within the military, the percentage of accidents important than ever to address human error associated with 
associated with violations is a mixture of good and bad GA, particularly that associated with basic flight skills. 
news. On the bad side of the coin, nearly 50% of all U.S. These data should prove as a foundation for addressing 
Navy/Marine Corps accidents were associated with at least those concerns. 
one violation of the rules. This was particularly alarming 
to the Navy and Marine Corps when this problem first 
surfaced in the late 1990’s. Later it was revealed that the 
            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    7 

Percentage of Accidents



100 use during accident investigation and analysis 
90 Military Aviation HFACS for 
80
70 throughout all branches of the service. 
60
50  
40
30 REFERENCES 
20
10  
0

Skill-based Decision Perceptual Violations
Errors Errors Errors Heinrich, H.W., Petersen, D. & Roos, N. (1980). Industrial 

accident prevention: A safety management approach 
100 100

Aviation
90 General Aviation 90 Commercial (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
80 80

70 70 Reason, J. (1990). Human error. New York: Cambridge 
60 60

50 50 University Press. 
40 40

30 30 Shappell, S.A. & Wiegmann, D.A. (1996). U.S. naval 
20 20

10 10 aviation mishaps 1977-92: Differences between single- 
0 0

Skill-based Decision Perceptual Violations Skill-based Decision Perceptual Violations
Errors Errors Errors Errors Errors Errors  and dual-piloted aircraft. Aviation, Space, and 

Figure 6. Comparison of the percentage of accidents Environmental Medicine, 67(1), 65-69. 
associated with the unsafe acts of operators by type of Shappell, S.A. & Wiegmann, D.A. (2000). The human 
operation. factors analysis and classification system (HFACS). 
 (Report Number DOT/FAA/AM-00/7). Washington 

At a minimum however, these data represent the first DC: Federal Aviation Administration.  
time that commercial and military data has been compared Shappell, S.A. & Wiegmann, D.A. (2001). Applying 
beyond simply reporting overall accident rates or the Reason: The human factors analysis and classification 
overall percentage of accidents associated with human system (HFACS). Human Factors and Aerospace 
error. The HFACS framework provides a reliable and valid Safety, 1(1), 59-86. 
means to compare human error associated with seemingly Webster, N. & White, D. (2004). U.S. Naval Aviation 
disparate aviation communities. Notably, this analysis did Safety: FY 2003 In Review. Presented at the 75th 
not require major changes within any of the communities Annual Meeting of the Aerospace Medical Association, 
involved. That is, all the aviation communities still have Anchorage, AK. 
their separate means of investigating accidents and Wiegmann, D. & Shappell, S. (2003). A human error 
corresponding databases. To date, only the U.S. approach to aviation accident analysis: The human 
Navy/Marine Corps utilize HFACS to actually conduct the factors analysis and classification system. Aldershot, 
original accident investigation. However, that is currently Great Britain: Ashgate Publishing Company. 
under revision as the U.S. Department of Defense is 
currently considering requiring a modified version of 
 

            ISASI 2004, Shappell et al., HFACS    8 

Percentage of Accidents

Percentage of Accidents

Percentage of Accidents



 
 
 
 

 

Universidade de São Paulo 
 
 

Faculdade de Saúde Pública 
 
 
 

 

Sistemas de investigação dos acidentes 
 

aeronáuticos da aviação geral – uma análise 
 

comparativa. 
 
 
 
 

 

Márcia Fajer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dissertação  apresentada  ao  Programa  de  Pós-Graduação  em 

Saúde  Pública, Saúde  do  Trabalhador, para  obtenção  do  título 

de Mestre em Saúde Pública. 
 
 
 
 
 

Área de Concentração: Saúde Ambiental 
 

Orientadora: Profª Dra. Frida Marina Fischer 
 
 
 

 

São Paulo 

 

2009



 
 
 
 
 

Sistemas de investigação dos acidentes aeronáuticos da  
 

aviação geral – uma análise comparativa.   
 
 
 
 

 

Márcia Fajer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dissertação  apresentada  ao  Programa  de  Pós-Graduação  em 

Saúde   Pública,   área   de   concentração   Saúde   Ambiental   – 

Saúde  do  Trabalhador,  para  obtenção  do  título  de  Mestre  em 

Saúde Pública. 
 
 
 

Área de Concentração: Saúde Ambiental 
 

Linha de Pesquisa: Saúde do Trabalhador 
 

Orientadora: Profª Dra. Frida Marina Fischer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

São Paulo 

 

2009



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

É  expressamente  proibida  a  comercialização  deste  documento,  tanto  na  sua  forma 

impressa como eletrônica. Sua reprodução total ou parcial é permitida exclusivamente 

para fins acadêmicos e científicos, desde que na reprodução figure a identificação do 

autor, título, instituição e ano da dissertação.



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DEDICATÓRIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aos  que  deixaram  de  viver,  vítimas  de  acidentes  aéreos,  razão  pela  qual  devemos 

manter o espírito de busca.



 
 
 
 

 
AGRADECIMENTO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Aos  meus  pais,  filhas,  família,  amigos,  professores,  chefes,  colegas,  pois  nada  se 

constrói sozinho.



 
 
 
 

 
RESUMO 
 

Fajer  M.  Sistemas  de  investigação  de  acidentes  da  aviação  geral  –  uma  análise 

comparativa. [dissertação de mestrado].São Paulo: Faculdade de Saúde Pública da USP; 

2009. 
 

Introdução  –  Descreve  o  panorama  do  surgimento  da  aviação  e  das  teorias  de 

investigação  de  acidentes  aeronáuticos.  Objetivo  -  Analisar  a  investigação  dos 

acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos ocorridos na Aviação Geral no Estado de São Paulo 

no período de 2000 a 2005 e verificar sua associação a fatores organizacionais. Método 

- Foram comparadas as atuações das agências de investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos 

dos Estados Unidos, União Européia e Brasil, identificado os métodos de investigação 

de  acidentes  empregados.  Foi  realizado  o  levantamento  das  ocorrências  com  as 

aeronaves classificadas na categoria de aviação geral no estado de São Paulo no período 

2000 a 2005 e feita a análise comparativa de 36 relatórios finais de acidentes utilizados 

pelo Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes (CENIPA) com o Human Factors 

Analysis  and  Classification  System  (HFACS).  Resultados  –  Identificou-se  que  as 

agências  de  investigação  dos  Estados  Unidos  e  União  Européia  atuam  de  forma 

sistêmica e a brasileira atua isoladamente. Foi constatado que houve 636 ocorrências 

com  aeronaves  da  aviação  geral,  sendo  que  92%  foram  incidentes,  que  não  foram 

investigados. Dos acidentes, 5,5% possuíam relatórios finais concluídos. A análise dos 

relatórios finais, segundo o CENIPA, apontou 163 fatores contribuintes, sendo que o 

principal  fator  foi  o  “deficiente  julgamento”  presente  em  80,5%  dos  acidentes. A 

utilização do modelo HFACS identificou a presença de 370 fatores contribuintes e os 

“erros de habilidade”, de “decisão” e “planejamento inadequado” foram os principais 

fatores  contribuintes  com  86,1%.  Considerações  Finais–  O  estudo  possibilitou  a 

identificação da falta de integração de diversos órgãos governamentais na investigação 

dos  acidentes  aeronáuticos.  A  ausência  de  investigação  de  incidentes  aeronáuticos 

dificultando a prevenção. A análise do CENIPA não contempla de forma adequada os 

fatores organizacionais. O HFACS não deve ser uma ferramenta apenas quantificadora 

das causas de acidentes aeronáuticos. 
 

Descritores  –  Acidente  Aeronáutico,  Incidentes  Aeronáuticos,  Acidente  de  trabalho, 

Fator Humano, Fator Organizacional



 
 
 
 

 
ABSTRACT 
 

Fajer M. Accident Investigation Systems for the General Aviation - A Comparative 

Analysis. [dissertation]. Sao Paulo: School of Public Health of the University of Sao 

Paulo; 2009. 
 

Introduction – it is presented an overview of the development of aviation in Brazil, and 

theories  of  investigation  of  accidents.  Aim  –  To  evaluate  the  process  of  the 

investigation of accidents and incidents occurred in the general aviation of the State of 

São  Paulo,  Brazil,  during  2000-2005.  It  was  compared  the  modus  operandi  of 

investigation agencies of the United States, European Union countries, and Brazil. And 

it  was  identified  the  accidents  occurred  in  the  general  aviation,  and  conducted  an 

analysis of 36 final reports. Method – The air accident agencies of the United States, 

European  Union  and  Brazil  were  studied,  identifying  and  comparing  the  accident 

investigation methods used.  It was registered the number of events with aircrafts in the 

State of Sao Paulo from 2000 to 2005, and performed the comparative analysis of 36 

accident final reports used by the Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes 

(CENIPA;  Accident  Prevention  and  Investigation  Center)  using  the  Human  Factors 

Analysis and Classification System (HFACS). Results – It was identified that the EU 

and  USA  agencies  of  aviation  accidents  investigation  act  in  a  much  broader  and 

systemic way compared to the Brazilian agency (CENIPA- Center of Investigation and 

Prevention of Aviation Accidents). In Brazil, CENIPA works without the cooperation of 

other institutions. It was registered a total of 630 episodes involving airplanes of general 

aviation that resulted in either incidents (92%), without apparent/immediate material or 

human losses, and accidents. The Brazilian agency CENIPA did not investigate the 

causes of incidents. Among the accidents, 5.5% had final reports. The analysis of these 

reports showed 161 factors that contributed to the occurrence of the accidents. However, 

the re-evaluation of the same reports of these accidents using the model of Human 

Factors  Analysis  and  Classification  System  (HFCAS),  showed  that  the  number  of 

factors associated with accidents were much higher: it was up to 370. The accident 

evaluation by CENIPA does not cover the organizational issues as contributive factors 

possibly  associated  with  the  accidents.  Conclusions  –  This  study  allowed  us  to 

understand  the  modus  operandi  of  the  Brazilian  investigation  agency  of  aviation 

accidents.  It  showed  there  is  a  lack  of  integrative  actions  when  investigating  an



 
 
 
 

 
accident. As the incidents were not investigated this is a hinder to prevention further 

episodes of incidents and accidents in general aviation in Brazil. 
 

Key Words – Air accident, Air incident, Work accident, Human Factors, Organizational 

Factors.



 
 
 
 

 
ÍNDICE 
 
 
 
 

1.INTRODUÇÃO 16 

1.1 ACIDENTES NA AVIAÇÃO 18 

1.2 A EVOLUÇÃO  DA AVIAÇÃO 22 

1.2.1 A Aviação Brasileira 25 

1.3 ORGANIZAÇÃO DOS SISTEMAS DE AVIAÇÃO 29 

1.4 A SEGURANÇA DE VÔO 31 

1.5 O FATOR HUMANO NOS ACIDENTES AÉREOS 34 

1.5.1 A Automação 36 

1.5.2 A Manutenção 37 

1.5.3 O Controle de Tráfego Aéreo 38 

1.5.4 Fatores Culturais 40 

1.6 AS AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 41 

1.6.1 As Agências da União Européia 42 

1.6.2 As Agências Americanas 46 

1.6.3 As Agências Brasileiras 50 

1.7 ASPECTOS TEÓRICOS RELATIVOS ÀS CAUSAS DE   53 

ACIDENTES AÉREOS 

1.7.1 O Modelo 5M 54 

1.7.2 O Modelo SHEL 57 

1.7.3 A Teoria de REASON 60 

1.7.4 A Gestão do Risco De Acidentes 68 

2. OBJETIVO 71 

2.1 GERAL 71 

2.2 ESPECÍFICOS 71 

3. MÉTODO 72 

3.1DELINEAMENTO DO ESTUDO 72 

3.2 UNIVERSO DO ESTUDO 72 

3.2.1 Agências de Investigação 72 

3.2.2 Relatórios Finais 72 

3.2.3 Escolha da Unidade da Federaçã 72



 
 
 
 

 
3.2.4 Período 73 

3.3 FONTE DE DADOS 74 

3.3.1 Agências de Investigação 74 

3.3.2 Consolidação dos Dados das Ocorrências 74 

3.3.3 Relatórios Finais 75 

3.3.4 Informações utilizadas 76 

3.3.5 Classificação das Categorias do HFACS 77 

3.4 ANÁLISE COMPARATIVA 77 

3.4.1 Agências de Investigação 77 

3.4.2 Métodos de Investigação 78 

3.4.3 Relatórios Finais 78 

4. RESULTADOS 79 

4.1 COMPARAÇÕES ENTRE AS AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 79 

4.2. O PROCESSO DE INVESTIGAÇÃO DOS ACIDENTES 79 

4.2.1 NTSB 80 

4.2.2 CENIPA 82 

4.3 ANÁLISES DAS OCORRÊNCIAS COM AERONAVES 85 

4.3.1 Tipos de Ocorrência 85 

4.3.2 Ocorrências por Categoria de Registro 87 

4.3.3 Incidentes. 88 

4.4  DADOS COLETADOS NOS RELATÓRIOS FINAIS 91 

4.4.1 Lesões 91 

4.4.2 Classificação dos Relatórios 92 

4.5. FATORES CONTRIBUINTES DOS ACIDENTES   94 

AERONÁUTICOS 

4.5.1 Análise Comparativa dos Relatórios Finais 94 

4.5.2 Fatores Contribuintes Identificados nos Relatórios Finais na Análise   101 

do CENIPA 

4.5.3 Fatores Contribuintes Identificados nos Relatórios Finais na Análise   103 

do HFACS 

5. DISCUSSÃO 106 

5.1 AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 106 

5.2 INCIDENTES AERONÁUTICOS 108



 
 
 
 

 
5.3 ANÁLISE DOS RELATÓRIOS DE ACIDENTES 110 

6. CONSIDERAÇOES FINAIS 115 

6.1 AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 115 

6.2 RELATÓRIOS FINAIS 116 

6.3 FATORES CONTRIBUINTES 116 

7. REFERÊNCIAS 118 

ANEXOS 

Anexo   1   –   Definições   de   Acidente,   Incidente,   Incidente   Grave   e   125 

Ocorrência de Solo 

Anexo 2 – Quadro Cronológico da Evolução da Aviação 127 

Anexo 3 – Quadro Comparativo da Interação Cultural 130 

Anexo 4 – Organograma da EASA 132 

Anexo 5 – Descrição das Categorias do HFACS 133 

Anexo 6 – Comparação Entre as Agências de Investigação 136 

Anexo 7– Lista dos Acidentes Analisados 140 

Anexo 8 – Organograma do NTSB 143 

Anexo 9 – Organograma do Comando da Aeronáutica 144 

Anexo 10 – Organograma da ANAC 145 

Anexo 11– Fluxograma da Investigação do Acidente 146 

Anexo 12 – Fluxograma da Investigação do Incidente e Ocorrência de solo.   147 

CURRÍCULO LATTES



 
 
 
 

 
LISTA DE FIGURAS 
 
 
 
 

Figura 1 – Distribuição do número de acidentes aéreos ocorridos no Brasil de   20 

1999 a mar de 2008 

Figura 2- Fatores contribuintes nos 630 acidentes aeronáuticos da aviação civil   21 

brasileira ocorrido no período de 1998 a 2007. 

Figura 3 – Modelo 5-M. (Well e Rodrigues, 2003) 54 

Figura 4 – Emblema do CENIPA 56 

Figura 5 - Modelo SHEL modificado por HAWKINS 58 

Figura 6 – Modelo do Queijo Suíço (adaptado de REASON, 1990) 63 

Figura 7 – Estágios da Investigação de um acidente organizacional – adaptado de   64 

REASON 1997 

Figura 8 - Modelo do HFACS adaptado de SHAPPELL e WIEGMANN (2000) 67 

Figura 9 – Visão Geral do Modelo, adaptado de AMALBERTI, 2001 69 

Figura 10 – Distribuição  por tipo de ocorrências com aeronaves  no Estado de   86 

São Paulo de 2000 /2005 

Figura 11 - Distribuição dos incidentes por categoria de operação no Estado de   88 

São Paulo, 2000-2005. 

Figura 12 - Distribuição dos acidentes por categoria de operação no Estado de   88 

São Paulo, 2000 a 2005. 

Figura 13- Número de incidentes aeronáuticos por tipo de ocorrêcia no Estado de   90 

São Paulo, 2000-2005. 

Figura  14  –  Distribuição  das  vítimas  por  tipo  de  lesão  dos  envolvidas  em   92 

acidentes aeronáuticos no Estado de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 

Figura 15 – Número de ocorrências dos relatórios finais, classificadas de acordo   94 

com o tipo no Est. São Paulo, 2000-2005. 

Figura 16 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo CENIPA no Acidente A 96 

Figura 17 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo HFACS no Acidente A 97 

Figura 18 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo CENIPA no Acidente B 99 

Figura 19 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo HFACS no Acidente B 100 

Figura 20 – Fatores contribuintes dos relatórios finais de acidentes ocorridos no   102 

Est. de São Paulo de 2000-2005.



 
 
 
 

 
Figura 21 – Número de  aspectos contribuintes por fator nos relatórios finais de   103 

acidentes ocorridos no Est. de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 

Figura 22 – Número de fatores contribuintes utilizando o HFACS nos acidentes   104 

ocorridos no Est. de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 

Figura 23 – Número de Fatores contribuintes com as subdivisões do HFACS nos   105 

acidentes ocorridos no Est. de São Paulo de 2000-2005.



 
 
 
 

 
SIGLAS UTILILZADAS 
 
 
 
 

ABAG – Associação Brasileira de Aviação Geral 
 

ANAC – Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil 
 

ASV - Agente de Segurança de Vôo 
 

ATC - Air Traffic Control 
 

CAA - Civil Aeronautics Administration 
 

CAB - Civil Aeronautics Board 
 

CENIPA - Centro Nacional de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos CI 

- Comando Investigador 
 

CIAA - Comissão de Investigação de Acidente Aeronáutico 
 

CIPA – Comissão Interna de Prevenção de Acidentes 
 

CT-SST - Comissão Tripartite de Saúde e Segurança no Trabalho 
 

DAC - Departamento de Aviação Civil 
 

DOT - Department of Transportation 
 

EASA - European Aviation Safety Agency 
 

EPA - Environamental Protection Agency 
 

ECCAIRS - European Coordination Centre for Accidents and Incidents Report 
 

FAA - Federal Aviation Administration 
 

FAB - Força Aérea Brasileira 
 

GCRA - Gerência de Controle dos Riscos Aeronáuticos



 
 
 
 

 
GGIP - Gerência-Geral de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos GPAT 

- Gerência de Pesquisa e Análise de Tendências 
 

HFACS - Human Factors Analysis and Classification System 
 

ICAO - International Civil Aviation Organization 
 

INCAER – Instituto Histórico-Cultural da Aeronáutica 
 

JRC - Joint Research Centre 
 

NACA - National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 
 

NEPA - National Environmental Policy Act 
 

NIOSH - National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
 

NORDESTE - Nordeste Linhas Aéreas Regionais 
 

NR – Norma Regulamentadora 
 

NTSB - National Transportation Safety Board 
 

OSHA - Occupational Safety And Health Administration 
 

PIN - Pública de Instrução 
 

PNSST – Política Nacional de Segurança e Saúde do Trabalhador 
 

PRI - Privada de Instrução 
 

OIT – Organização Internacional do Trabalho 
 

OSV - Oficial de Segurança de vôo 
 

RBHA – Regulamento Brasileiro de Homologação Aeronáutica 
 

RAB – Registro Aeronáutico Brasileiro 
 

RIO SUL - Rio Sul Serviços Aéreos Regionais



 
 
 
 

 
RIT – Regulamento de Inspeção do Trabalho 
 

SAE - Serviços Aéreos Especializados 
 

SAFA - Safety Assessment of Foreign Aircraft 
 

SHEL – Software, Hardware, Environment, Liveware 
 

SERIPA - Serviço Regional de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos 

SIPAER - Serviço de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos 
 

TABA - Taba Linhas Aéreas 
 

TAM - Táxi Aéreo Marília 
 

TPN - Serviço Transporte Aéreo Público Não Regular 
 

TPP - Serviços Aéreos Privados 
 

TPX - Serviço Transporte Aéreo Público Não Regular Táxi Aéreo 
 

UE - União Européia 
 

VASP - Viação Aérea São Paulo 
 

VARIG - Viação Aérea Rio-Grandense 
 

VOTEC - Votec Linhas Aéreas



 
 
 

16 
 
 
 
 

1. INTRODUÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

O presente estudo trata da análise dos métodos de investigação dos acidentes 

aéreos, traçando um panorama da evolução da aviação e seus sistemas de regulação, 

do surgimento e sistema de funcionamento de algumas agências de investigação de 

acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos e de abordagens teóricas utilizadas na analise de 

acidentes. 

Foram  identificados  os  acidentes  e incidentes ocorridos  no  estado de São 

Paulo, no período de 2000 a 2005 e comparadas análises e fatores identificados como 

contribuintes nos relatórios emitidos  pelo órgão responsável no Brasil com outro 

modelo de análise, avaliando se este entendimento traz novas implicações práticas 

para as investigações. 

O  mundo  do  trabalho  é  um  universo  complexo.  Pode  ser  estudado  sob 

diferentes  perspectivas:  econômica,  social,  psicológica  ou  filosófica.  Fato  é  que 

sempre esteve presente nas diversas civilizações, desde a pré-história até os dias de 

hoje. As relações e estruturas sociais foram se modificando ao longo da história, bem 

como a relação que o homem mantém com o trabalho. 

O trabalho é entendido por ANTUNES (1999), em seu sentido mais amplo, 

como  ―a  expressão  da  relação  metabólica  entre  o  ser  social  e  a  natureza  (...) 

desenvolvendo  inter-relações  com  outros  seres  sociais,  também  com  vistas  à 

produção de valores de uso‖. 

O contexto produtivo do século XX tem implicações tanto sobre as relações 

sociais quanto sobre os sujeitos que a constituem. Habermas, citado por ANTUNES 

(1999), considera que houve uma mudança desde o fim do sec.XIX, trazendo outra 

tendência de desenvolvimento, caracterizadora do capitalismo em fase tardia, que 

vem se impondo cada vez mais: a ciência e a  técnica aparecem com  a pesquisa 

industrial em grande escala. 

Ciência, técnica e valorização foram inseridas ao mesmo tempo no sistema; 

tornando  assim  a ciência e a técnica  as  principais  forças  produtivas.  ANTUNES 

(1999) considera que a ciência não pode se tornar a principal força produtiva, pois



 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
 

ela interage com o trabalho, afirmando que o saber científico e o saber laborativo se 

misturem no mundo moderno e sem que o primeiro faça ―cair por terra‖ o segundo. 

Nos últimos cem anos, o trabalho sofreu  grandes transformações, desde a 

mudança de uma abordagem inicialmente técnica para uma científica e hoje para a 

tecnológica, que é o principal motor das transformações, gerando modificações no 

próprio conceito do saber e do trabalho, a aviação se insere neste contexto, trazendo 

dimensões espaciais e abrindo um leque de novas tarefas. 

Os  acidentes  de  trabalho,  dentro  de  um  contexto  tecnológico,  devem  ser 

analisados,  fugindo  das  considerações  de  imperfeição  ou  imperícia,  baseados  em 

uma teoria científica que considere ampliar a compreensão das ações do ser humano, 

que é, sem duvida, o principal agente de todos os processos. Sem a sua ação não 

haveria acidente, entretanto ele é o único capaz de monitorar os sistemas e deter as 

catástrofes. 

O trabalho não é só fruto da organização de projetistas, ele é reorganizado por 

aqueles   que   o   realizam   e   esta   organização   coletiva   comporta   prescrições 

indispensáveis à leitura do trabalho real. (CLOT, 2006) 

O trabalho e a saúde do trabalhador confiram  um aspecto coletivo, uma vez a 

própria atividade, o contexto social e a regulação das ações e normas não se dão 

individualmente. 

No Brasil a saúde como direito social surge pela primeira vez na Constituição 

Federal  de  1988  e,  a  saúde  do  trabalhador  consta  no  inciso  II  do  artigo  200: 

“executar as ações de vigilância sanitária e epidemiológica, bem com as de saúde 

do trabalhador‖. (CF, 1988), até então era de responsabilidade das empresas e da 

Previdência Social e, a regulamentação das condições de trabalho eram atribuições 

do Ministério do Trabalho. (SATO, LACAZ e BERNARDO, 2006) 

A vinculação das relações de trabalho e a saúde-doença como objeto da saúde 

pública se caracterizam particularmente por incorporar o conceito de processo de 

trabalho, suas diferentes formas de organização, divisão e formações sociais e não se 

restringindo unicamente ao ambiente. (GOMEZ e LACAZ, 2005) 

ASSUNÇÃO (2003) considera que as categorias saúde e trabalho se referem 

a fenômenos que por sua natureza se alternam, o uso do corpo e os processos de



 
 
 

18 
 
 
 
 

trabalho possuem dimensões que ainda não foram bem avaliadas, a organização do 

trabalho ao atingir o indivíduo traz efeitos sobre sua saúde alterando sua forma de 

agir e enfrentar os riscos. Embora a condição de trabalho tenha hoje uma visibilidade 

muito maior, o modo como as pessoas tem feito uso de suas capacidades físicas, 

cognitivas e afetivas  para produzir foi transformada e exige que a ciência esteja 

envolvida nesta temática. 

Na   tentativa   de   corresponder   ao   desempenho   esperado   o   trabalhador 

desenvolve estratégias que podem levar a falhas e conseqüentemente a acidentes se 

não houverem mecanismos de segurança adequados para conte-los. 

LIMA  e  ASSUNÇÃO  (2000)  avaliam  que  o  risco  é  inerente  a  atividade 

humana e que o domínio do homem sobre a natureza se desenvolvem a medida que 

explora  objetos  desconhecidos,  tornando  os  acidentes  inerentes  ao  progresso, 

relacionando a diferença entre a gravidade dos riscos e a conseqüência das decisões. 

Estabelecer qual o risco aceitável é um dos obstáculos a serem transpostos para a 

prevenção. 
 
 
 
 
1.1   ACIDENTES NA AVIAÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

Os  acidentes  de  trabalho  são  considerados  na  legislação  brasileira  como 

eventos  ocorridos  pelo  exercício  do  trabalho,  que  causam  lesão  corporal  ou 

perturbação funcional, morte e perda ou redução da capacidade para o trabalho. (lei 

n° 8213). Sendo responsabilidade das empresas a adoção de medidas de proteção e 

de segurança da saúde do trabalhador. 

A  lei  n°  8213  considera  ainda  como  acidentes  de  trabalho  as  doenças 

profissionais, as doenças do trabalho entendidas como adquiridas ou desencadeadas 

em função da condição de trabalho 

De acordo com a Norma de Sistema do Comando  da Aeronáutica 3 -1  – 

Conceituações de Vocábulos, Expressões e Siglas de uso no Sistema de Investigação 

e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos (NSCA 3-1) – as ocorrências envolvendo



 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
 

aeronaves  ou  infra-estrutura  aeronáutica  são  classificadas  em  acidente,  incidente 

grave, incidente e ocorrência de solo. (anexo 1). 

Nas  definições  encontradas  na  NSCA  3-1,  tanto  o  ―acidente‖  como  o 

―incidente‖ indicam uma disfunção no sistema ligado à ação ou ao fato ocorrido, 

reportando-se  aos  danos,  perdas  e  lesões  e,  relacionando  o  acidente  a  uma 

multicasualidade. Não há uma definição de erro, podendo o erro se referir à ação, ao 

evento ou a causa/conseqüência da ação. 

O conceito de segurança, por sua vez, é o mesmo adotado pela Internacional 

Civil  Aviation  Organization  (ICAO),  reforçando  mais  uma  vez  a  visão  ligada  a 

questões relativas a perdas materiais ou a lesões. 

As normas e práticas recomendadas para Investigação de Acidentes Aéreos 

foram adotadas pelo Conselho da ICAO em 11 de Abril de 1951. São designadas 

pelo  Annex  13  —  Aircraft  Accident  and  Incident  Investigation  da Convenção  de 

Chicago, que estabeleceu as bases para as investigações dos acidentes e incidentes 

aeronáuticos a nível mundial e são aplicáveis a: "atividades que se seguem sempre 

que os acidentes e incidentes que ocorreram‖ e abrangem um amplo espectro de 

atividades, incluindo as de investigações de acidentes e incidentes. 

Segundo o Anexo 13, "O único objetivo da investigação de um acidente ou 

incidente  será  a  prevenção  de  acidentes  e  incidentes.  Não  é  o  propósito  desta 

atividade imputar  culpa  ou  responsabilidade."  Esta orientação  direciona tanto  as 

ações tomadas durante a investigação como as medidas relacionadas à prevenção, 

refletindo a filosofia adotada na década de 50, em que a segurança era uma questão 

de seguir ou não as regras, buscando preservar os envolvidos. Estes objetivos se 

mantêm inalterados. 

Os conceitos de segurança ainda hoje são relacionados a sistemas de controle, 

sejam eles ligados ao desenvolvimento de sistemas mecânicos ou à regulamentação. 

Muitos consideram que a meta na prevenção deve ser ―zero acidente‖, porém nunca 

teremos  o  controle  de  todas  as  variáveis  envolvidas  na  atividade  aérea.  Hoje  a 

concepção de segurança está mais ligada à gestão de processos organizacionais, mas 

ainda voltada as ações realizadas nos controles dos processos. (ICAO, 2009)



 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
 

A   ICAO   (2009)   considera   a   segurança   como:   ―O   estado   em   que  a 

possibilidade de danos a pessoas ou danos a propriedade é reduzido e mantido num 

nível igual ou superior ao aceitável, através de um processo contínuo de identificação 

dos perigos e gestão dos riscos.‖ 

A investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos no Brasil está a cargo do Centro 

Nacional  de  Investigação  e  Prevenção  de  Acidentes  Aeronáuticos   (CENIPA) 

subordinado ao Comando da Aeronáutica e ao Ministério da Defesa e é quem define 

o acidente aeronáutico, utilizando como base no Anexo 13 da ICAO. 

A  estatística  fornecida  pelo  CENIPA  (figura  1)  mostra  um  considerável 

aumento do número de acidentes aeronáuticos ocorridos no Brasil nos três últimos 

anos. Muitos fatores podem ser considerados para que este número tenha se elevado, 

as informações fornecidas no sítio eletrônico do CENIPA foram sendo modificadas a 

partir de 2007 com o fornecimento de dados de categorias diferentes, tornando   o 

estabelecimento comparações das informações períodos anteriores imprecisas. 

Podemos estabelecer uma série de classificações para avaliar os indicadores 

de  segurança  das  operações  aéreas,  podem  estar  relacionados  a  horas  voadas, 

tamanho da frota, número de decolagens, número de acidentes; se são graves, qual 

número de mortos em acidentes, qual o tipo de acidente que mais ocorre. Não existe 

uma padronização internacional. 

Figura 1 – Distribuição do número de acidentes aéreos ocorridos no Brasil de 1999 a 
2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fonte: CENIPA



 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
 

O National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) classifica suas estatísticas 

de  acidentes  por  tipo  de  aviação  e  por  milhão  de  horas  voadas,  analisando 

separadamente os tipos de lesão e os fatores contribuintes. (NTSB, 2005). 

A European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) apresenta suas estatísticas por 

10 milhões de horas voadas, por tipo de equipamento separando aviões, helicópteros; 

por tipo de aviação e as fatalidades. (EASA, 2008). 

A partir do ano de 2009, o CENIPA passou a apresentar  suas estatísticas 

classificadas por tipo de equipamento (avião ou helicóptero); fatalidades e tipo de 

dano material e não citando mais os fatores contribuintes. 

A figura 2 possui dados mostrados no sitio eletrônico do CENIPA até 2007 

quando ainda eram indicados os fatores contribuintes dos acidentes cuja analise final 

já  havia  sido  realizada  pelo  CENIPA.  A  apresentação  nos  reporta  à  questão  da 

multicasualidade, sugerindo que um acidente tem múltiplos fatores contribuintes, os 

fatores contribuintes apontados não identificam problemas na gestão dos sistemas 

organizacionais. 

Figura  2-  Fatores  contribuintes  em  630  acidentes  aeronáuticos  da  aviação  civil 
brasileira ocorrido no período de 1997 a 2006. (CENIPA, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fonte: CENIPA



 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 

De acordo com a informação fornecida foi identificado que não há uma causa 

única para os acidentes, a média de 3,62 causas por acidente não chega porem a 

configurar uma multicausalidade, sugerindo a necessidade de aprimorar o método de 

investigação utilizado. 

Segundo REASON (1997), existem dois tipos de acidente; os individuais e os 

organizacionais. Os organizacionais são aqueles que envolvem múltiplas causas e 

diferentes operadores em diferentes funções, comparativamente, mais raro, porém 

mais  catastrófico  e  envolve  modernas  tecnologias.  Para  o  autor,  os  acidentes  na 

aviação  se  enquadram  na  categoria  de  acidentes  organizacionais.  Deveríamos, 

portanto, concentrar nossa investigação nos fatores que construíram a trajetória que 

resultou no acidente e não em condicionantes isolados. 
 
 
 
 
1.2 A EVOLUÇÃO DA AVIAÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

Apesar de contar com pouco mais de um século, a aviação evoluiu muito 

rápido,  principalmente  em  função  de  sua  utilização  bélica  e  de  suas  vantagens 

econômicas. 

A história da aviação tem início em 23 de outubro de 1906, no campo de 

Bagatelle, Paris, França, quando Alberto Santos-Dumont conseguiu: taxiar, decolar, 

voar nivelado e pousar com um aparelho que se deslocava com recursos próprios. 

Através da genialidade de um brasileiro, passamos a escrever um novo rumo da 

historia   dos   transportes   de   forma   definitiva.   Nenhum   fato   histórico   ocorre 

isoladamente;  ele  é  uma  conseqüência  da  evolução  da  ciência,  da  premência  da 

economia  e  da  necessidade  da  sociedade.  A  nova  realidade  passou  a  exigir  do 

homem  que  atendesse  os  desafios  no  campo  da  engenharia,  da  medicina,  da 

economia e do mundo do trabalho, lidando com novas profissões e estratégias. 

A atividade aérea, vista como uma maravilha da época atraía multidões em 

feiras. Como objeto de competições e desafios, espalhou-se pela Europa, fazendo 

este mercado evoluir e se expandir principalmente na França e na Alemanha. Na



 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
 

América do Norte, sua expansão ocorreu através dos mesmos mecanismos, porém 

mais lentamente em função de brigas por patentes. (CROUCH, 2008). 

A  primeira  guerra  mundial  mudaria  este  panorama  festivo.  A  indústria 

aeronáutica teve uma grande evolução, marcando definitivamente a importância do 

poder aéreo, transformando os aviadores nos mais celebrados e em heróis de guerra, 

plantando raízes no meio militar, transformando-o no principal formador de pilotos. 

A evolução ocorrida nestes poucos anos foi marcante. O final da guerra na 

Europa serviu para organizar os fundamentos da atividade aérea. A crise econômica 

do pós-guerra e a diminuição da demanda por aeronaves militares fizeram com que a 

aviação passasse a buscar novos desafios, abrindo-se para o mercado da aviação 

civil. Os desafios se modificaram com o crescimento da aviação civil. Novos marcos 

deveriam ser estabelecidos, os vôos transatlânticos e de longa duração eram metas a 

serem atingidas e a indústria aeronáutica acompanhava esta evolução. (CROUCH, 

2008). 

Os aeronautas, que em 1910 eram classificados na categoria de artistas por 

seus feitos circenses, passaram pela imagem de heróis durante os anos da primeira 

Grande Guerra, à de aviador temerário e imprudente, dispostos a realizar feitos de 

habilidade e coragem e ousadia, no pós-guerra. Esta imagem não era adequada para 

vender  passagens  aéreas.  Então,  a  partir  de  1932,  programas  de  formação  e 

treinamento passaram a ser ministrados dentro das companhias aéreas. A aviação 

civil faz surgir também novas profissões ligadas às necessidades da atividade, como 

os controles em terra de aeronaves e escalas. 

A Convenção Internacional sobre Navegação Aérea foi assinada em 13 de 

outubro de 1919, por 27 países, reconhecendo o direito de cada país em controlar o 

próprio espaço aéreo. Nos Estados Unidos, surge a ―National Advisory Commite for 

Aeronautics‖  (NACA),  recomendando  que  ficasse  a  cargo  do  governo  federal  a 

responsabilidade   de   licenciar   pilotos   e   inspecionar   e   certificar   aeronaves   e 

estabelecer e manter aeroportos (CROUCH, 2008). 

A  aviação  civil  cresceu  na  Europa  e  nos  Estados  Unidos,  criando  novos 

nichos econômicos e substituindo paulatinamente os circos por operações com bases 

fixas  e  regulares.  Os  avanços  na  ciência  da  aerodinâmica,  melhorias  técnicas  na



 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
 

construção  dos  aviões,  nos  equipamentos,  controles  e  nas  cabines  das  aeronaves 

permitiram  que  os  vôos  se  realizassem  a  altitudes  maiores,  mais  rapidamente  e 

levando mais carga e passageiros. Este período se estendeu até meados da década de 

30. (GRANT, 2002). 

A guerra voltou a dominar o cenário da aviação. A pintura ―Guernica” de 

Pablo Picasso (1937), símbolo do ataque aéreo sofrido pela cidade de mesmo nome 

em 26 de abril de 1937, é um marco que ilustra a utilização do avião na segunda 

Grande Guerra. 

A  conquista  da   superioridade   aérea   marcou   definitivamente  um   novo 

panorama para a guerra, foi determinante nos  combates e no controle do espaço 

aéreo,  tornou possível  desde o  bombardeio  estratégico até o  reconhecimento  e o 

apoio às tropas em terra, revelando-se também um veículo para armas capazes de um 

extermínio devastador. 

Os  teatros  de  operações  não  se  restringiam  aos  territórios  dos  países; 

atravessaram oceanos a bordo de porta aviões e realizavam ataques aos submarinos e 

embarcações. A atividade aérea provocada novamente pela necessidade da guerra 

evoluiu muito rapidamente de 1939 a 1945, dando impulso ao surgimento da era dos 

jatos e dos helicópteros, das armas nucleares e de sistemas eletrônicos. (CROUCH, 

2008) 

Com o final da Segunda Grande Guerra, uma parte da indústria aeronáutica 

passou a se dedicar à aviação civil, enquanto que a Guerra Fria entre Estados Unidos 

e a então União Soviética manteve aquecido o desenvolvimento da aviação militar 

nos anos subseqüentes. 

No  início  da  década  de  50,  surgiram  as  primeiras  aeronaves  a  jato,  mas 

somente em 1958 o primeiro avião de passageiros começou a operar com sucesso e, 

com ele, os novos desafios para a indústria aeronáutica, que buscava aeronaves cada 

vez maiores e mais rápidas e seus sistemas foram ficando cada vez mais complexos. 

(GRANT, 2002). 

A  partir  da  década  de  1970,  surgiram  as  aeronaves  supersônicas  e  os 

primeiros  sistemas  de  navegação  automática.  Na  década  de  80,  os  sistemas  de 

gerenciamento   de   vôos   eletrônicos   e,   finalmente,   na   década   de   90,   foram



 
 
 

25 
 
 
 
 

introduzidos os sistemas digitais, chamados de ―glass cockpit‖*, que incluem novos 

comandos de vôo e sistemas de proteção gerenciados por um sistema inteligente da 

aeronave. 

No início do novo milênio, os atentados ocorridos em 11 de setembro de 

2001,  nos  Estados  Unidos,  tiveram  impactos  imediatos  no  mercado  da  aviação, 

levando a uma queda na demanda que chegou a 40% (CROCH, 2008). A crise se 

estendeu até os fabricantes de aeronaves, levando a indústria a uma reflexão sobre 

sua produção e passando a apontar seu foco em direção à competição na disputa pelo 

mercado, mudando os desafios, que antes eram tecnológicos, para os comerciais. 

(NEWHOUSE, 2008) 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2.1. A Aviação Brasileira 
 
 
 
 
 

Os  aviadores  franceses  Roland  Garros  e  Edmond  Plachout  e  o  italiano 

Ernesto Darioli foram os pioneiros da aviação no Brasil e maravilhavam a população 

em 1911 com suas demonstrações aéreas. Decidiu-se, nesta época, criar o "Aero- 

Club   Brasileiro"   (posteriormente   tornar-se-ia   o   Aeroclube   do   Brasil),   uma 

organização civil apoiada pelos militares da Marinha e do Exército. Dentre os seus 

objetivos, estava a fundação de uma escola de aviação e a dotação de "aparelhos de 

voar" para o Exército e a Marinha. Fundada em 24 de fevereiro de 1914, no Campo 

dos Affonsos, no Rio de Janeiro, contava com 15 aviões e 45 alunos matriculados. 

(LAVERNÉRE-WANDERLEY, 1975) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  ―glass cockpit‖ é exibição da informação por computadores que podem ser ajustados conforme for 
necessário   em  substituição   na   cabine   tradicional   aos   mostradores  analógicos   que   dependem  de 
numerosas entradas mecânicas (AIRBUS, 2009).



 
 
 

26 
 
 
 
 

A aviação  militar no  Brasil  envolveu-se em  diversos eventos  políticos  do 

Tenentismo à Revolução de 32. Tanto a Aviação do Exército como a Aviação Naval 

criaram na década de 30 os correios aéreos, que, em apenas seis meses, já cobriam 

1731 km de rotas. Entre 1932 e 1935, abriram-se linhas para Minas Gerais, Mato 

Grosso, Paraná, Ceará, Rio Grande do Sul, chegando até a Amazônia, afirmando a 

soberania sobre o Território Nacional. (LAVERNÉRE-WANDERLEY, 1975) 

A aviação comercial brasileira iniciou-se em 1927. A primeira empresa no 

Brasil a transportar passageiros foi a Condor Syndikat, com sede em Berlim, que, em 

22 de fevereiro, iniciava a primeira linha regular. Em 1° de dezembro daquele ano, 

foi nacionalizada, com o nome de "Sindicato Condor Limitada‖. Durante a II Guerra 

Mundial, passou a usar o nome de Serviços Aéreos Cruzeiro do Sul. 

A Compagnie Génerale Aéronautiques (com sede em Paris) operava malotes 

postais entre a Europa e a América do Sul e operava sua rota a partir de Fernando de 

Noronha, seguindo até o Uruguai pelo litoral. Em junho do mesmo ano, era fundada 

a Viação Aérea Rio-Grandense (VARIG). (ALMIRANTE, 2007) 

Em 1929, a linha Nova Iorque - Rio - Buenos Aires iniciava o serviço aéreo 

entre essas duas cidades e o Rio de Janeiro, tendo sido fundada a Nyrba do Brasil 

S.A., que se transformou na Panair do Brasil, extinta em 1965. Em novembro de 

1933, foi fundada a Viação Aérea São Paulo (VASP), que iniciou em 1936 o vôo 

regular entre o Rio de Janeiro e São Paulo, a linha de maior tráfego da aviação 

brasileira até hoje. A aviação civil brasileira ganhou impulso a partir de 1940, com as 

aeronaves americanas excedentes da guerra, que podiam ser adquiridas com baixo 

custo, propiciando o aparecimento de inúmeras empresas aéreas. Com o surgimento 

não  programado,  regulação  estatal  e  estrutura  precária,  teve  grande  importância 

devido   ao   seu   efeito   integrador   e   ao   de   desenvolvimento   que   promoveu, 

considerando-se a dimensão territorial brasileira. (ALMIRANTE, 2007). 

Em  janeiro  de  1941,  o  Governo  Brasileiro  decidiu  unificar  as  operações 

aéreas militares e civis e criar o Ministério da Aeronáutica, que passou a denominar 

seu efetivo militar de Força Aérea Brasileira (FAB) em maio do mesmo ano. Em 

agosto  de 1942,  o  Brasil  declarou  guerra  à Alemanha nazista e à  Itália.  A  FAB 

montou patrulhas sobre os mares brasileiros e, no final do mesmo ano, o governo



 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
 

decidiu enviar militares para lutar ao lado dos aliados na Europa, composta de um 

componente  aéreo  com  o  1º  Grupo  de  Aviação  de  Caça  e  da  1ª  Esquadrilha  de 

Ligação e Observação. (LAVERNÉRE-WANDERLEY, 1975). 

A  aviação  civil  brasileira,  em  função  da  oferta  inicial  exagerada  e  de 

desequilíbrios financeiros, viveu em 1950 uma onda de fusões entre empresas e de 

falências. O número de cidades atendidas nunca foi tão grande quanto nesse período 

dos anos 50. O número de cidades atendidas era de 358, número jamais alcançado 

nem antes nem depois daquela época. Na década de 50, operavam cerca de dezesseis 

empresas   brasileiras,   algumas   com   apenas   dois   ou   três   aviões,   fazendo 

principalmente ligações regionais. (PESSOA, 1989). 

Na  década  de  60,  a  aviação  comercial  brasileira  passou  por  uma  crise 

econômica. O governo federal resolveu exercer um controle maior, dando apoio a 

novas  fusões  que  reduziram  o  número  de  empresas  para  apenas  quatro  grandes 

empresas  comerciais:  VARIG,  VASP,  Transbrasil  e  Cruzeiro.  Muitas  cidades 

pequenas saíram do mapa aeronáutico e se organizaram, na década de 70, novas 

empresas regionais, para operarem em cinco regiões do território nacional, com o 

objetivo  de  viabilizar  a  aeronave  Bandeirante,  produzida  pela  Embraer,  surgindo 

assim  as  empresas  Nordeste  Linhas  Aéreas  Regionais  (NORDESTE),  Rio  Sul 

Serviços Aéreos Regionais (RIO SUL), Taba Linhas Aéreas (TABA), Táxi Aéreo 

Marília (TAM) e Votec Linhas Aéreas (VOTEC). (MALAGUTTI, 2001) 

A  VARIG  absorveu  a  Cruzeiro  e  adquiriu  outras  empresas  regionais, 

transformando-se,  no  início  do  século  XXI,  na  maior  transportadora  da  América 

Latina.  A  partir  de  2007,  a  primeira  empresa  brasileira  de  avião  comercial  se 

transformou   em   uma   pequena   empresa,   entretanto   ostentou   números   que   a 

consagraram como uma das líderes do mercado mundial. Depois foi adquirida pela 

Gol Linhas Aéreas Inteligentes S.A., que foi a primeira empresa a operar no Brasil 

com a proposta  ―low cost, low fare‖* a partir de 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 

* O conceito surgiu nos Estados Unidos e se refere a uma companhia aérea com estruturas de custos 
operacionais mais baixos, oferece baixas tarifas em troca de eliminar muitos serviços tradicionais aos 
passageiros. (GROSS e SCHODER, 2007)



 
 
 

28 
 
 
 
 

No ano de 1991, foi redigida uma política para os serviços de transporte aéreo 

comercial  no  Brasil,  onde  o  Ministério  da  Aeronáutica  expunha  novas  diretrizes 

políticas, que passaram a ser adotadas a partir de 1992 com um sistema monitorado 

de liberação de tarifas aéreas e das regras do setor e o aumento da concorrência entre 

as empresas, tentando, porém manter o controle e desenvolvendo o transporte aéreo 

não - regular. (MALAGUTTI, 2001). 

A década de 90 foi pontuada por diversas transformações na economia, que 

afetaram  diretamente  o  setor  aéreo.  O  início  do  Plano  Real,  em  1994,  trouxe  a 

necessidade  de  adequação  ao  novo  valor  da  moeda  financeira;  o  incremento  de 

viagens  ao  exterior;  o  aumento  do  poder  aquisitivo  de  algumas  camadas  da 

população e, conseqüentemente, uma maior procura do transporte aéreo internacional 

e o aumento da demanda nacional. 

Em 10 de junho de 1999, o Ministério da Defesa é oficialmente criado, o 

Estado-Maior das Forças Armadas é extinto e os Ministérios da Marinha, do Exército 

e da Aeronáutica são transformados em Comandos, a ele subordinados. 

O novo ministério passou a ter sob sua responsabilidade uma diversificada 

gama de assuntos, dentre os quais as operações militares; o orçamento da defesa; 

política e estratégia militares; o serviço militar e a aviação civil; constituindo, em 

2000,  o  Conselho  da  Aviação  Civil  –  CONAC,  com  o  intuito  de  assessorar  o 

Presidente  da  Republica  na  formulação  da  política  nacional  da  aviação  civil. 

(Decreto n° 3.564) 

Devido  ao  impasse  na  criação  da  Agência  Nacional  de  Aviação  Civil 

(ANAC), que estava proposta desde 2002, em 2005 houve um aumento das pressões 

políticas por parte dos executivos da aviação para que o Brasil organizasse a aviação 

civil  de  forma  mais  clara,  adequando-se  aos  padrões  técnicos  internacionais, 

justamente para facilitar processos operacionais. A agência, que foi então criada, 

passou a existir de fato em 20 de março de 2006. 

A ANAC tem sua origem no Departamento de Aviação Civil (DAC), órgão 

subordinado ao Comando da Aeronáutica e que tinha como competência planejar, 

gerenciar e controlar as atividades da aviação civil com base no Código Brasileiro de 

Aeronáutica (Lei n° 7.565). Com o advento da Lei nº 11.182, de 2005, a atividade de



 
 
 

29 
 
 
 
 

autoridade aeronáutica foi transferida, com todas as suas responsabilidades, para a 

ANAC, que passa a manter vinculação com o Ministério da Defesa. 

A  partir  de  2005,  o  setor  de  transporte  aéreo  atingiu  um  alto  grau  de 

desregulamentação econômica, onde as companhias aéreas competem livremente por 

posições no mercado para possuir mais liberdade no sistema de concessões de linhas 

aéreas, fazendo com que o mercado da aviação comercial avance e se desenvolva. 

(OLIVEIRA, 2008). 

A aviação brasileira se divide em militar e civil, sendo que, a aviação civil, 

seja ela comercial ou privada, subdividida em duas categorias: o transporte aéreo, 

que engloba todas as categorias de transporte comercial de passageiros; e de cargas e 

a  aviação  geral,  que  inclui  desde  pequenos  aviões  de  propriedade  particular  até 

modernos  jatos  de  negócio,  helicópteros,  balonismo,  vôos  de  treinamento  (para 

pilotos iniciantes) e outras atividades aéreas. 

Até abril de 2008, o Brasil possuía uma frota com 11.459 aeronaves, das 

quais 10.562 pertenciam à aviação geral. (ABAG,2008) 

A aviação civil brasileira possui, portanto, uma cultura com raízes em sua 

origem militar, vinculação que mantém até hoje, por força da legislação vigente, 

tendo  sua  agência  reguladora  e  a  infra-estrutura  aeroportuária  subordinadas  ao 

Ministério da Defesa. 

Um  quadro  com  o  resumo  cronológico  da  evolução  da  aviação  no 

Brasil e no mundo pode ser visto no anexo 2. 
 
 
 
 
1.3. A ORGANIZAÇÃO DOS SISTEMAS DE AVIAÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

A  agência  especializada  das  Nações  Unidas  para  a  aviação  civil  e  a 

International Civil Aviation Organization - ICAO cumpre a tarefa de ser o seu fórum 

global.  Sua  criação  ocorreu  na  Convenção  sobre  a  Aviação  Civil  Internacional 

(também  conhecida  como  Convenção  de  Chicago)  e  foi  referendada  em  7  de 

Dezembro de 1944, por 52 Estados. Em outubro de 1947, a ICAO tornou-se uma



 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
 

agência especializada das Nações Unidas ligada ao Conselho Econômico e Social. 

(ICAO, 2006) 

A Convenção sobre a Aviação Civil Internacional estabeleceu as atribuições 

da ICAO: 

Considerando  que  o  desenvolvimento  futuro  da  aviação  civil  internacional  pode 
ajudar grandemente para criar e preservar a amizade e compreensão entre as nações e 
os  povos  do  mundo,  mas  seu  abuso  pode  se  tornar  uma  ameaça  para  a  segurança 
geral,   e   considerando   que   é   desejável   para   evitar   atritos   e   para   promover   uma 
cooperação entre nações e povos de que a paz do mundo depende;  assim, o abaixo- 
assinado   com   os   governos   concordaram   em   determinados   princípios   e   regras 
aplicáveis a fim de que a aviação civil internacional possa ser desenvolvida de forma 
segura   e   ordenada   e   que  o   transporte  aéreo   internacional   de   serviços   possa  ser 
estabelecido com base na igualdade de oportunidade e operando de forma 
economicamente sólida. Concluí-se a presente Convenção para esse efeito. (Decreto 
n° 21.713) 
 
 
A Convenção de Chicago estabelece os privilégios e as restrições de todos os 

Estados   contratantes   e   prevê   a   adoção   de   normas   internacionais   e   práticas 

recomendadas  para  regulamentar  transporte  aéreo  internacional.  A  Convenção 

reconhece em seu artigo primeiro o princípio de que cada Estado tem a soberania 

completa  e  exclusiva  sobre  o  espaço  aéreo  acima  do  seu  território.  (Decreto  n° 

21.713). 

Dentre  as  finalidades  e  objetivos  da  ICAO,  conforme  o  artigo  44  da 

Convenção de Chicago está o de desenvolver os princípios e técnicas de navegação 

aérea  internacional  e  promover  o  planejamento  e  desenvolvimento  do  transporte 

aéreo internacional de modo a: 

Assegurar o crescimento seguro e ordenado da aviação civil internacional em todo o 
mundo; incentivar a concepção e operação das aeronaves para fins pacíficos; entre os 
Estados contratantes; promover a segurança de vôo na navegação aérea 
internacional; promover o desenvolvimento geral de todos os aspectos da 
aeronáutica civil internacional; incentivar o desenvolvimento de aerovias, aeroportos 
e  instalações  de  navegação  aérea  para  a  aviação  civil  internacional;  satisfazer  as 
necessidades dos povos do mundo para o transporte aéreo seguro, regular, eficiente e 
econômico;   evitar   desperdícios   econômicos   causados   pela   concorrência   desleal; 
garantir que os direitos dos Estados contratantes sejam plenamente respeitados e que 
cada Estado contratante tem a possibilidade de operar companhias aéreas 
internacionais; evitar a discriminação. (Decreto n° 21.713).



 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
 

As normas e práticas recomendadas da ICAO são detalhadas em 18 anexos da 

Convenção de Chicago, que cobrem todos os aspectos da aviação civil internacional: 

Anexos:  1.  Personnel  Licensing;  2.  Rules  of  the  Air;  3.  Meteorological  Service  for 
International Air Navigation; 4. Aeronautical Charts; 5.   Units of Measurement to be 
Used in Air and Ground Operations; 6. Operation of Aircraft; 7.   Aircraft Nationality 
and Registration Marks; 8. Airworthiness of Aircraft; 9. Facilitation; 10. 
Aeronautical Telecommunications; 11. Air Traffic Services; 12. Search and Rescue; 
13. Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation; 14.   Aerodromes; 15. Aeronautical 
Information Services;  16.   Environmental  Protection;  17.   Security —  Safeguarding 
International  Civil  Aviation  Against  Acts  of  Unlawful  Interference;  18. The  Safe 
Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air. (ICAO, 2006) 
 

A   ICAO   trabalha   para   alcançar   a   sua   visão   da   segurança   e   do 

desenvolvimento sustentável da aviação civil através da cooperação entre os seus 

Estados membros. 

Para  que  possa  estabelecer  esta  visão,  a  ICAO  estabeleceu  os  seguintes 

objetivos estratégicos para o período 2005-2010, quanto à segurança:  melhorar a 

segurança global da aviação civil e reforçar a segurança da aviação civil mundial; 

quanto a proteção ambiental: minimizar os efeitos negativos da aviação civil mundial 

sobre  o  ambiente;  eficiência:  melhorar  a  eficiência  das  operações  da  aviação; 

continuidade: manter a continuidade das operações da aviação; e, finalmente, quanto 

ao estado de direito: reforçar a legislação que rege a aviação civil internacional. 

Até  início  de  2009,  a  ICAO  contava  com  190  (cento  e  noventa)  países 

signatários, sendo o Brasil signatário desde 1945. 
 
 
 
 
1.4 A SEGURANÇA DE VÔO 
 
 
 
 

Desde que o homem começou a se utilizar de ferramentas há milhares de 

anos,  a  aplicação  elementar  de  conceitos  de  fatores  humanos  tem  facilitado  a 

eficiência de seu trabalho. Mas somente no último século o fator humano começou a 

evoluir.



 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
 

Durante  os  primeiros  anos,  a  aviação  civil  possuía  uma  tecnologia  pouco 

desenvolvida,   faltava   uma   infra-estrutura   adequada   e   os   riscos   eram   pouco 

compreendidos. A evolução da aviação comercial ocorreu depois da primeira Grande 

Guerra. Naquela época, os maiores fatores de risco para a segurança de vôo eram as 

condições meteorológicas e a visibilidade. Nas décadas seguintes foi dada grande 

importância  a  este  aspecto,  tanto  no  desenvolvimento  das  aeronaves  como  nos 

sistemas de rádio-comunicação e no controle de tráfego aéreo. A ferramenta utilizada 

para a prevenção inicialmente era a investigação do acidente, mas estes processos 

eram dificultados pela falta de apoio tecnológico. (ICAO, 2009) 

Os  acidentes  aéreos  acompanham  a  trajetória  histórica  da  aviação,  que, 

inicialmente, enfrentava desafios da engenharia e das condições climáticas, passando 

para as habilidades dos operadores e chegando hoje aos sistemas organizacionais. 

Desde  o  início  a  aviação  tem  feito  um  grande  número  de  vítimas  em 

acidentes. Em 1936, a taxa de mortes de passageiros nos Estados Unidos era de 10,1 

mortos por 160 milhões de quilômetros voados, permanecendo até hoje um de seus 

principais desafios os aspectos relacionados à segurança. (CROUCH, 2008). 

Na década de 30, a causa dos acidentes era analisada com uma visão uni 

causal, o homem era considerado com seu causador e a concepção de que havia uma 

predisposição  ao  risco  conduziu  ao  desenvolvimento  da   análise  das  atitudes 

humanas. Os métodos se restringiam a levantamentos estatísticos que favoreceram o 

desenvolvimento dos modelos de risco. (DE LA GARZA e FADLER, 2007) 

ALMEIDA   (2006)   considerou   que   o   início   da   sistematização   das 

investigações dos acidentes ocorreu em 1931, com Heinrich, que lançou a idéia de 

acidentes com danos à propriedade, ou seja, a idéia de acidentes sem lesão, definindo 

o acidente como todo evento não planejado, não controlado e não desejado, que 

interrompe uma atividade ou função, considerando que os acidentes de trabalho com 

ou sem lesões são devidos à personalidade do trabalhador, à prática de atos inseguros 

e à existência de condições inseguras nos locais de trabalho, formulando a Teoria dos 

Dominós. 

As  necessidades  de  produção  e  operação  de  equipamentos  sofisticados, 

surgiram durante as duas guerras mundiais e impuseram ao ser humano necessidades



 
 
 

33 
 
 
 
 

que muitas vezes superavam a capacidade de operá-los. Foram o estímulo para o 

progresso  da  ergonomia  ou  dos  fatores  humanos  com  a  criação  da  Ergonomics 

Research Society, em 1949, a Human Factor Society , em 1957 e da  Internacional 

Ergonomics Association em 1959. (ICAO, 1989) 

Na década de 50, a aviação foi se tornando mais segura, mas também mais 

regulamentada, resultando na noção de que a segurança pode ser garantida, desde 

que as regras sejam seguidas e que o desvio das regras conduz necessariamente a 

falhas, esta percepção permaneceu por muito tempo na visão dos  investigadores. 

(ICAO, 2009) 

Na década de 60, foi introduzida a noção de ―multicauaslidade‖ e com ela as 

noções de ―sistema homem – máquina‖. O acidente é definido como um sintoma de 

disfunção  desse  sistema  e  sua  análise  visa  à  compreensão  do  evento  através  do 

estudo das interações homem – sistema. (DE LA GARZA e FADLER, 2007) 

A  investigação  de  acidentes  passa  a  procurar  nas  cadeias  de  eventos,  os 

momentos onde as pessoas não fizeram aquilo que era esperado, ou fizeram algo 

diferente  do  esperado  ou  uma  combinação  de  ambos.  Quando  não  era  possível 

identificar uma falha tecnológica, as falhas eram operacionais. São desta época as 

teorias que partem da identificação de causas, fatores de risco, roteiros ou classes de 

acidentes  que  buscam  procedimentos  corretivos  e,  portanto  são  reativas.  Estas 

abordagens   conduzem   à   análise   do   fator   humano   e   do   erro   humano   e   da 

confiabilidade, associando o acidente à presença da segurança ou da não-segurança. 

(DE LA GARZA e FADLER, 2007) 

No início da aviação até a década de 70 havia uma grande preocupação com a 

segurança. Estava voltada a aspectos técnicos e a indústria aeronáutica desenvolveu 

esforços que resultaram em uma melhoria tecnológica, trazendo os motores a jato. Os 

radares de vôo e de solo, os pilotos automáticos e sistemas de gerenciamento da 

navegação e da comunicação. O foco, a partir de então, passou a ser no fator humano 

e se desenvolveram diversos treinamentos visando o aprimoramento das tripulações, 

tentando controlar o erro humano. 

A investigação de grandes catástrofes com alta tecnologia envolvida revelou 

que  acidentes  tem  sido  causados  por  uma  combinação  de  muitos  fatores,  cujas



 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
 

origens podem ser encontradas na falta por considerar os fatores humanos durante 

fases de concepção e funcionamento do sistema. (REASON, 1997) 

A  partir  da  década  de  90,  reconheceu-se  que  o  ser  humano  não  opera 

isoladamente e sim dentro de um contexto. O foco das investigações passou a ser 

organizacional e a segurança passou a ser percebida de uma perspectiva sistêmica. 

(ICAO, 2009) 
 
 
 
 
1.5. O FATOR HUMANO NOS ACIDENTES AÉREOS 
 
 
 
 

A  importância  do  fator  humano  na  aviação  embora  já  fosse  um  conceito 

conhecido pela indústria ficou patente com o acidente aéreo ocorrido em Tenerife em 

1977 em que a colisão de duas aeronaves no solo causou a morte de 583 pessoas e 

sua analise resultou de uma série de deficiências na adequação de vários aspectos 

ligados ao fator humano. (ICAO, 1989) 

Em 1986 a assembléia da ICAO considerou a segurança de vôo como seu 

principal objetivo e definiu que ―melhorar a segurança de vôo nos estados membros 

os  tornado  mais  conscientes  e  sensíveis  a  importância  dos  fatores  humanos  na 

aviação civil através da oferta de material e medidas desenvolvidos com base nos 

fatores humanos.‖ (ICAO, 1989) 

O reporte do envolvimento do fator humano em acidentes aéreos remonta da 

década de 40 e foi apontado tanto em acidentes como em incidentes aéreos. (ICAO, 

1993) Apesar do reconhecimento de sua importância o progresso tem sido lento na 

adoção de uma abordagem uniforme para a investigação de acidentes. 

A definição inicial dada pela ICAO ao termo ―fator humano‖ considerou que 

poderia ser aplicado a qualquer fator relacionado ao homem, parte mais flexível e 

adaptável do sistema de aviação, mas também a mais vulnerável. (ICAO, 1989) 

As preocupações iniciais do fator humano na aviação foram relacionadas a 

efeitos do ruído, das vibrações, calor, frio e acelerações, fatores ligados a fisiologia 

podem ter gerado a crença de que estava relacionada unicamente a medicina.



 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
 

A expansão da utilização do termo ocorreu através incorporação de aspectos 

cognitivos  das  tarefas  relacionadas  ao  vôo,  envolvendo  aspectos  do  desempenho 

humano: tomada de decisão, processos cognitivos, design de displays e controles, 

cabine de pilotagem e seu layout, comunicação, softwares, mapas, gráficos, domínio 

da documentação da aeronave e, listas de cheque e, passou a ser usado na seleção de 

pessoal, formação e investigação de acidentes. 

O   fator   humano   foi   considerado   como   de   natureza   multidisciplinar, 

compreendendo inicialmente a psicologia, fisiologia e a biologia. A ICAO (1989) 

considerou o termo ―fator humano‖ como sinônimo do termo ergonomia, mas não o 

utiliza  por  avaliar  que   em  alguns   Estados  signatários  pode  ser  interpretado 

estritamente nos estudos das relações com as máquinas. 

Atualmente o conceito usado para definir o fator humano pela ICAO (1989) 

diz respeito: ―as pessoas em seu ambiente de trabalho e de vida, sua relação com as 

maquinas,  equipamentos  e  procedimentos,  sua  relação  com  os  demais  e  seu 

desempenho dentro do sistema de aviação‖. 

Na investigação de acidentes no Brasil o fator humano inicialmente se referia 

apenas  os  aspectos  psicológicos  e  fisiológicos,  tendo  permanecido  desta  forma 

durante mais de 20 anos. Embora em 2008 a nova formatação dos relatórios finais de 

investigação   de   acidentes   tenha  englobado   o   aspecto   operacional,   os   cursos 

destinados a formação de elemento credenciado na investigação do fator humano é 

afeta somente a médicos e psicólogos. (NSCA 3-10, 2008) 

Ainda que exista a recomendação da ICAO (1991) para que a formação de 

todos os pilotos inclua um curso sobre fatores humanos, com pelo menos 35 horas e 

que  maior  ênfase  se  dada  a  este  aspecto  para  os  que  lidam  com  prevenção  e 

investigação de acidentes, são gerentes ou supervisores de atividades operacionais de 

vôo   ou   instrutores   de   vôo,   não   se   observa   na   legislação   brasileira   esta 

obrigatoriedade e nem esta pratica. 

O campo  de fatores  humanos não  se  restringe  a aspectos  psicológicos ou 

médicos, o campo é bem mais amplo há necessidade de uma melhor compreensão de 

sua abrangência.



 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 

1.5.1. A Automação 
 
 
 
 

Em aviação a automação foi inicialmente destinada a estabilizar a atitude das 

aeronaves, durante a 2ª Grande Guerra seu progresso foi rápido e sistemas elétricos e 

eletrônicos passaram a ser usados para fornecer informações sobre diversos sistemas 

na aeronave, sistemas de aterragem e acoplamento do piloto automático. 

A partir da década de 50 com o aumento da velocidade, altitude e capacidade 

das aeronaves passou a haver necessidade de informações bem mais precisas, foram 

introduzidos equipamentos que integram informações, fazendo com que os pilotos 

perdessem de vista os dados brutos. 

A introdução de equipamentos de aviso de proximidade do solo, ou sistemas 

para  evitar  colisão  durante  a  navegação  e  a  introdução  de  equipamentos  de 

navegação  aérea  passaram  a  ser  sentidas  pelas  tripulações  como  dificuldades  a 

medida que os equipamentos se tornaram mais complexos para serem operados. 

A  capacidade  de  utilização  do  espaço  aéreo  e  o  controle  das  aeronaves 

passaram a ser mais eficazes. Um dos objetivos da automação era de tornar a cabine 

mais segura, porem havia também objetivos econômicos, como reduzir o número de 

tripulantes na cabine de 03 para 02 e reduzir o consumo de combustível. (ICAO, 

1992) 

Os  sistemas  de  controle  de  tráfego  aéreo  não  estavam  adaptados  para  a 

capacidade das novas aeronaves e a mudança da função dos pilotos de autoridade 

direta para gestores de sistemas se distanciando cada vez mais da atividade inicial 

passou a ser gerador de novos erros. (ICAO, 1992) 

O impacto tecnológico possui múltiplas dimensões que devem ser avaliadas 

levando em consideração as razões para sua introdução, o gerenciamento da filosofia, 

a cultura, o projeto da organização, a organização do trabalho e os processos de 

desenvolvimento e implementação, para que os resultados sejam adequados. (LIKER 

et al, 1999). 

O papel da gestão tem sido muitas vezes esquecido nas questões relacionadas 

a  automação,  muitos  aspectos  ainda  podem  ser  melhorados  no  que  se  refere  ao



 
 
 

37 
 
 
 
 

desenho do equipamento e configuração, porem é de fundamental importância que 

sejam  considerados  a  adequação  das  políticas  e  o  envolvimento  dos  gestores, 

abordando para isso os operadores. 
 
 
 
 
1.5.2 A Manutenção 
 
 
 
 

A manutenção aeronáutica é um componente essencial do sistema de aviação, 

as exigências e imposições que o setor vem sofrendo se relacionam a pressão do 

tempo  para  realizar  as  tarefas,  o  aumento  de  demanda  e  a  complexidade  das 

aeronaves. 

A segurança na manutenção deve ser dirigida para aspectos relacionados a 

eficiência na prestação dos serviços, a adequação das instalações e ao ambiente de 

trabalho. 

A  contribuição  do  fator  manutenção  nos  acidentes  e  incidentes  tem  sido 

crescente  as  falhas  envolvem  procedimentos   de  rotina  em  operações  diárias 

sugerindo um erro no desenho da tarefa. (ICAO, 1995) 

A falta de direcionamento da analise dos fatores humanos para este setor tem 

sido uma importante lacuna na analise dos acidentes. 

O  ambiente  em  que  se  dá  a  manutenção  e  a  inspeção  pode  ser  muito 

complexo e variado, aumentando as possibilidades de erro. A frota de aviões tem 

ficado mais velha, aumentando as dificuldades de manutenção. 

As  taxas  de  acidentes  após  algumas  décadas  de  utilização  das  aeronaves 

sobem,  o  que  pode  ser  explicado  pela  idade  dos  aparelhos  e  sua  compra  por 

companhias menores que tem dificuldade em conservar o alto nível da manutenção e 

do custo exigido por aeronaves mais velhas. (VALOT, 2008) 

Por  outro  lado  aeronaves  com  novas  tecnologias  entram  a  cada  dia  no 

mercado,  aumentando  a  demanda  por  manutenção  aeronáutica.  Os  novos  aviões 

incorporam  tecnologias  avançadas  como  estruturas  de  materiais  compostos,  ou 

altamente automatizados.



 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
 

A tarefa de manter novas e velhas frotas de aeronaves exige profissionais 

cada vez mais experientes e altamente qualificados com boa formação. No Brasil a 

política  para  formação  desses  profissionais  não  é  clara  ficando  a  cargo  dos 

empregadores formarem sua mão de obra, cabendo ao órgão fiscalizador acompanhar 

e homologar escolas, bem como emitir as habilitações. (RBHA 65) 

Problemas   de   comunicação   têm   sido   apontados   como   um   dos   mais 

significativos  no  universo  da  manutenção  de  aeronaves.  Sem  comunicação  entre 

gestores, fabricantes, despachantes, pilotos, o público o governo e outros, seria difícil 

manter a atividade com segurança. (ICAO, 1995) 

A fim de apoiar os seus operadores, os fabricantes de aeronaves emitem um 

grande número de boletins e recomendações. O idioma adotado é sempre o inglês, 

que pode gerar dificuldades culturais. 

A organização do trabalho é outro aspecto significativo na manutenção, que 

normalmente trabalha em equipes, por turnos e grande parte do trabalho é feito no 

período noturno.  Compartimentos das aeronaves muitas vezes são mal iluminados e 

de difícil acesso. O ruído no ambiente de trabalho é outra variável importante que 

pode causar implicações a saúde com perdas permanentes. 
 
 
 
 
1.5.3. O Controle de Tráfego Aéreo 
 
 
 
 

A atividade de controle de tráfego  aéreo surgiu entre a 1ª e a 2ª Guerra 

Mundial e logo se tornou necessária a sua regulamentação em escala global, esta 

regulamentação  surgiu  em  1994  e  foi  ratificada  pela  ICAO  em  1944,  foram 

estabelecidos então as Regras do Ar e Serviços de Tráfego Aéreo. (ICAO, 1993) 

O sistema de tráfego aéreo tem como objetivo fornecer a segurança, a ordem 

e a rapidez do fluxo de trafego aéreo, nesse sistema o ser humano interage com as 

maquinas  para  cumprir  as  funções  do  sistema.  No  entanto,  normalmente  não 

possuem  todos  a  mesmas  tarefas,  embora  tenham  a  mesma  formação,  possuem 

postos, funções e equipamentos diferentes. (ICAO, 1993)



 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
 

Os desafios do fator humano no sistema de controle de tráfego aéreo não são 

novos,  derivam  de  capacidades  e  limitações,  o  conhecimento  de  como  os  seres 

humanos   percebe,   sentem,   aprendem,   compreendem,   interpretam,   processam, 

lembram e usam as informações se aplicam ao desempenho dentro do sistema. 

O  controlador  de  tráfego  aéreo  precisa  ter  um  entendimento  de  como  o 

sistema de controle foi concebido e pode funcionar, a forma de interagir com ele e 

contribuir com seus conhecimentos profissionais. 

Nos últimos anos temos visto o crescimento do tráfego aéreo mundial e a 

introdução de um número de aeronaves maiores e mais rápida, juntamente com o do 

número de aeronaves menores, exigindo que o controlador lide com uma variedade 

cada vez maior de aeronaves. 

A  sobrecarga  dos  sistemas  tem  sido  imposta  pelos  sistemas  de  gestão, 

exigindo cada vez mais que a experiência e conhecimento sejam necessários para o 

desempenho da atividade. Outros fatores podem agravar o desempenho da atividade 

como a quantidade de controladores necessários para devido ao aumento de tráfego 

aéreo; a diminuição da separação entre as aeronaves, permitida pela nova tecnologia, 

exigindo  uma  intervenção  mais  rápida  e  precisa  do  controlador,  dificuldades  de 

comunicação devido a ruídos ou idioma. (ICAO, 1993) 

As   informações   necessárias   sobre   uma   aeronave   são   de   dois   tipos, 

quantitativas  e  qualitativas.  As  quantitativas  podem  ser  geralmente  expressas 

digitalmente,  já  as  qualitativas  como,  por  exemplo,  a  confiabilidade,  validade  e 

fiabilidade  dos  dados,  não  é  normalmente  apresentada,  depende  de  atualização, 

exatidão, precisão, dos tipos de erro, falhas ou degradação a que possa ser suscetível. 

Aspectos que devem ser contemplados no fator humano no sistema de tráfego 

aéreo compreendem as interfaces do local de trabalho desde as edificações, layout 

das salas, estações de trabalho, torres de controle, consoles, aspectos 

antropométricos, o ambiente físico, displays visuais, comunicações, a proficiência, os 

aspectos ligados a automação, seleção, treinamento, aspectos ligados ao estresse e ao 

trabalho em equipes.



 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
 

1.5.4 Fatores Culturais 
 
 
 
 

A maioria das investigações normalmente mostra o que ocorreu e quando e 

dão poucas explicações sobre como e porque o acidente aconteceu. As investigações 

eram realizadas por pesquisadores generalistas que realizavam toda a investigação, 

consultando quando necessário os especialistas. (ICAO, 1993) 

Para que houvesse uma mudança neste cenário seria importante reconhecer 

que  as  pessoas  não  agem  sozinhas  de  forma  isolada,  elas  são  parte  de  uma 

organização, que funciona de forma contínua com uma hierarquia, com divisões de 

trabalho. O pessoal operacional não funciona sem conexão com a organização e suas 

ações são um reflexo desta organização. (HELMERICH e MERRITT, 1998) 

A partir da perspectiva da organização a segurança pode ser vista como um 

método de conservar todas as formas de recursos, incluindo o controle de custos. 

Permite  que  as  organizações  prossigam  em  seus  objetivos  de  produção  com  o 

mínimo dano ao equipamento e ao pessoal. Em aviação existem elementos de risco 

que não podem ser eliminados, mas podem ser controlados através de programas de 

gerenciamentos de riscos. Estes programas são essenciais para a adequada tomada de 

decisões que se baseiam na cultura da organização. (REASON, 1997) 

As  investigações  de  acidentes  aéreos  têm  demonstrado  que  a  cultura 

organizacional   influência   profundamente   os   comportamentos,   permitindo   ou 

impedindo a violação de normas. (ICAO, 1993) 

A aviação é uma das grandes responsáveis pela globalização, fazendo com 

que fosse possível chegar a qualquer parte do mundo num tempo bastante reduzido e 

interferindo  em  alguns  referenciais  de  nosso  tempo,  da  mesma  forma  como 

proporcionou um grande intercambio entre as culturas ela é afetada diretamente por 

este fator. 

O contexto cultural inclui aspectos econômicos, políticos, geográficos, físicos 

e  sociais,  que  fazem  decidir  pelo  tamanho  da  clientela,  pela  acessibilidade  dos 

preços, pelo apoio a infra-estrutura aeronáutica, pela familiaridade com a tecnologia, 

pelos valores e as expectativas.



 
 
 

41 
 
 
 
 

Quando  nos  deparamos  com  contextos  culturais  diferentes  podemos  nos 

defrontar com algumas incertezas e fazer com que o contexto possa fazer sentido. A 

aviação é por sua própria natureza multicultural, projetos de aeronaves são feitos 

para serem operados em qualquer parte do mundo, assim como controladores de vôo 

se  comunicam  com  pilotos  estrangeiros  e  que  voam  em  nosso  espaço  aéreo, 

transportando cargas e passageiros de todos os lugares do mundo. O quadro 1 é um 

exemplo das interações que podem ocorrer em uma operação rotineira na aviação 

comercial. 

No anexo 3 mostra um quadro comparativo da interação cultural que ocorre 

na rotina de uma operação na aviação. 

Muitas vezes as interações são apenas entre duas partes relativamente iguais, 

que  decidem  em  que  medida  as  adaptações  culturais  seriam  realizadas.  Existem 

entretanto outros problemas que ultrapassam estas decisões, os maiores fabricantes 

de aeronaves estão nos Estados Unidos e na Europa Ocidental, o que força outros 

fabricantes  a  seguir  suas  normas  de  certificações,  bem  como  são  os  maiores 

mercados, influenciando também as normas para a aviação.  (ICAO, 2004) 

Grande parte das pesquisas e tecnologias desenvolvidas na segurança de vôo 

ocorrem no eixo Estados Unidos - Europa Ocidental, as melhorias apresentadas não 

são iguais para todas as culturas, o que torna a percepção que em determinados locais 

a aviação é menos segura, mostrando que muitas vezes as soluções servem apenas 

para as culturas pesquisadas. (ICAO, 2004) 

A  aviação  como  um  sistema  global  sofre  um  constante  esforço  para 

transcender os aspectos multiculturais, porem é bastante evidente que esta subjugada 

a um modelo cultural dominante e suas práticas. 
 
 
 
 
1.6 AS AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO DE ACIDENTES 
 
 
 
 

As tentativas de identificar, analisar e compreender os problemas que levaram 

à  degradação  do  desempenho  humano  e,  portanto  ao  acidente  são  por  vezes



 
 
 

42 
 
 
 
 

incoerentes,  normalmente  os  relatórios  param  na  explicação  de  como  o  acidente 

ocorreu. 

A  filosofia   adotada   na  investigação   do   acidente  aeronáutico   é  muito 

importante para determinar a sua direção. A ausência de crédito na importância dos 

fatores  humanos  continuaria  a  negligenciar  os  esforços  na  obtenção  de  uma 

investigação mais sistemática e completa. 

A ausência de uma investigação independente tem o potencial de criação de 

por  um  conflito  de  interesses  dentro  da  organização,  podendo  ser  gerador  de 

relutância por parte dos legisladores no sentido de investigar questões relacionadas 

ao seu próprio papel. (ICAO, 1991) 

A ICAO, através de seus estatutos, determina os direitos, deveres, direitos e 

participação   em   investigações.   As   investigações   são   conduzidas   pelo   órgão 

responsável  que  irá  desfrutar  a  independência  e  a  livre  autoridade  sobre  sua 

condução.  O Estado, que tem  a responsabilidade da investigação,  tem  também  a 

responsabilidade de divulgar o relatório final com a maior brevidade possível. 

O Relatório Final deverá conter as recomendações de segurança e o conjunto 

de  ações  necessárias  a  serem  tomadas  para  reforçar  a  segurança  da  aviação.   O 

formato do relatório final segue o processo de investigação contendo: informação 

fatual, análise, conclusões e recomendações de segurança. 
 
 
 
 
1.6.1 As Agências da União Européia 
 
 
 
 
1.6.1.1 European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) 
 
 
 
 

Todas  as  informações  sobre  a  EASA  foram  encontradas  em  seu  sitio 

eletrônico na internet. 

A criação da EASA surgiu do constante aumento do tráfego aéreo, revelando- 

se uma iniciativa necessária a nível europeu, se destinou a manter o transporte aéreo



 
 
 

43 
 
 
 
 

seguro e sustentável, enquanto que às autoridades nacionais couberam as funções 

operacionais,  como  a certificação  individual  de aeronaves  ou  o  licenciamento  de 

pilotos. 

A EASA constitui a viga mestra da estratégia da União Européia em matéria 

de segurança da aviação. A sua missão consiste em promover as normas comuns de 

segurança e proteção ambiental no setor da aviação civil. 

Sua  atividade  teve  início  em  2003,  tendo  por  base  o  Regulamento  n.º 

1592/2002 do Parlamento Europeu e do Conselho. Enquanto organismo da União 

Européia  (UE),  é  independente  e  regido  pelo  direito  comunitário,  é  responsável 

perante os Estados-Membros e as instituições da UE. 

O Conselho de Administração, constituído por representantes dos Estados - 

Membros e da Comissão Européia, que aprova o orçamento e o programa de trabalho 

da Agência. 

A indústria da aviação participa ativamente no trabalho da Agência, através 

de  uma  série  de  comitês  consultivos  e  de  aconselhamento.  A  Agência  dispõe 

igualmente de uma Câmara de Recurso independente e tem sua sede em Colônia, na 

Alemanha. 

A EASA possui estreitas relações de trabalho com entidades homólogas a 

nível  mundial,  incluindo  a  ICAO,  a  FAA  nos  Estados  Unidos  da  América  e  as 

autoridades da aviação do Canadá, do Brasil, de Israel, da China e da Federação 

Russa. 

A  Agência  desenvolve  regras  de  segurança  e  ambientais  comuns  a  nível 

europeu. Monitora a aplicação de normas mediante inspeções nos Estados-Membros 

e disponibiliza a perícia técnica, a formação e a investigação necessárias. As suas 

principais atribuições são: 

   Regulamentação:  elaboração  de  legislação  de  segurança  e  prestação  de 

aconselhamento técnico à Comissão Européia e aos Estados - Membros; 

   Inspeções, formação e programas de normalização, tendo em vista assegurar 

a  aplicação  uniforme  da  legislação  européia  em  matéria  de  segurança  da 

aviação em todos os Estados-Membros;



 
 
 

44 
 
 
 
 

   Certificação de tipo no domínio da segurança e da compatibilidade ambiental 

de aeronaves, motores e peças; 

   Certificação e supervisão de entidades de projeto, produção e manutenção de 

aeronaves em Estados terceiros; 

   Recolhimento  e  análise  de  dados,  bem  como  investigação  no  intuito  de 

melhorar a segurança da aviação. 

   Gerenciar  o  programa  Safety  Assessment  Of  Foreign  Aircraft  (SAFA)  da 

Comunidade Européia, em nome da Comissão Européia. 

O trabalho da EASA é o de assegurar os mais elevados níveis de segurança da 

aviação civil e ocorre através da certificação dos produtos da aviação, a aprovação 

das  organizações   para  prestar  serviços  de  aviação,   do  desenvolvimento  e  a 

implementação de um quadro regulamentar europeu normalizado. 

A Agência tem como responsabilidade ser geradora da cultura de segurança, 

através do trabalho nas áreas de investigação de acidentes, análise de segurança e dos 

programas de investigação. 

A análise de segurança e o Departamento de Pesquisa atuam como o ponto 

focal para a coordenação de segurança da aviação e das recomendações de segurança 

de vôo. São responsáveis pelo acompanhamento das ocorrências em que foi posta em 

perigo a segurança da aviação, bem como a coordenação interna das ações corretivas 

que devem ser realizadas, incluindo as ações propostas em termos de recomendações 

de segurança. 

O departamento realiza estudos e fornece relatórios sobre a segurança de vôo 

na Europa e no mundo. Dados sobre o sistema de aviação e de acidentes, incidentes e 

ocorrências, são recolhidos, classificados e armazenados e formam a base para seus 

estudos. 

Para conseguir cumprir suas responsabilidades na área de investigações, a 

EASA tem no seu organograma (anexo 4)  uma Seção de Investigação de Acidentes, 

que é  responsável  pelo  acompanhamento  de ocorrências  em  que a  segurança  foi 

posta em perigo. 

Suas principais atribuições são: 

   Acompanhar o progresso das investigações de acidentes e incidentes;



 
 
 

45 
 
 
 
 

   Ser representado nas comissões de investigação e recolher as informações 

relacionadas às ocorrências; 

   Atender as recomendações Segurança dirigidas à Agência, 

   Fornecer relatórios e estatísticas sobre as recomendações de segurança; 

   Manter uma boa coordenação com os organismos europeus de investigações 

de acidente. 

 Identificar deficiências e disseminar as informações relacionadas à segurança 

de vôo. 
 
 
 
 

1.6.1.2 – European Coordination Centre for Accidents and Incidents Reports 

(ECCAIRS) 
 
 
 
 

Todas  as  informações  sobre  a  ECCAIRS  foram  encontradas  em  seu  sitio 

eletrônico na internet. 

Em  1989,  um  estudo  na  área  de  investigação  de  acidentes  e  incidentes  e 

sistemas de comunicação foram iniciados em nome da Comissão da Comunidade 

Européia.   Uma   das   conclusões   do   estudo   sugere   reunir   os   conhecimentos 

provenientes dos relatórios de incidentes existentes nas autoridades aeronáuticas dos 

diferentes Estados-Membros. Como os sistemas existentes não eram compatíveis, o 

estudo recomendou a criação de um centro europeu de coordenação dos sistemas de 

notificação obrigatória de incidentes. 

Em 1993, o ―Joint Research Centre” (JRC), a pedido da Comissão Européia 

iniciou um estudo de viabilidade. O principal objetivo do estudo foi a implementação 

piloto de um sistema de comunicação de incidentes automatizado, capaz de recolher 

várias informações existentes de fontes incompatíveis. Um segundo objetivo foi o de 

oferecer  uma  solução  para  os  Estados-Membros  que  não  possuíam  um  sistema 

automatizado no momento. O projeto foi chamado ECCAIRS.



 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 

Em 1995, a viabilidade da abordagem da ECCAIRS foi demonstrada através 

da integração, a título experimental, de mais de 40.000 ocorrências provenientes da 

Escandinávia, do Reino Unido e da Alemanha. 

De 1995 até 1999, a primeira versão de produção ECCAIRS foi compilada. 

Desde o final de 1998, este programa foi distribuído para as autoridades. Em 1999, 

um  novo  desenho  do  original  Reporting  System  foi  iniciado  para  apoiar  novas 

normas  da  ICAO  e,  em  agosto  de  2003,  a  nova  versão  do  ECCAIRS  foi 

disponibilizada para a comunidade e tem sido amplamente adotada. 
 
 
 
 
1.6.2 As Agências Americanas 
 
 
 
 

A investigação de acidentes aéreos nos Estados Unidos não é composta de 

uma única agência e sim de varias agências que interagem e se completam tornando 

a investigação mais sistêmica e completa. 
 
 
 
 
1.6.2.1 The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
 
 
 
 

O FAA, no começo chamado de ―Federal Aviation Act” se deu em 1926 com 

o ―Air Commerce Act” considerado o início da regulamentação da aviação. Esta lei 

deu ao Departamento do Comércio da Aeronáutica a responsabilidade de certificar 

pilotos e aeronaves e fez as regras iniciais da indústria aeronáutica. Foi um passo 

importante na regulação da aviação, porque ele fez os Estados Unidos reconhecem o 

potencial do transporte aéreo comercial. (WELLS e RODRIGUES, 2003) 

Em  1940,  o  presidente  Franklin  Roosevelt  a  divide  em  duas  agências,  a 

“Civil  Aeronautics  Administration”  (CAA)  e  “Civil  Aeronautics  Board”  (CAB). 

CAA ficou como responsável pelo controle de tráfego aéreo, certificação de pilotos e 

aeronaves, aplicação de normas de segurança e o desenvolvimento de aerovias.



 
 
 

47 
 
 
 
 

Ao CAB foi confiada a regulamentação da segurança, os inquéritos sobre 

acidentes e a regulação econômica das companhias aéreas. Ambas as organizações 

fazem parte do Departamento de Comércio. (WELLS e RODRIGUES, 2003) 

Com o aparecimento do jato, em 1958 e uma série de colisões em vôo, a 

transferência da legislação CAA foi impulsionada para um novo órgão independente, 

a FAA, ampliando a autoridade da aviação relacionada aos perigos da aviação, que 

deu a ela inteira responsabilidade pelo desenvolvimento e manutenção de um sistema 

comum civil-militar de navegação aérea e de controle do tráfego aéreo. 

Em  1966,  o  Congresso  autorizou  a  criação  do  Departamento  Federal 

Transportes e do ―Department of Transportation” (DOT), que iniciou as operações 

em  1967  e que  tornou  a FAA  um  dos  seus  diversos setores,  passando  a  função 

investigação de acidentes o então criado National Transportation Safety Board 

(NTSB) 

Em 2000, uma nova legislação levou a estabelecer uma nova ação, com base 

no desempenho e com a responsabilidade pela organização dos serviços de tráfego 

aéreo dentro da agência. Após os ataques terroristas de 11 de setembro de 2001, o 

Congresso criou uma a ―Transportation Security Administration”, que sucedeu FAA 

como a agência com a responsabilidade principal pela segurança da aviação civil. 

(WELLS e RODRIGUES, 2003) 
 
 
 
 
1.6.2.2 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
 
 
 
 

O OSHA foi criado pelo presidente Nixon em 1970, para garantir condições 

de trabalho seguro e saudável para homens e mulheres, autorizando a execução de 

normas elaboradas, ao abrigo da lei, através do apoio e incentivo aos Estados em 

seus  esforços  para  garantir  condições  de  trabalho  seguro  e  saudável,  através  do 

fornecimento  de  investigação,  informação,  educação  e  formação  no  domínio  da 

segurança e saúde ocupacional. Está ligado ao Ministério do Trabalho. (WELLS e 

RODRIGUES, 2003)



 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
 

O  mesmo  ato  criou  o  ―National  Institute  for  Occupacional  Safety  and 

Health” (NIOSH), que é o órgão federal responsável pela realização de estudos e de 

fazer recomendações para a prevenção de lesões e doenças relacionadas ao trabalho e 

esta ligada ao Departamento de Saúde e Serviços Humanos. 

Em conjunto com a FAA, desenvolve programas relacionados à Certificação 

dos Aeroportos onde atua em aspectos relacionados aos requisitos gerais como: o 

conteúdo dos manuais de certificação dos aeroportos e suas alterações; o manuseio e 

armazenamento de materiais e substâncias perigosas; pedestres e veículos terrestres e 

certificação de aeroportos que operam aeronaves com mais de 30 lugares, ou que a 

FAA exija que a administradora tenha um certificado. 

Em conjunto com membros da indústria da aviação e do Conselho Nacional 

de Segurança, o OSHA trabalha para fornecer aos empregadores e trabalhadores da 

indústria aérea com informação e assistência para ajudar a criar um ambiente  de 

trabalho seguro e saudável. (WELLS e RODRIGUES, 2003) 
 
 
 
 
1.6.2.3 Environamental Protection Agency (EPA) 
 
 
 
 

Em julho de 1970, a Casa Branca e o Congresso trabalharam em conjunto 

para cria e estabelecer a EPA, com a atribuição de reparar os danos já causados ao 

meio ambiente e estabelecer novos critérios para orientar os americanos no sentido 

de tornar o ambiente mais limpo. 

O  seu  maior  impacto  em  relação  à  aviação  está  na  criação  do  ―National 

Environmental Policy Act‖ (NEPA), que exige que as agências federais integrem os 

valores  ambientais  em  seus  processos  de  tomada  de  decisão,  considerando  os 

impactos  ambientais  das  suas ações  propostas  e  alternativas  razoáveis  para essas 

ações,  principalmente  no  caso  da  aviação  em  relação  a  aeroportos,  materiais 

utilizados  em  aeronaves  e  a  poluição  do  ar,  controle  de  ruídos.  (WELLS  e 

RODRIGUES, 2003)



 
 
 

49 
 
 
 
 

1.6.2.4 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
 
 
 
 

Todas  as  informações  sobre  o  NTSB  foram  encontradas  em  seu  sítio 

eletrônico na internet. 

O NTSB é uma agência de investigação de acidentes federal e independente. 

Desde a sua criação em 1967, sua missão foi a de determinar as prováveis causas de 

acidentes de transporte e de formular recomendações para melhorar a segurança de 

transporte. 

Suas investigações envolvem todos os acidentes da aviação civil americana, 

de trens e ferrovias, rodovias, grandes acidentes marítimos, acidentes com gasodutos 

e acidentes que resultam em liberação de resíduos perigosos em qualquer modalidade 

de transporte. 

O ato de sua criação lhe conferiu autoridade para: realizar estudos especiais 

sobre  os  problemas  de  segurança;  manter  um  censo  oficial  de  acidentes  aéreos; 

avaliar   a   eficácia   das   agências   governamentais   envolvendo   a   segurança   no 

transporte; avaliar as salvaguardas utilizadas no transporte de materiais perigosos; 

avaliar a eficácia das respostas de emergência em acidentes com materiais perigosos; 

revisar os apelos de aviadores e marinheiros mercantes cujos certificados tenham 

sido revogados ou suspensos; revisar os apelos de pilotos e mecânicos que tenham 

sofrido sanções ao serem avaliados pelo FAA. 

Cabe ao NTSB conduzir equipes americanas em acidentes de companhias 

aéreas estrangeiras para assistir autoridades estrangeiras com relação às disposições 

da ICAO. Possui a responsabilidade de coordenar os recursos do governo federal e 

de outras organizações, a fim de apoiar os esforços das autoridades locais e estaduais 

e as companhias aéreas na assistência dos sinistrados e suas famílias em acidentes 

aéreos. 

A condução das investigações dos acidentes se dá de forma a garantir que se 

concentrem  apenas  na  melhoria  da  segurança  dos  transportes,  na  análise  de 

informações  fatuais  e  na  determinação  da  provável  causa  e  que  não  pode  ser 

utilizadas como prova em tribunal.



 
 
 

50 
 
 
 
 

1.6.3 As Agências Brasileiras 
 
 
 
 
1.6.3.1   Centro   de   Investigação   e   Prevenção   de   Acidentes   Aeronáuticos 

(CENIPA) 
 
 
 
 

As atividades de investigação e prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos no Brasil 

remontam  à década de 20.  Com  o advento  da aviação  militar,  tanto  na Marinha 

quanto  no  Exército,  as  investigações  dos  acidentes  ou  incidentes  aeronáuticos 

buscavam sempre a apuração de responsabilidade, através de um inquérito. (COSTA, 

2000) 

Com a criação do Ministério da Aeronáutica, em 1941, essas investigações 

foram  unificadas  sob  a  jurisdição  da  antiga  Inspetoria  Geral  da  Aeronáutica  e 

passaram a sofrer um processo de constante evolução. 

Da aviação civil brasileira, então incipiente, não se tem muitas notícias. Sabe- 

se que até o início dos anos 30 não existia forma alguma de controle ou registro das 

ocorrências. 

Em  1951,  nasceu  o  Serviço  de  Investigação  e  Prevenção  de  Acidentes 

Aeronáuticos  (SIPAER)  e,  em  1965,  passou  a  realizar  investigações,  visando  a 

prevenção, e, a partir de 1966, dividiu a análise dos fatores em operacional, humano 

e material. (COSTA, 2000) 

Em 1971, através do Decreto Nº. 69.565, nasceu o Centro de Investigação e 

Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos - CENIPA - como órgão central do SIPAER, 

que passa à denominação de sistema e não mais serviço. (COSTA, 2000) 

O SIPAER tem como atribuição ―planejar, orientar, coordenar, controlar e 

executar as atividades de investigação e de prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos‖, de 

acordo com o que prevê o Código Brasileiro do Ar no seu artigo 86. (Lei n° 7.565, de 

19  de  dez  de  1986).  A  palavra  inquérito  foi  incondicionalmente  substituída.  As 

investigações passaram a ser realizadas com um único objetivo: a "prevenção de 

acidentes aeronáuticos".



 
 
 

51 
 
 
 
 

Após a extinção do DAC, o CENIPA criou serviços regionais, denominados 

Serviço Regional de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos (SERIPA) 

que   funcionam   de   acordo   com   a   subdivisão   dos   Comandos   Regionais   da 

Aeronáutica. 

Cabe  ao  CENIPA  a  investigação  de  acidentes  que  envolvem  aeronaves 

estrangeiras  que tenha  ocorrido em  solo  brasileiro e das  aeronaves  do  transporte 

aéreo  regular.  Os  demais  tipos  de  operação  e  aeronaves  são  conduzidos  pelos 

serviços regionais. 

Uma  investigação  conduzida  pelo  SIPAER  tem  a  finalidade  única  de 

promover a prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos, tem precedência sobre qualquer 

outra   investigação   que   venha   a   ser   realizada   em   decorrência   do   mesmo 

acontecimento.  Tal  precedência  tem  por  finalidade  a  preservação  de  indícios  de 

fundamental importância à prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos. (NSCA 3-6) 
 
 
 
 
1.6.3.2 Agência Nacional da Aviação Civil (ANAC) 
 
 
 
 

A ANAC tem sua origem no do Departamento de Aviação Civil (DAC), que 

eram estabelecidas no art. 18 do Anexo I do Decreto nº 5.196, de 26 de agosto de 

2004, que dispunha: ―ao Departamento de Aviação Civil compete planejar, gerenciar 

e controlar as  atividades relacionadas com a aviação civil‖. Portanto, em virtude 

dessa competência, o DAC qualificava-se como ―autoridade aeronáutica‖, exercendo, 

por  via  de  conseqüência,  as  atividades  relacionadas  a  essa  função  pelo  Código 

Brasileiro de Aeronáutica (Lei nº 7.565). 

Com  o  advento  da  Lei  nº  11.182,  de  2005,  a  atividade  de  autoridade 

aeronáutica foi transferida, com todas as suas responsabilidades, para a ANAC, pelo 

disposto no §2º do art. 8º desse dispositivo legal, confirmado pelo texto do art. 3º do 

Anexo I ao Decreto nº 5.731, de 20 de março de 2006. 

Como   agência   reguladora   independente,   os   seus   atos   administrativos 

objetivam: a) manter a continuidade na prestação de um serviço público de âmbito



 
 
 

52 
 
 
 
 

nacional;  b)  preservar  o  equilíbrio  econômico-financeiro  dos  agentes  públicos  e 

privados responsáveis pelos diversos segmentos do sistema de aviação civil; c) zelar 

pelo interesse dos usuários; d) cumprir a legislação pertinente ao sistema por ela 

regulado, considerados, em especial, o Código Brasileiro de Aeronáutica, a Lei das 

Concessões, a Lei Geral das Agências Reguladoras e a Lei de criação da ANAC. 

Possui  em  seu  regimento  interno  uma  Gerência-Geral  de  Investigação  e 

Prevenção  de  Acidentes  Aeronáuticos  (GGIP):  composta  de  uma.  Gerência  de 

Controle  dos  Riscos  Aeronáuticos  (GCRA);  e  de  uma  Gerência  de  Pesquisa  e 

Análise de Tendências (GPAT). 

A GGIP é um elo do CENIPA a qual tem a função de assessoria à Direção da 

Agência sobre os assuntos de Prevenção e Investigação de Acidentes Aeronáuticos 

no âmbito da Aviação Civil. 
 
 
 
 

1.6.3.3 Comissão Tripartite de Saúde e Segurança no Trabalho (CT – SST) 
 
 
 
 

A Comissão Tripartite, criada a partir da lei interministerial nº 152 de 13 Mai 

08,  é  composta  de  representantes  do  Governo,  das  áreas  de  Previdência  Social, 

Trabalho   e   Emprego   e   Saúde,   de   representantes   dos   trabalhadores   e   dos 

empregadores e tem como objetivo, entre outros, revisar e ampliar a proposta da 

Política Nacional de Segurança e Saúde do Trabalhador - PNSST, de forma a atender 

as Diretrizes da Organização Internacional do Trabalho (OIT) e o Plano de Ação 

Global em Saúde do Trabalhador, aprovado na 60ª Assembléia Mundial da Saúde, 

ocorrida em maio de 2007. 

Tem  como  objetivo  propor  o  aperfeiçoamento  do  sistema  nacional  de 

segurança e saúde no trabalho por meio da definição de papéis e de mecanismos de 

interlocução permanente entre seus componentes; e elaborar um Programa Nacional 

de Saúde e Segurança no Trabalho, com definição de estratégias e planos de ação 

para sua implementação, monitoramento, avaliação e revisão periódica, no âmbito 

das competências do Trabalho, da Saúde e da Previdência Social.



 
 
 

53 
 
 
 
 

De acordo com o Decreto n° 4.552, de 27 de dezambro de 2002, que aprovou 

o  Regulamento  de  Inspeção  do  Trabalho  (RIT)  estabeleceu  a  competencia  dos 

Auditores-Fiscais  do  Trabalho,  analisar  e  investigar  as  causas  dos  acidentes  de 

trabalho. 

A  Comissão  Interna  de  Prevenção  de  Acidentes  (CIPA)  é  uma  comissão 

composta por representantes do empregador e dos empregados e tem como missão a 

preservação da saúde e da integridade física dos trabalhadores e de todos aqueles que 

interagem com a empresa. A Norma Regulamentadora número 5 (NR n° 5) inclui 

como   obrigatório,   o   treinamento   dos   integrantes   de   uma   CIPA   em   alguma 

metodologia  de  investigação  e  análise  de  acidentes  e  doenças  do  trabalho,  não 

estabelecendo um método padronizado. (NR n° 5) 

O  Ministério  do  Trabalho  não  sugere  a  adoção  de  nenhum  método  de 

investigação de acidentes, informando apenas em seu Manual da CIPA, na parte 

pertinente ao treinamento que: 

É  importante  que  o  método  escolhido  seja  participativo  e  que  se  proponha a  buscar 
causas   intervenientes,   com   o   objetivo   de   eliminá-las   ou   de   inserir   barreiras 
protetoras, e não com o objetivo de classificar  de forma simplória o acidente, que é 
sempre complexo, e muito menos de buscar configuras culpados. (p.23) 
 

O mesmo documento sugere ainda que sejam estudados casos clássicos de 

acidentes que tenham ocorrido na empresa ou similares, deixando a cargo da própria 

empresa realizar este treinamento, ou escolher outro órgão que o faça. 

No  site  do  Ministério  do  Trabalho  –  www.mte.gov.br,  estão  disponíveis 

publicações relacionadas ao tema apenas com caráter educativo. 

Embora   a   CT-SST   seja   interministerial,   não   mantém   vinculo   com   o 

Ministério da Defesa, no caso de acidente de trabalho ser um acidente aeronáutico, 

poderão ocorrer investigações paralelas. 
 
 
 
 
1.7 ASPECTOS TEÓRICOS RELATIVOS ÀS CAUSAS DE ACIDENTES 

AÉREOS



 
 
 

54 
 
 
 
 

As práticas de investigação de acidentes compreendem diferentes aspectos 

que englobam as definições de risco e segurança, as bases teóricas, os sistemas de 

segurança, as análises estatísticas e os profissionais envolvidos. 

Grande parte das práticas desenvolvidas provavelmente tenha sido originada 

da teoria de Heinrich, que foi um dos pioneiros no campo da prevenção. A indicação 

da palavra ―científica‖ como subtítulo, em sua obra Industrial Accident Prevention: 

A  Scientific  Approach  indica  seu  crédito  na  prática  científica  para  a  aplicação  e 

desenvolvimento da prevenção.  (MANUELE, 2003). 

Os estudos de acidentes aéreos estão fundamentados em teorias que analisam 

separadamente  os  fatores  contribuintes  dos  acidentes,  levando  a  uma  conclusão 

fragmentada  que  conduz  o  investigador  a  enfatizar  a  falha  humana  quando  não 

houver   indicadores   de   problemas   técnicos   nem   operacionais.   (ALMEIDA   E 

JACKSON FLIHO, 2007). 

A abordagem utilizada em uma investigação ajuda o investigador a identificar 

as   causas   dentro   de   um   complexo   sistema   aéreo,   permitindo   uma   melhor 

compreensão de como diversos componentes do sistema interagiram para resultar no 

acidente  e  apontam  o  caminho  para  as  medidas  corretivas,  estas  abordagens  são 

bastante diversas. 
 
 
 
 
1.7.1 O Modelo 5-M 
 
 
 
 

O  modelo  5-M  é  assim  chamado  por  incluir  os  seguintes  fatores:  men, 

machine,  medium,  mission  and  management,  (homem,  máquina,  meio,  missão  e 

gestão), usado para analisar a natureza dos acidentes na indústria de transportes. Este 

conceito foi desenvolvido por T. P. WRIGHT da Cornell University, foi o primeiro a 

introduzir o conceito da tríade: homem- meio- máquina na aviação, por volta de 

1940. O quarto ―M ―(management) foi agregado em 1965 e o quinto (mission) em 

1976. (WELL e RODRIGUES, 2003)



 
 
 

55 
 
 
 
 

Este modelo incorpora um esquema de três círculos interligados e um todo 

englobando  círculo  como  representado  na  figura  3.  Em  cada  um  dos  pequenos 

círculos, são colocados o "homem", a "máquina" e o "meio". O grande círculo é 

rotulado "gestão". O espaço no meio que todos eles compartilham é denominado 

"Missão" e é o objetivo que os quatro M têm em comum.  (WELL e RODRIGUES, 

2003). 

Figura 3 – Modelo 5-M. (Well e Rodrigues, 2003) 
 

Gestão 
 
 
 
Homem 
 
 
 

Missão 
 

Máquina Meio 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Os desafios da indústria aeronáutica, a partir do 3º milênio, estão voltados em 

atender  a  grande  demanda  de  passageiros  que  se  utiliza  do  transporte  aéreo, 

envolvendo não somente a evolução tecnológica das aeronaves, mas também todo o 

sistema de suporte envolvendo a infra-estrutura aeroportuária e o controle de tráfego 

aéreo. 

Considerando a complexidade envolvida no sistema aeronáutico, o modelo 

5M descrito por WELL e RODRIGUES (2003) considera que se deve construir um 

sistema  rígido  que  garanta  a  qualidade  desde  a  cabine  do  piloto,  passando  pela 

manutenção  e  pelo  controle  de  tráfego  aéreo.  Analisa  cada  um  dos  fatores, 

considerando as seguintes categorias: 

   Man  (homem)  –  Considera  não  somente  o  piloto  e  sim  todas  as  pessoas 

inseridas  no  sistema  da  aviação.  Analisa  os  aspectos  que  conduziram  aos 

comportamentos  que  resultaram  nas  falhas  humanas,  incluindo:  aspectos



 
 
 

56 
 
 
 
 

individuais:   físicos   e   mentais;   fadiga;   drogas;   treinamento;   rotinas   e 

distrações. 

   Machine  (máquina)  –  Os  aspectos  relacionados  à  máquina  não  englobam 

apenas o projeto, fabricação e manutenção, mas também fadiga de materiais e 

componentes, certificações, concepções de design que minimizam os erros e 

as limitações humanas do operador. 

   Medium  (meio)  –  A  análise  divide  o  ambiente  em  natural  e  artificial.  O 

ambiente natural engloba o clima, a topografia e outros fenômenos naturais e 

suas  manifestações.  O  artificial  pode  ser  físico,  incluindo  o  controle  de 

tráfego  aéreo  e  aeroportos  e  os  não  físicos  que englobam  os  sistemas  de 

software, legislação e regulamentos. 

   Mission (missão) – Diferentes operações envolvem diferentes riscos, portanto 

o propósito da operação deve ser analisado, pois pode se refletir no acidente 

de diversas maneiras. 

   Management   (gerenciamento)   –   Diversos  aspectos   da   segurança   e   da 

prevenção  em  qualquer  organização  dependem  da  sua  administração  que 

determina  a  distribuição  de  recursos  e,  que  tem  um  efeito  profundo  na 

qualidade do desenvolvimento dos programas de segurança e da cultura da 

organização. 

O modelo teórico 5-M pode ser identificado no emblema do CENIPA (figura 

4), que faz referência direta a tríade Homem, Meio e Máquina, que sugere, embora 

não existam referências documentais, influenciar a filosofia adotada no Sistema de 

Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos (SIPAER). 

Figura 4 – Emblema do CENIPA



 
 
 

57 
 
 
 
 

1.7.2 Modelo SHEL 
 
 
 
 

O  Modelo  SHEL  exprime  as  relações  e  interdependências  de  diferentes 

componentes  sistêmicos.  Por  um  lado,  o  componente  humano  e,  por  outro,  a 

influência  das  condições  ambientais.  EDWARDS  (1972)  considerou  que  são 

sistemas sócio-técnicos e estão sempre moldados por outros componentes. Portanto, 

qualquer alteração de um componente causa impacto nos outros.   As combinações 

não existem no vácuo, elas sempre operam em um contexto de reformas econômicas, 

políticas,  históricas  ou  sócio-culturais.  Em  sua  concepção  original  o  modelo  se 

assemelhava bastante aos conceitos de homem-meio e máquina. 

O  modelo  é  o  adotado  pela  ICAO  para  a  análise  dos  fatores  humanos, 

considerado útil por permitir uma abordagem gradual, auxiliando na compreensão de 

cada um dos fatores. Um esquema prático para ilustrar este modelo conceitual está 

representado na figura 5 e usa blocos para representar os diferentes componentes do 

fator humano. Este modelo é adotado pela ICAO para análise dos fatores humanos. 

(ICAO, 2009). 

O  nome  SHEL  é  uma  sigla  que  deriva  das  letras  iniciais  dos  seus 

componentes, onde o significado do ―S‖ é Software (processos, treinamento, suporte, 

etc.);  do  ―H‖  é  Hardware  (máquinas  e  equipamentos),  do  ―E‖  é  Environment 

(ambiente ou circunstâncias em que as operações e os do resto do sistema, L-M-S 

deve funcionar) e do ―L‖ é  Liveware (homem no local de trabalho).(ICAO 2009) 

O Modelo foi desenvolvido inicialmente por EDWARDS (1972), com uma 

modificação diagrama para ilustrar o modelo desenvolvido em 1975 por HAWKINS 

(1887).



 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
 

Figura 5 - Modelo SHEL modificado por HAWKINS (1987) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

O ―L‖ no central do modelo é a pessoa, considerada pela teoria o elemento 

mais crítico, pois estão sujeitas a variações consideráveis no desempenho e sofrem 

muitas limitações, a maioria das quais geralmente não é previsível. Assim, como 

também o elemento de maior flexibilidade. 

Na representação da figura 5, identificamos que as bordas dos blocos não são 

simples  e  diretas.  Todos  os  componentes  do  sistema  devem  ser  cuidadosamente 

acomodados para que se ajustem de forma flexível, evitando as quebras em seus 

encaixes.  O  Liveware  é  o  núcleo  do  Modelo  SHEL  de  Fatores  Humanos.  Os 

componentes restantes devem ser adaptados e combinados a este componente central, 

as análises se dão em relação a ele e as interfaces contemplam os seguintes aspectos: 

   Liveware-Hardware:  Esta  é  a  interface  considerada  quando  o  sistema 

homem-máquina: as concepções dos lugares adaptados às características do 

corpo humano, de displays para processamento de informação, características 

do operador e dos controles com movimento, os sistemas de codificação e a 

localização.   Problemas   nesta   interface   podem   resultar   em   situações 

catastróficas devido à capacidade de adaptação do ser humano, que dificulta a 

percepção das deficiências. 

   Liveware-Software:   Inclui   a   relação   entre   as   pessoas   e   os   suportes 

encontrados  no  local  de  trabalho,  tais  como  os  procedimentos,  manuais, 

publicações,  listas  de  verificação,  layouts,  simbologia  e  programas  de 

computador.  Os  problemas  são  menos  tangíveis  nesta  interface  e  são, 

conseqüentemente, de mais difícil resolução.



 
 
 

59 
 
 
 
 

   Liveware- Environment: Esta interface refere-se à relação entre o indivíduo e 

os ambientes interno e externo. O ambiente interno inclui aspectos físicos, 

como temperatura, luz, ruído, vibração e qualidade do ar. O ambiente externo 

(para pilotos) inclui itens como visibilidade, turbulência e terreno. Considera 

também como o ambiente de trabalho o período de 24 horas do dia, incluindo 

as perturbações do ritmo biológico. Considera também o contexto político e 

econômico,  que  afetam  o  clima  organizacional.  São  ainda  incluídos  nesta 

interface os fatores relativos à adequação das instalações físicas e o apoio da 

infra-estrutura, situação financeira e da eficiência da regulamentação. 

 Liveware-Liveware: Esta é a interface da relação entre as pessoas, entre o 

indivíduo e outros no local de trabalho. Tripulações de vôo, controladores de 

tráfego aéreo, mecânicos da manutenção de aeronaves e o pessoal do setor de 

operações funcionam como um grupo, a influência do grupo desempenha um 

papel  determinante  no  comportamento  e  ações  dos  seres  humanos.  Esta 

interface se refere às interações de liderança, trabalho em equipe, cooperação 

e personalidade. 

O Modelo SHEL, embora pouco difundido na literatura sobre investigação de 

acidentes, de modo geral é amplamente recomendado pela ICAO em diversas publica 

e   influencia   diretamente   a   investigação   dos   fatores   humanos   nos   acidentes 

aeronáuticos no Brasil. 

A  teoria  da  década  de  70  possui  características  típicas  da  percepção  de 

acidente utilizadas na época, procurando avaliar isoladamente os diferentes tipos de 

relações estabelecidas com a figura central: a pessoal, induzindo o investigador a 

analisar os erros sempre em relação a este componente. 

Ambas as abordagens, o modelo 5M e o modelo SHEL são hoje criticadas por 

se limitarem a analisar os fatores contribuintes para os acidentes restringindo-se a 

aspectos técnicos, humanos e operacionais que são de limitado alcance. (ALMEIDA 

E JACKSON FILHO 2007) (CARDOSO e CUKIERMAN, 2007)



 
 
 

60 
 
 
 
 

1.7.3   A Teoria de REASON 
 
 
 
 

REASON  concebe  a  indústria  aeronáutica  como  um  sistema  de  produção 

complexo, interativo e organizado. Seu modelo, proposto em 1990, procurou analisar 

o modo como os seres humanos contribuem para as falhas de um sistema, a ponto de 

produzir um acidente aeronáutico. Os sistemas complexos que operam em condições 

de risco possuem os seguintes elementos: processos organizacionais e suas culturas 

associadas,  uma  variedade  de  diferentes  postos  de  trabalho  envolvendo  uma 

variedade  de  condições  locais,  defesas,  barreiras  e  salvaguardas  projetadas  para 

proteger as pessoas, as instalações e o ambiente dos efeitos adversos e riscos locais. 

(MAURINO, REASON E JOHNSTON, 2000) 

Conseqüências negativas das decisões de alto nível (orçamentos 

inadequados, planejamento deficiente, pressões de tempo, comerciais e operacionais, 

etc.) são transmitidas pelos vários caminhos departamentais e organizacionais para os 

diferentes postos de trabalho, onde são criadas as condições locais que promovem a 

realização  de  atos  inseguros. Muitos  desses  atos  inseguros serão  cometidos,  mas 

apenas alguns ultrapassarão a série de barreiras existentes para gerar conseqüências 

danosas. (REASON, 2000) 

Devem ser consideradas também as condições locais de trabalho, como um 

dos fatores que influenciam na eficiência e na confiabilidade do desempenho humano 

num  contexto  de  trabalho  específico  (cabine  da  aeronave,  centro  de  controle  de 

tráfego, hangar de manutenção, linha de montagem, etc.). (REASON, 2000). 

Segundo REASON (1999) estas condições locais de trabalho são divididas 

em duas classes: os fatores relacionados às tarefas e o seu ambiente imediato e os 

fatores relacionados ao estado mental e físico dos indivíduos. As defesas, barreiras e 

salvaguardas são medidas que objetivam remover, minimizar ou proteger de danos 

operacionais. Podem ser classificados quanto à sua função: conscientizar sobre os 

riscos; detectar e avisar a existência de condições anormais; proteger as pessoas e as 

instalações e; recuperar de condições anormais.



 
 
 

61 
 
 
 
 

Não existe um conjunto perfeito de defesas contra todas as eventualidades. 

Muitas falhas serão conseqüências diretas dos processos decisórios organizacionais. 

Tais imperfeições devem incluir a inexistência de defesas necessárias e fragilidades 

nas defesas  existentes. Em conjunto, compreendem a carga de falhas latentes do 

sistema.  Quando  as  pessoas  estão  envolvidas  num  sistema  complexo,  falhas 

ocorrerão, seja no posto de trabalho (falhas ativas) ou em relação às defesas (falhas 

latentes). (REASON, 1999) 

As falhas ativas provocam um impacto direto e imediato, enquanto que as 

falhas latentes podem permanecer ocultas por longos períodos, às vezes anos, antes 

de se combinarem com falhas ativas e eventos desencadeantes locais para romper as 

defesas do sistema. As falhas ativas são cometidas por aqueles que estão em contato 

direto  com  o  sistema  (pilotos,  controladores,  mecânicos).  As  falhas  latentes  são 

derivadas  de  decisões  tomadas  nas  esferas  gerenciais  e  organizacionais,  pessoas 

separadas das interfaces imediatas do sistema, tanto no tempo quanto no espaço. 

(REASON, 1997) 

Erros ou violações são falhas que, quando conjugados a rupturas nas defesas, 

causam acidentes. As falhas latentes são ―janelas‖ nas defesas do sistema e, ao se 

combinarem  com  falhas  ativas  e  ou  fatores  desencadeantes  locais,  criam  uma 

trajetória de oportunidades de acidentes (às vezes momentânea) através de algumas 

ou de todas as  camadas  protetoras  do sistema.  São estas  ―janelas‖ alinhadas nas 

várias defesas que constituem um evento. (REASON, 1997) 

A maioria das falhas latentes é descoberta apenas quando uma defesa falha. 

Entretanto, o fluxo normal das operações oferece a oportunidade de se verificar a 

deficiência de uma defesa, sem que haja conseqüências adversas. O evento é definido 

como uma penetração completa ou parcial de uma trajetória de acidentes através das 

camadas defensivas do sistema. É neste nível que os caminhos das falhas ativas e 

latentes se juntam para criar trajetórias completas ou parciais de oportunidades de 

acidente. Os caminhos casuais também podem interagir com fatores desencadeantes 

locais: estados atípicos do sistema; condições ambientais ou condições 

meteorológicas adversas. (REASON, 1997)



 
 
 

62 
 
 
 
 

O nível do evento é altamente dinâmico, ―janelas‖ aparecem, desaparecem e 

reaparecem,  encolhem  e  se  expandem,  modificam  sua  localização  na  camada 

defensiva. As conseqüências de um evento podem variar em intensidade, mas todas 

proporcionam experiências de aprendizagem para o sistema, já que revelam falhas 

latentes.   Através   da   especificação   dos   fatores   organizacionais   e   situacionais 

envolvidos nos caminhos causais, é possível identificar falhas latentes antes de se 

combinarem para causar um acidente. (REASON, 1997) 

Segundo   WIEGMANN   e   SHAPPELL  (2001),   esta  é  uma  abordagem 

particularmente atraente para a gênese do erro humano, pois reside no fato de andar 

―para trás‖ na hora de identificar as causas do acidente. 

Segundo  os  autores,  o  primeiro  nível  descreve  os  atos  inseguros  dos 

operadores que, em última instância, conduziram ao acidente e é este nível que a 

maioria das investigações concentrou os seus esforços e, conseqüentemente, onde a 

maioria dos fatores causais é descoberta. 

O modelo do "queijo suíço", mostrado na figura 6 é particularmente útil na 

investigação  de  um  acidente,  forçando  os  investigadores  a  identificar  as  falhas 

latentes no seio da causa de seqüência de acontecimentos. Como seu nome sugere, 

falhas  latentes,  ao  contrário  dos  seus  homólogos  ativa,  podem  estar  latentes  ou 

indetectáveis por horas, dias, semanas ou mesmo um período mais longo, até que um 

dia as mesmas prejudicam os desavisados operadores. (WIEGMANN e SHAPPELL, 

2001). 

ALMEIDA (2006) também considera que a teoria de Reason se destaca pela 

importância de mostrar ao investigador que o caminho da prevenção não deve se 

deter nos erros humanos, ou seja, nas falhas ativas e que o ideal é identificar as 

características do sistema que podem aumentar a chance de erros.



 
 
 

63 
 
 
 
 

Figura 6 – Modelo do Queijo Suíço (adaptado de REASON, 1990) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Segundo REASON (1997), a trajetória da investigação dos acidentes deve 

seguir o modelo mostrado na figura 7. O bloco retangular no topo representa os 

elementos principais de um evento, enquanto a forma triangular abaixo representa o 

sistema de sua produção. Este tem três níveis: a pessoa (atos inseguros), os locais de 

trabalho (condições que provocam o erro) e o da organização. As condições latentes 

são representadas pela seta paralela ao triangulo e mostra a possibilidade que os erros 

ativos  possuem  em  se  originar  de  condições  latentes.  As  setas  pretas  para  cima 

indicam a direção da causalidade e as setas brancas descendentes indicam os passos 

da investigação. 

A teoria de Reason, embora não demonstre de forma prática como realizar a 

investigação,  é  sem  dúvida  um  marco  na  investigação  de  acidentes  aéreos,  por 

introduzir  a  importância  da   análise  sistêmica  e  da  relação   entre  os   fatores 

organizacionais com os atos inseguros. 

Outra  contribuição  significativa para  a  prevenção  de  acidentes  aéreos  é  o 

sistema de gestão de erros, que se preocupa em conter os seus efeitos, considerando 

que  nem  sempre  podemos  mudar  a  condição  humana  de  cometer  erros,  mas, 

podemos melhorar as condições onde o indivíduo trabalha, estabelecendo programas



 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
 

de  gestão  com  metas  voltadas  a  ele,  à  equipe,  à  tarefa  e  ao  local  de  trabalho. 

(REASON, 1997). 
 
 

Figura 7 – Estágios da Investigação de um acidente organizacional – adaptado de 
REASON 1997 
 

DEFESAS 
  

PERIGOS DANOS 
  

 
RISCOS 

 
  
  

CONDIÇÕES CAUSAS 

LATENTES ATOS INSEGUROS INVESTIGAÇÃO 
 
 

AMBIENTE FÍSICO E TÉCNICO DE 
TRABALHO 
 
 

FATORES GERENCIAIS E ORGANIZACIONAIS 
 
 
 
 

A teoria de Reason é referenciada nos documentos da ICAO, principalmente 

nos sistemas voltados à gestão da segurança (DOC 9859). O mesmo, porém, não 

ocorre nas práticas recomendadas da investigação. 
 
 
 
 
1.7.3.1 Modelo de Investigação de Fatores Humanos 
 
 
 
 

As estimativas da literatura indicam que entre 70 e 80 por cento dos acidentes 

aéreos podem ser atribuídos, pelo menos em parte, a erros humanos (SHAPPELL & 

WIEGMANN, 1996). 

A visão tradicional de que as investigações de acidentes são um pouco mais 

do que um esforço para atribuir culpas pode ser verdade para algumas investigações 



 
 
 

65 
 
 
 
 

(por  exemplo:  processos  judiciais,  os  créditos  de  seguros),  mas  a  maioria  dos 

pesquisadores de segurança argumenta que o seu objetivo é simplesmente impedir o 

acidente de acontecer novamente. 

No  domínio  da  aviação,  geralmente  se  considera  que  os  acidentes  são  o 

resultado de uma cadeia de acontecimentos que culminaram com atos inseguros de 

operadores (ou seja, tripulantes). 

A aviação não está sozinha nesta crença, como a comunidade em geral tem 

abraçado uma teoria seqüencial de investigação de acidentes desde que HEINRICH, 

em 1931, publicou seu primeiro axioma sobre da segurança industrial. 

As  análises  dos  acidentes  aéreos  são  baseadas,  na maioria das  vezes,  nos 

dados  da  investigação  e  nos  erros  cometidos  pelos  tripulantes.  Infelizmente,  a 

maioria dos sistemas de investigação não se baseia em um quadro teórico de erro 

humano. Na verdade, as teorias empregadas são voltadas a aspectos da engenharia 

mecânica e os fatores humanos são variáveis mal definidas, que acabam conduzindo 

a uma análise tradicional do erro humano. 

DEKKER (2002) sugeriu que, ao invés de procurar "o que fizeram de errado, 

talvez  fosse  melhor  despender  esforços  tentando  compreender  a  razão  pela  qual 

determinado   ato   ou   comportamento   parecia   certo   para   o   indivíduo   naquele 

momento.‖ 

O Modelo Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) toma 

como base a Teoria de REASON e contempla os conceitos de falha ativa e latente, de 

forma que possam ser identificados. 

No  escopo  do  conceito  de  falhas  latentes,  existem  vários  níveis  de  falha 

humana. A condição de como uma tripulação pode ter seu desempenho afetado, se 

refere às condições prévias para atos inseguros. Este nível envolve condições tais 

como fadiga mental, má comunicação e coordenação, muitas vezes referida como a 

gestão dos recursos da tripulação. (SHAPPELL & WIEGMANN, 1996). 

A própria organização pode ter impacto no desempenho dos tripulantes em 

todos os níveis. Por exemplo, em tempos de austeridade financeira, pode-se ter como 

resultado o tempo de vôo gasto com a formação diminuído. Conseqüentemente, os



 
 
 

66 
 
 
 
 

supervisores muitas vezes são deixados sem qualquer alternativa,  a não ser  a de 

diminuir a proficiência dos que possuem tarefas complexas. 

Os investigadores devem, portanto, expandir a investigação para examinar a 

seqüência do acidente ocorrido na sua totalidade e ir além da cabine de vôo. Em 

última análise, todos os níveis de fatores causais devem ser investigados dentro da 

organização, para que se tenha um sistema de prevenção bem-sucedido. 

O HFACS é um modelo que permite forma de criar uma ponte entre a teoria e 

a prática, fornecendo investigadores com uma ferramenta abrangente, amigável para 

identificar e classificar os recursos humanos como causas de acidentes aéreos. 

O modelo foi desenvolvido inicialmente utilizando-se os acidentes militares 

da ―U.S. Naval Safety Center”,” U.S. Army Safety Center”e “U.S. Air Force Safety 

Center” e também está sendo empregado desenvolver melhores métodos e técnicas 

para  investigar  os  fatores  humanos  na  aviação  civil  nas  investigações  ―Federal 

Aviation Administração”(FAA) e do “National Transportation Safety 

Board”(NTSB). (SHAPPELL e WIEGMANN, 2001). 

Descreve quatro níveis de falhas: os atos inseguros, as condições prévias para 

inseguros atos, a supervisão insegura e, finalmente, as influências organizacionais. A 

figura 8 mostra os níveis e suas categorias, com a direção de suas interações.



 
 
 

67 
 
 
 
 

Figura 8 - Modelo do HFACS adaptado de SHAPPELL e WIEGMANN (2000). 
 
 
 
 

INFLUÊNCIAS 
ORGANIZACIONAIS 
  
  
  

GESTÃO DE  RECURSOS CLIMA PROCESSOS 
ORGANIZACIONAL ORGNIZACIONAIS 
 
 
 

SUPERVISÃO 
INSEGURA 

  
  
  

PLANEJAMENTO FALHA  NA 
SUPERVISÃO INADEQUADO CORREÇÃO VIOLAÇÃO  DA 
INADEQUADA DAS 

OPERAÇÕES DO SUPERVISÃO 
PROBLEMA 

 
 

Condições 
prévias  de  atos 

inseguros 
  
  
  

CONDIÇÕES 
DO PRÁTICAS  DO 

OPERADOR OPERADOR 
     
     
     

ESTADO ESTADO LIMITAÇÕES 
MÁ  CONHECIMEN 

GESTÃO 
MENTAL PSICOLÓGICO FÍSCICAS  E 

ADVERSO ADVERSO MENTAIS DO CRM TOS 
PESSOAIS 

 
 

ATOS 
INSEGUROS 
 
 
 

ERROS VIOLAÇÕES 
   
   
   

ERROS DE ERROS DE ERROS DE 
DECISÃO HABILIDADE PERCEPÇÃO           ROTINA          EXCEPCIONAL 



 
 
 

68 
 
 
 
 

1.7.4   A Gestão do Risco de Acidentes 
 
 
 
 

AMALBERTI   (2007)   considera   que   houve   uma   grande   evolução   da 

segurança durante o séc.XX e o fator humano foi explorado como se fosse a ultima 

fronteira para atingir-se a segurança perfeita. As diversas teorias desenvolvidas nas 

ultimas duas décadas tinham em comum a percepção de que os erros devem ser 

admissíveis no sistema e que continuarão a existir, as violações são originadas na 

inflexibilidade das leis e dos regulamentos. A redução dos erros não reduziu porem 

os acidentes, sistemas muito seguros tornam mais difícil à busca de falhas. 

Houve também uma mudança significativa no mundo do trabalho, a gestão da 

segurança deixou de ter como primeiro foco o trabalhador, passando a ser um objeto 

público,  orientado  principalmente  pela  sobrevivência  econômica.  (AMALBERTI, 

2007) 

Os  riscos  e  os  desvios  das  normas  de  segurança  são  ações  amplamente 

reconhecidas e aceitas pelos operadores, dentro do contexto de sua atividade. Parece 

tratar-se  de  uma  forma  de  regulação  que  tenta,  de  forma  mais  ou  menos  bem 

sucedida,  atenuar  os  conflitos  existentes  entre  as  duas  lógicas,  freqüentemente 

contraditórias: a da produção e a da segurança. (AMALBERTI, 2001) 

A identificação de riscos e o desvio das normas de segurança não são, per se, 

necessariamente  negativos,  reforçando  a  idéia  de  que,  finalmente,  não  se  trata 

unicamente  de  eliminá-los,  mas  sim,  de  criar  dispositivos  na  organização  que 

permitam a sua formalização e possibilitem a sua gestão. (AMALBERTI, 2001) 

A  figura  9  representa  uma  armadilha  que  permeia  a  regulamentação.  O 

desempenho seguro, como esperado e calculado durante o projeto está contido dentro 

de três fronteiras: a individual com as regras sociais, as regras do mercado e as regras 

de segurança. Quando em atividade, o sistema migra para obter um desempenho 

melhor e mais benefícios individuais indo alem dos limites de segurança. O novo 

espaço resultante do desempenho operacional se posiciona em grande parte fora do 

espaço  de  desempenho  seguro  inicial.  Este  novo  espaço  é  caracterizado  pelas



 
 
 

69 
 
 
 
 

reduzidas  margens  de  incidentes  e  acidentes  (apesar  dentro  de  uma  margem 

aceitável) e de numerosas violações e desvios. 

AMALBERTI  (2007)  considera  que  o  novo  desafio  da  segurança  esta  na 

evolução das mentalidades, tanto de trabalhadores como de empregadores no sentido 

de  admitir,  comunicar  e  aceitar  a  comunicação  realista  do  risco  e  das  falhas 

razoavelmente dominadas. 
 
 
 
 

Figura 9– Visão Global do Modelo, adaptado de AMALBERTI (2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

As   teorias   apresentadas   mostram   alguns   autores   que   se   dedicam   a 

investigação   de   acidentes   aeronáuticos,   existem   vários   outros   que   fazem 

considerações sobre este tema, fugindo ao objetivo do trabalho realizar uma análise



 
 
 

70 
 
 
 
 

de todos eles, muitos deles foram citados ao longo do trabalho, fazendo com que 

possamos identificar suas contribuições. 

A complexidade do tema e de sua abrangência reflete-se na forma com que é 

tratado em diversas partes do mundo, envolvendo diferentes setores que englobam a 

ciência, economia, cultura e política e também da indústria aeronáutica. 

PERROW citado por ALMEIDA (2006) aborda os acidentes com um enfoque 

sistêmico onde a complexidade do sistema determina a estrutura dos acidentes, que 

chamou  de  acidentes  normais  ou  sistêmicos,  onde  a  possibilidade  de  interações 

determina o risco. 

Para  que  pudéssemos  compreender  melhor  como  estamos  inseridos  neste 

contexto faremos um recorte que contempla os acidentes da aviação geral brasileira, 

notadamente no Estado de São Paulo e quais as implicações envolvidas nas suas 

análises.



 
 
 

71 
 
 
 
 

2. OBJETIVOS 
 
 
 
 
2.1 GERAL 
 
 
 
 

Analisar o sistema de investigação dos acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos 

ocorridos na Aviação Geral no Estado de São Paulo no período de 2000 a 2005 e 

verificar sua associação a fatores organizacionais. 
 
 
 
 
2.2 OBJETIVOS ESPECÍFICOS 
 
 
 
 
2.2.1   Comparar a subordinação e forma de atuação das agências de investigação de 

acidentes do Brasil, União Européia e Estada Unidos, quanto à independência 

condução e elaboração dos relatórios; 

2.2.2   Identificar os relatórios finais dos acidentes e incidentes da Aviação Geral no 

Estado de São Paulo no período de 2000 a 2005; 

2.2.3   Identificar  os  fatores  contribuintes  nos  relatórios  finais  elaborados  pelo 

Centro  Nacional  de  Investigação  e  Prevenção  de  Acidentes  Aeronáuticos 

(CENIPA) 

2.2.4   Utilizar o Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFCAS) para 

fazer uma reclassificação dos fatores contribuintes nos relatórios finais 

2.2.5   Comparar  fatores  contribuintes  nas  análises  dos  relatórios  finais  quanto  à 

atribuição  de  fatores  organizacionais,  no  modelo  adotado  pelo  Centro 

Nacional de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos (CENIPA), 

com os fatores identificados no Human Factors Analysis and Classification 

System (HFCAS) ; 

2.2.6   Avaliar  o  alcance  e  as  limitações  do  modelo  de  relatório  brasileiro  de 

investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos.



 
 
 

72 
 
 
 
 

3. MÉTODO 
 
 
 
 
3.1 DELINEAMENTO DO ESTUDO 
 
 
 
 

A pesquisa foi de natureza descritiva, identificando os fatores contribuintes de 

acidentes aeronáuticos, os métodos de investigação de acidentes e a organização das 

agências de investigação, utilizando-se de material bibliográfico e documental. 
 
 
 
 
3.2 UNIVERSO DO ESTUDO 
 
 
 
 
3.2.1 Agências de Investigação 
 
 
 
 

As agências de investigação de acidentes foram analisadas quanto à forma de 

organização, de funcionamento e sistema de investigação e vínculos governamentais. 

Elas são compostas de um universo muito amplo. Todos os países, de acordo com o 

previsto no Anexo 13 – ICAO devem possuir sua própria agência. Foram escolhidos 

para esta análise os Estados Unidos e a União Européia, pela por serem os dois 

maiores pólos da aviação no mundo, tanto quanto a abrangência da frota, pesquisa na 

área e fabricação de aeronaves e equipamentos. 
 
 
 
 
3.2.2   Relatórios Finais 
 
 
 
 

Os  relatórios  finais  de  acidentes  pesquisados  incluem  as  ocorrências  com 

aeronaves da aviação geral que englobam aeronaves particulares e de uso comercial,



 
 
 

73 
 
 
 
 

helicópteros, vôos de treinamento (para pilotos iniciantes) e outras atividades aéreas. 

Esta categoria não comporta as aeronaves que realizam vôos regulares (de linhas 

aéreas), aeronaves militares e estrangeiras. 

A opção pela escolha da aviação geral ocorreu por compreender um universo 

maior  em  termos  de  número  de  aeronaves  e  tipo  de  atividade.  De  acordo  com 

pesquisa realizada pela Associação Brasileira da Aviação Geral (ABAG, 2008), das 

11.150 aeronaves homologadas no Brasil, 10. 650 pertenciam à aviação geral, ou seja 

correspondem a 95%. 

Os relatórios finais dos incidentes, incidentes graves e ocorrências de solo 

não havia sido elaborados pelo CENIPA e portanto não puderam ser utilizados para 

esta pesquisa. 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3 Escolha da Unidade da Federação 
 
 
 
 

O Estado de São Paulo foi escolhido por reunir 28 % da frota nacional da 

aviação geral, aproximadamente 3000 mil aeronaves da aviação civil,  sendo o estado 

com maior número de aeronaves no país. 

As aeronaves registradas no Estado de São Paulo são utilizadas em atividades 

em diferentes categorias da aviação geral: aviação agrícola, de treinamento, táxi- 

aéreo  e  privada  e  os  serviços  aéreos  especializados,possibilitando  uma  maior 

representativade por tipo de atividade. 
 
 
 
 
3.2.4- Período 
 
 
 
 

O periodo foi delimitado em função de possibilitar a maior inclusão possível 

de dados organizados de forma semelhante. A pesquisa dos relatórios finais ficou 

limitada ao período de 2000 a 2005, relatórios anteriores a 2000 eram formatados de



 
 
 

74 
 
 
 
 

maneira  difirente  e  por  não  existirem  relatórios  finais  disponíveis  dos  anos 

subsequentes a 2005. 
 
 
 
 
3.3  FONTE DE DADOS 
 
 
 
 
3.3.1   – Agências de Investigação 
 
 
 
 

Os  dados  sobre  as  agências  de  investigação  acidentes  aeronáuticos  foram 

obtidos  através  da  informação  disponível  nos  sítios  eletrônicos  das  agências  na 

internet.  A  pesquisa  seguiu  os  critérios  buscando  a  organizaçao  administrativa, 

atribuiçoes , sistema de investigação. 

Foram pesquisados os seguintes sítios eletrônicos : 

 European Aviation Safety Agency - www.easa.eu.int; 

 National Transportation Safety Board -www.ntsb.gov; 

 Federal Aviationa Administration - www.faa.gov; 

 Centro   de   Investigação   e   Prevenção   de   Acidentes   Aeronáuticos   - 

www.cenipa.aer.mil.br; 

 Agência Nacional da Aviaçao Civil - www.anac.gov.br; 

 Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego - www.mte.gov.br; 

 Ministério da Saúde -  www.saude.gov.br; 

 European Coordination Centre for Accident and Incident Reporting System- 

www.eccairsportal.jrc.ec.europa.eu/Start.asp 
 
 
 
 

3.3.2   Consolidação dos Dados das Ocorrências com as Aeronaves



 
 
 

75 
 
 
 
 

O banco de dados foi construído a partir da consulta às planilhas eletrônicas 

disponíveis  no  IV  Serviço  Regional  de  Investigação  e  Prevenção  de  Acidentes 

(SERIPA IV), responsável pela investigação de acidentes nos estados de São Paulo e 

Mato Grosso do Sul e não estão disponíveis em sítio eletrônico na internet. 

O local  onde ocorre o  acidente  é que determina o  comando investigador, 

independente  da  origem  da  aeronave.  Na  consulta  foram  identificadas  todas  as 

ocorrências com aeronaves no Estado de São Paulo no período de 2000 a 2005. 

As ocorrências são classificadas em: acidente, incidente grave, incidente e 

ocorrência de solo. As planilhas do SERIPA IV contêm informações resumidas das 

ocorrências, conforme segue: 

   Dados da Aeronave: matrícula da aeronave (número do registro), modelo, 

operador,  tipo  de  aeronave  (avião,  helicoptero,  experimental,  planador  ou 

ultra-leve); categoria de operação. 

   Dados  da  Ocorrência:   classificação  da  ocorrência  (incidente,  acidente, 

ocorrência de solo ou incidente grave ); data; natureza (leve, média ou grave); 

local e resumo da ação inicial. 

   Dados da Tripulação: nome e código ANAC do comandante e co-piloto. 

   Dados da Comissão: nome dos responsáveis ( presidente, oficial de segurança 

de vôo(osv) ; fator operacional (osv) ; fator material (oficial engenheiro) ; 

fator  humano:  aspecto  fisiológico  (oficial  médico)  e  aspecto  psicológico 

(oficial psicológo)  e outros (outros especialistas, se forem necessários). 

   Dados sobre lesões: número de pessoas e tipo de lesão (leve, grave, fatais). 
 
 
 
 

3.3.3   – Relatórios Finais 
 
 
 
 

Os  relatórios  finais  encotram-se  arquivados  na  Divisão  de  Investigação  e 

Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos do  CENIPA, cuja sede fica em Brasília D.F. e 

estão   disponíveis   para   consulta  de  qualquer   cidadão   e   contêm   as   seguintes 

informações:



 
 
 

76 
 
 
 
 

   Dados do Acidente: modelo; matrícula; operador; data/hora, local, município 

e estado. 

   Dados  da  investigação:  histórico  do  acidente,  danos  causados:  pessoais  e 

materiais; elementos da investigação: informação sobre o pessoal envolvido, 

informações da aeronave, exames, testes e pesquisas, infomações 

meteorológicas, navegação, comunicação, informações sobre o 

aeródromo,informações sobre o impacto e os destroços, dados sobre fogo, 

aspectos de sobrevivência e/ou abandono da aeronave, gravadores de vôo, 

aspectos   operacionais,   aspectos   humanos:   fisiológicos   e   psicológicos, 

aspectos ergonômicos e informações adicionais. 

   Análise 

   Conclusão: fatos; fatores contribuintes: fator humano: aspecto fisiológico e 

psicologico;  fator  material:  deficiênca  de  projeto,  de  fabricação  e   de 

manuseio de material; fator operacional: condições meteorológicas; deficiente 

infra-estrutura,   deficiente   instrução,   deficiente   manutenção,   deficiente 

aplicação de comandos, deficiente controle de tráfego, deficiente 

coordenação de cabine, deficiente julgamento, deficiente pessoal de apoio, 

deficiente planejamento, deficiente supervisão, esquecimento, indisciplina de 

vôo, influência do meio ambiente, pouca experiência vôo/aeronave e outros 

aspectos operacionais. 

   Recomendações de segurança de vôo. 
 
 
 
 

3.3.4   – Informações Utilizadas 
 
 
 
 

Foram utilizados os dados relatados nas análises e conclusões, dos relatórios 

finais, baseando-se apenas no que foi investigado, sem buscar dados novos que não 

haviam sido pesquisados pelos responsáveis pela investigação.



 
 
 

77 
 
 
 
 

3.3.5   Classificação das Categorias do HFACS 
 
 
 
 

O  detalhamento  dos  fatores  Modelo  HFACS  que  foram  usados  para  o 

levantamento de dados dentro de cada categoria estão descritos no anexo 5  e tratam 

de uma tradução livre do que é sugerido pelos autores do modelo. 

As categorias causais conforme descritas foram utilizadas como roteiro para 

reclassificar   os   fatores   contribuintes   presentes   nos   relatórios   finais   foram 

reclassificados  pela  autora  através  da  análise  das  informações presentes  em 

relatórios finais de 36 acidentes ocorridos no Estado de São Paulo no período de 

2000 a 2005. 

A autora possui experiência na análise de fatores humana contribuintes em 

acidentes   aeronáuticos,   exercendo   a   atividade   de   elemento   credenciado   pelo 

CENIPA  para  análise  de  fatores  humanos  no  aspecto  psicológico  há  23  anos  e 

participado  de  diversas  investigações  de  acidentes  aeronáuticos  ao  longo  deste 

período. 
 
 
 
 
3.4  ANÁLISE COMPARATIVA 
 
 
 
 
3.4.1   Agências de Investigação 
 
 
 
 

Na  análise  comparativa  entre  os  sistemas  de  organização  estrutural  das 

agências de investigação dos Estados Unidos, União Européia e do Brasil, foram 

identificadas  as  formas  com  que  cada  agência  atua  quanto  ao  seu  sistema  de 

vinculação  (subordinação),  quais  são  suas  atribuições,  e  como  atua  nas  áreas  de 

segurança de vôo e investigação de acidentes.



 
 
 

78 
 
 
 
 

3.4.2 Métodos de Investigação 
 
 
 
 

A comparação da forma de atuação dos investigadores foi realizada somente 

entre a agência NTSB que é americana e o CENIPA, agência brasileira, a EASA não 

atua  diretamente  nas  investigações  havendo  independência  entre  os  31  países 

membros para realizar as investigações em seus territórios, o que tornou extensa, 

complexa e difícil a obtenção de informações confiáveis sobre cada um para que 

fosse feita a inclusão na comparação. 
 
 
 
 
3.4.3 Relatórios Finais 
 
 
 
 

A comparação entre os fatores contribuintes identificados nos relatórios finais 

foi feita considerando as diferenças resultantes das classificações de acordo com o 

método usado pelo CENIPA e pelo HFACS, avaliando qual método possibilita uma 

um maior número de variáveis organizacionais.



 
 
 

79 
 
 
 
 

4. RESULTADOS 
 
 
 
 

Inicialmente serão apresentados os dados sobre as agências de investigação, 

os  dados  do  levantamento  dos  relatórios  finais  e  a  comparação  dos  métodos  de 

análise. 
 
 
 
 
4.1 COMPARAÇAO ENTRE AS AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

A comparação entre as agências de investigação foi mostrada através de um 

quadro comparativo (anexo 6). 

As  agências  que  lidam  diretamente  com  a  investigação  de  acidentes  são 

apenas  o  NTSB  e  o  CENIPA,  sendo  uma  totalmente  independente  e  a  outra 

subordinada a um órgão militar. A agência européia EASA atua como supervisora 

dos Estados – Membros que possuem autonomia para realizar as investigações de 

acidentes aéreos ocorridos em seus territórios. 
 
 
 
 
4.2 O PROCESSO DE INVESTIGAÇÃO DOS ACIDENTES 
 
 
 
 

Descrevemos a seguir a forma como atuam as equipes de investigação de 

acidentes quanto ao acionamento, ação inicial no local do acidente, condução da 

investigação, equipes, reuniões e emissão de relatórios. A EASA não realiza ações 

diretas de investigação, não foi incluída nesta etapa da pesquisa, sendo considerada 

esta uma limitação do estudo.



 
 
 

80 
 
 
 
 

4.2.1 – NTSB 
 
 
 
 

Para a realização das investigações, é utilizada uma equipe chamada de "Go 

Team", que é considerada o núcleo das investigações do NTSB . O seu objetivo é ser 

simples e eficaz. É quem começa a investigação no local do acidente e busca o mais 

rapidamente   possível   a   montagem   de   uma   equipe   com   amplo   espectro   de 

conhecimentos técnicos necessários para resolver problemas complexos de segurança 

do transporte. 

A equipe pode ter de três ou quatro membros ou até mais de uma dúzia de 

especialistas, que estão na sede em Washington, DC, ou nas bases, para seguir o mais 

rapidamente possível para a cena do acidente. As equipes se deslocam através de 

aeronaves militares ou civis em função das circunstâncias e disponibilidade. Durante 

o tempo em que estão em "alerta", os membros devem estar contatáveis 24 horas por 

dia. 

O   Chefe   imediato   do   ―Go   Team”   é   o   ―investigator-in-charge”,   um 

investigador  sênior  com  anos  de  experiência  na  NTSB.  Cada  investigador  é  um 

especialista responsável por uma parte claramente definida do inquérito do acidente. 

Na aviação, as especialidades e as suas responsabilidades são: 

   Operações: dedica-se à investigação da história do acidente e dos membros da 

tripulação de vôo. 

   Estruturas: pesquisa da documentação da estrutura do avião e destroços do 

acidente, incluindo o cálculo do ângulo do impacto para ajudar a definir o 

plano de pré-impacto claro e atitude. 

   “Powerplants”: análise dos motores (e hélices) e acessórios do motor. 

   Sistemas:   Estuda   os   componentes   do   sistema   de   hidráulico,   elétrico, 

pneumático e sistemas associados, juntamente com instrumentos e elementos 

do sistema de controle de vôo. 

   Controle  de  tráfego  aéreo:  responsável  pela  reconstrução  dos  serviços  de 

tráfego aéreo dados ao avião, incluindo a aquisição de dados e transcrições 

―Air Traffic Control” (ATC), do radar e das transmissões via rádio.



 
 
 

81 
 
 
 
 

   Clima: recolhem de todos os dados pertinentes às condições meteorológicas 

do ―National Weather Service” e, por vezes recorrem às estações de televisão 

locais, para cobrir uma ampla área em torno do acidente. 

   Desempenho humano: estuda o desempenho da tripulação e todos os fatores 

que  poderiam  estar  envolvidos  em  um  erro  humano  antes  do  acidente, 

incluindo   fadiga,   medicação,   álcool,   drogas,   dados   de   anamnese,   da 

formação,  da  carga  de  trabalho,  equipamentos  e  design  e  ambiente  de 

trabalho. 

   Fatores de sobrevivência: avaliam a documentação das forças de impacto e 

lesões, a evacuação, as equipes que coordenam e planejam como atuar nas 

emergências e de todos os recursos de contra incêndio. 

Sob direção do ―investigator-in-charge”, cada um destes investigadores são 

chefes em uma área de especialização que a NTSB chama um grupo de trabalho, que 

compõe uma subcomissão da equipe global. 

Os grupos são equipes de representantes das "partes" para o inquérito, que é 

composto também por membros representantes do FAA, da companhia aérea, dos 

pilotos, comissários, sindicatos e dos fabricantes de motores. 

De modo geral, os grupos são pequenos. A composição da equipe técnica é a 

mesma, variando de acordo com o meio de transporte envolvido. 

As recomendações de segurança são a parte mais importante da investigação. 

A  comissão  deve  corrigir  as  deficiências  detectadas  imediatamente,  e,  portanto, 

muitas vezes  são  feitas  recomendações  antes  da conclusão  das  investigações.  As 

recomendações  são  baseadas  nas  conclusões  da  investigação  e  podem  resolver 

deficiências  que  não  dizem  respeito  diretamente  ao  que,  em  última  análise, 

determinou a causa do acidente. 

A Comissão pode realizar audiências públicas como parte da investigação de 

um grande acidente de transporte. A finalidade da audiência é dupla: em primeiro 

lugar, para recolher depoimentos de testemunhas sobre as questões identificadas pela 

Comissão no decurso do inquérito e em segundo, para permitir que o público observe 

o andamento do inquérito. As audiências são normalmente realizadas no prazo de



 
 
 

82 
 
 
 
 

seis  meses  de um  acidente, mas podem  ser adiadas  as  investigações  forem  mais 

complexas. 

A investigação e as análises podem eventualmente levar muitos meses, assim 

como a elaboração de um relatório final pela comissão. A comissão delibera sobre o 

relatório  final,  em  uma  reunião  pública  em  Washington,  incluindo  as  partes  e 

membros da família, que não podem interagir com a Comissão durante a reunião. 

Depois que o relatório foi aprovado em  reunião, um resumo desse relatório, que 

contém as conclusões do Conselho de Administração, com as prováveis causas e 

recomendações de segurança, é colocado no sítio eletrônico em "Publicações". O 

relatório completo normalmente aparece várias semanas mais tarde. 

As  investigações  dos  acidentes  da  aviação  geral  são  um  processo  mais 

simples e ocorrem com uma equipe menor. Na medida em que o NTSB investiga 

muitos acidentes por ano da aviação geral, a investigação normalmente é abreviada, 

dado  o  limitado  número  de  pessoas  e  de  recursos  orçamentais.  A  maioria  das 

investigações é conduzida por uma das regionais da NTSB ou escritórios de campo. 

Pelo menos um investigador vai ao local do acidente, uma pequena investigação é 

realizada por meio de correspondência ou telefone. Alguns, mas não todos, acidentes 

de aviação geral geram recomendações de segurança aprovadas pelos membros da 

NTSB. 
 
 
 
 

4.2.2 - CENIPA 
 
 
 
 
Toda investigação de acidente aeronáutico, incidente aeronáutico e de ocorrência de 

solo realizada pelo SIPAER tem como base as informações contidas no Relatório 

Preliminar da ocorrência, que dá origem a um Relatório Final, que é o documento 

conclusivo da investigação. (NSCA 3-6). 

A  Comissão  de  Investigação  de  Acidente  Aeronáutico  (CIAA)  tem  como 

atribuições: a elaboração do relatório preliminar, conforme as instruções contidas na 

regulamentação  do  SIPAER  e  divulgar,  sempre  que  possível  aos  familiares  e



 
 
 

83 
 
 
 
 

sobreviventes, dos acidentes aeronáuticos de repercussão, informações relacionadas 

ao   andamento   da   investigação,   sem   comprometer   o   sigilo   necessário   das 

informações. Um relatório final será elaborado pelo CENIPA. (NSCA 3-6) 

A designação dos membros envolvidos em um processo de investigação, bem 

como  qualquer  alteração,  é  feita  pelo  Comando  Investigador  (CI).  A  CIAA  é 

composta  por  um  presidente  que  deve  ser  um  Oficial  Superior  do  Comando  da 

Aeronáutica responsável pela investigação como um todo, representando o CI; um 

coordenador - profissional qualificado pelo SIPAER como Oficial de Segurança de 

vôo  (OSV)  ou  Agente  de  Segurança  de  Vôo  (ASV)  que  é  responsável  pela 

coordenação das tarefas de investigação e desempenhando a função de Investigador- 

Encarregado. (NSCA 3-6) 

Podem compor ainda a CIAA um profissional responsável pela investigação 

do   fator   material;   um   profissional   responsável   pela   investigação   deste   fator 

operacional, preferencialmente com experiência na aeronave envolvida; um médico 

qualificado  responsável  pela investigação  do  aspecto  fisiológico  e,  um  Psicólogo 

responsável pela investigação deste aspecto psicológico; os dois últimos aspectos 

compõem o fator humano; todos os membros devem ser qualificados pelo SIPAER. 

Pode compor a comissão ainda qualquer especialista que possa contribuir com seu 

conhecimento técnico para a investigação. (NSCA 3-2) 

A  ação  inicial  de  qualquer  acidente  será  realizada  por  um  elemento 

credenciado do CENIPA que esteja mais próximo do local do acidente, que será 

responsável pelo preenchimento do relatório de ação inicial, devendo constar o nome 

e assinatura do responsável em campo específico. (NSCA 3-6) 

O  relatório  de  ação  inicial  é  composto,  dentre  outros,  pelo  histórico  da 

ocorrência, informações da aeronave, tripulantes, local de ocorrência, tipo de vôo 

pretendido e condições de vôo conhecidas, medidas corretivas já adotadas e outros 

aspectos  cuja  divulgação  seja  considerada  adequada  e  oportuna.  Este  relatório  é 

elaborado com a finalidade de facilitar a adoção de medidas corretivas em curto 

prazo após a ocorrência enquanto se processa a sua investigação. (NSCA 3-6) 

O   Relatório   Preliminar   é   composto,   dentre   outros,   pelo   histórico   da 

ocorrência,  laudos,  pareceres  técnicos  e  registros  referentes  às  diversas  áreas



 
 
 

84 
 
 
 
 

envolvidas  no  processo  da  investigação  e  registro  de  entrevistas  realizadas  com 

tripulantes e outras pessoas envolvidas e testemunhas. Tem como objetivo registrar 

os elementos de investigação, com vistas à elaboração do Relatório Final. (NSCA 3- 

6) 

O  Relatório  Final  é  composto  pelo  histórico  da  ocorrência,  elementos  de 

investigação (informações fatuais), análise dos elementos de investigação, conclusão 

e recomendações de Segurança Operacional. Sua finalidade é divulgar a análise, a 

conclusão e as recomendações de Segurança Operacional relativas a um acidente 

aeronáutico, incidente aeronáutico ou ocorrência de solo, visando exclusivamente à 

prevenção  de sua recorrência.  Nos  anexos  11  e 12,  encontramos  os  fluxogramas 

usados para as investigações dos acidentes, incidentes e ocorrências de solo (NSCA 

3-6) 

O elemento credenciado pelo SIPAER, localizado mais próximo do local de 

um acidente ou incidente, deverá coordenar com as autoridades policiais e de defesa 

civil  sobre  as  providências  de  isolamento,  segurança  do  sítio  e  preservação  de 

indícios e evidências, até a chegada do investigador-encarregado para a realização da 

ação inicial. Deve identificar preliminarmente as testemunhas e os riscos presentes 

no  sítio  do  acidente  ou  incidente,  fornecendo  as  informações  pertinentes  ao 

investigador-encarregado. (NSCA 3-6) 

Após  o  resgate  e  o  socorro  das  vítimas  do  acidente,  o  investigador- 

encarregado  tem  acesso  e o  controle irrestrito  sobre todo  material  e  documentos 

relevantes  e  destroços,  incluindo  os  gravadores  de vôo  e  gravações  do  órgão  de 

controle  de  tráfego  aéreo,  com  a  finalidade  de  iniciar  os  exames  do  material 

selecionado com o mais rápido possível. (NSCA 3-6) 

Informações  relevantes  sobre  o  vôo,  nos  momentos  que  precedem  um 

acidente ou incidente, podem ser obtidas através da leitura dos registros contidos nos 

gravadores de vôo, os quais devem ser encaminhados pelo presidente da CIAA, para 

decodificação  dos  dados,  no  menor  prazo  praticável,  através  de  solicitação  ao 

CENIPA. (NSCA 3-6) 

O processo com que ocorre a investigação sugere ser bastante semelhante nas 

duas agências.



 
 
 

85 
 
 
 
 

4.3 ANÁLISE DAS OCORRÊNCIAS COM AERONAVES 
 
 
 
 
4.3.1   Tipo de Ocorrência 
 
 
 
 

A partir do levantamento feito no banco de dados das planilhas eletrônicas 

disponíveis no IV SERIPA, foram identificadas 636 ocorrências com aeronaves no 

período  de  2000  a  2005,  considerando-se  todos  os  tipos  de  ocorrência  com 

aeronaves. A tabela 1 apresenta a distribuição, mostrando os tipos e quantas foram 

investigadas em cada ano. 
 
 

Tabela  1  –  Distribuição  acidentes  aeronáuticos  por  tipo  de  ocorrências  com 
aeronaves e se foram ou não investigadas , período de 2000 a 2005, no Estado de São 
Paulo. 
    

Tipo De Acidente              Incidente Incidente          Ocorrência De Total 

Ocorrência Grave Solo 

Investigado Sim Não Sim Não Sim Não Sim Não 

2000 13 - 1 - 11 78 - 2 105 

2001 15 - 2 - 5 85 3 3 113 

2002 13 - 1 - 6 71 - 10 101 

2003 11 - 1 - 8 95 2 5 122 

2004 11 - 1 2 1 81 - 3 99 

2005 11 - 2 - 9 66 5 3 96 

Total 74 - 8 2 40 476 10 26 636 
 

Fonte: IV SERIPA 
 
 

Foram  encontradas  74  ocorrências  classificadas  como  acidentes  aéreos, 

correspondendo a 11,6% do total.  Destes, 69 possuiam os relatórios de investigação 

de acidente aeronáutico (RELIAA) concluídos, dos quais 36  relatórios finais haviam 

sido  finalizados  em  dezembro  de  2008.  Ou  seja,  5,5  %  do  número  total  de 



 
 
 

86 
 
 
 
 

ocorrências foram utilizados para esta análise. A relação dos acidentes analisados 

está no anexo 7. 

Comparativamente o número de acidentes em cada período é relativamente 

estável girando em torno da média de 12,3 acidentes por ano de investigação, assim 

como a média de ocorrências que é de 106 acidentes ao ano. 

Podemos  observar  na  tabela  1  que  74,8%  correspondem  a  incidentes  não 

investigados. A NSCA 3-6 permite que os incidentes não sejam investigados, desde 

que   o   comando   investigador   considere   que   a   investigação   não   trará   novos 

conhecimentos para a prevenção. Já  os acidentes têm investigação compulsória. 

Embora  não  exista  a  obrigatoriedade  de  investigação  dos  incidentes,  pela 

legislação vigente, a informação ou ensinamento que poderia surgir desta analise 

deixou de contribuir para a segurança de vôo. Os fatores que que fizeram com que os 

incidentes não fossem investigados não são claros, podem estar relacionados ao tipo 

de evento, ou a carrência de pessoal para realizar as investigações. 

A  figura  10  mostra  que  os  incidentes  foram  o  tipo  de  ocorrência  mais 

frequente, correspondendo a 81% do total. 
 
 
 
 
Figura 10 – Distribuição por tipo de ocorrências com aeronaves  no Estado de São 
Paulo de 2000 /2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

n = 636



 
 
 

87 
 
 
 
 

4.3.2 – Ocorrências por Categoria de Registro 
 
 
 

A tabela 2 mostra a distribuição das ocorrências por categoria de registro da 

aeronave, que identifica o tipo de atividade para a qual a aeronave é cadastrada no 

Registro Aeronáutico Brasileiro (RAB), disponível para consulta na internet no site 

da ANAC. (RBHA 47) 

Identificamos que as categorias que mais se envolveram em acidentes são as 

aeronaves privadas e as de instrução, estas categorias correspondem também as de 

maior número de registro na ANAC no Estado de São Paulo. 
 
 
 
 
Tabela 2 – Distribuição do total de ocorrências com aeronaves por categoria de 

registro, ocorridas no Estado de São Paulo, no período 2000-2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Categoria N % 
 
 SERVIÇOS AÉROS PRIVADOS (TPP) 283 44,50 
 
 SERVIÇOS DE TRANPORTE AÉREO 105 16,5 
 
 PÚBLICO – TAXI AÉREO (TPX) 

 
 SERVIÇO TRANSPORTE AÉREO PÚBLICO 34 5,3 
 NÃO REGULAR ( TPN) 
 
 

PRIVADA DE INSTRUÇAO (PRI)/PÚBLICA 152 23,9 
 
 DE INSTRUÇÃO (PIN) 
 
 SERVIÇOES AÉREOS ESPECIAIS (SAE) 26 4,1 
 
 OUTRAS 36 5,7 
 
 TOTAL 636 100 
 

 Fonte: IV SERIPA



 
 
 

88 
 
 
 
 

Se observarmos comparativamente as figuras 11 e 12, apenas os acidentes e 

incidentes identificamos que as aeronaves privadas e de instrução também aparecem 

com maior proporção, tanto nos acidentes como nos incidentes. 
 
 

Figura 11- Distribuição dos incidentes por categoria de operação no Estado de São 

Paulo, 2000-2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

n = 516 
 
 
 

Figura 12 - Distribuição dos acidentes por categoria de operação no Estado de São 

Paulo, 2000 a 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

n = 74 
 
 

*Categorias:  TPP  (Privada  -  Serviços  Aéreos  Privados);  TPX  (Privada  –  Serviço  Transporte  Aéreo 
Público Não Regular Táxi Aéreo); TPN (Privada  – Serviço Transporte Aéreo Público Não Regular); 
PRI (Privada de Instrução); PIN (Pública de Instrução); SAE (Serviços Aéreos Especializados – inclui 
todas as categorias); Outras ( inclui outras 13 categorias) 
4.3.3 Incidentes



 
 
 

89 
 
 
 
 

Embora os relatórios finais dos incidentes não estivessem disponíveis e 92% 

dos incidentes não tenham sido investigados, observamos na figura 13 que os tipos 

de ocorrência são predominantemente relacionados a falhas mecânicas: de sistema, 

de motor, de motor em vôo, de componente, na hélice, no trem de pouso, no rotor e 

estrutural, somando 41,19% e, indicando um predomínio de deste tipo de causa nos 

incidentes. 

O modelo teórico do HFCAS sugere que os atos inseguros se originam de 

influências  organizacionais  e  que  não  podemos  nos  restringir  aos  indicadores  de 

falhas mecânicas como pontuais ou aleatórios. 

As  ocorrências  que  não  são  investigadas  podem  ser  resultantes  de  falhas 

latentes,   como   por   exemplo,   nos   problemas   organizacionais   que   podem   ser 

identificados tanto por parte de quem faz a tarefa, como do proprietário da aeronave, 

que pode não valorizar a supervisão direta, ou ainda de órgãos governamentais que 

deveriam fiscalizar o sistema. 

WIEGMANN   E   SHAPPELL   (2001)   consideram   que   os   esforços   da 

investigação devem ser sistematicamente centrados em uma análise abrangente das 

bases de dados existentes, que deve ser avaliada para determinar os fatores humanos 

responsáveis pelos acidentes e incidentes na aviação. 

Devemos  concentrar  esforços  em  conceber  novos  modelos  de  análise  dos 

processos de investigação.  Os  estudos  mais recentes na área de investigação de acidentes 

consideram  que  ―falha  técnica‖  é  um  resultado  de  circunstâncias  e  decisões  anteriores:  o 

acidente, como qualquer outro evento, tem antecedentes e uma história complexa. 

(AMALBERTI, 2001; REASON, 1990).



 
 
 

90 
 
 
 
 

Figura 13- Número de incidentes aeronáuticos classificados por tipo de ocorrência, 
no Estado de São Paulo, 2000-2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

n= 415



 
 
 

91 
 
 
 
 

4.4. DADOS DOS RELATÓRIOS FINAIS 
 
 
 
 
4.4.1 Lesões 
 
 
 
 

Os  acidentes  aeronáuticos  chamam  nossa  atenção  devido  à  sua  grande 

letalidade.  Se  considerarmos  o  número  de  mortos  em  acidentes  aeronáuticos  em 

comparação a outros meios de transporte, teremos dificuldade de analisá-los devido 

às formas de classificação das atividades pelo Ministério da Saúde, as estatísticas 

nem  sempre  identificam  as  vítimas  de  acidente  de  transporte  da  mesma  forma, 

podem  ser  classificados  como  acidente  de  trabalho  ou  não,  podendo  tornar  a 

comparação imprecisa. 

O  número  de  vítimas  fatais  é  grande,  considerando  apenas  os  eventos 

analisados no período da pesquisa. Em função do conceito de acidente utilizado pelo 

CENIPA,  somente  encontraremos  vítimas  fatais  nos  acidentes,  porém  todos  os 

envolvidos são considerados vitimas, mesmo que não sofram lesão física (ilesos). 

A  figura  14  mostra  a  classificação  dos  tipos  de  lesão  das  118  vítimas 

envolvidas  nos  74  acidentes  aeronáuticos  da  aviação  geral  ocorridos  do  período 

compreendido na pesquisa, que incluem pilotos, passageiros e terceiros. O número de 

lesões fatais comporta 41,5% e, se somada às lesões graves, atinge 49,1% do total.



 
 
 

92 
 
 
 
 

Figura 14 – Distribuição das vítimas por tipo de lesão dos envolvidas em acidentes 
aeronáuticos no Estado de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 
 
 
 

30 
 
25 
 
20 
 

TRIPULANTES 
15 
 PASSAGEIROS 
10 

TERCEIROS 

5 
 
0 

FATAIS GRAVES LEVES ILESOS 
Tipo de Lesão 
 
 
 
 

4.4.2 Classificação dos Relatórios 
 
 
 
 

A tabela 3 mostra como estão distribuídos os 36 relatórios finais utilizados 

para  análise  e  comparação  com  o  modelo  HFACS.  Identificamos  que  80%  dos 

acidentes  analisados  foram  com  aviões  e  que  a  atividade  predominante  foi  o 

transporte público privado (TPP), com 44% das ocorrências, seguido das atividades 

de instrução (PRI) com 25%. 

Podemos identificar também um número decrescente de relatórios finais  a 

cada ano. A elaboração dos relatórios finais é de responsabilidade do CENIPA, órgão 

que passou por mudanças a partir de 2005 devido a criação da ANAC passando a 

absorver um maior número de atribuições, como por exemplo, a investigação de 

acidentes da aviação comercial. 

O CENIPA passou em um intervalo menor que um ano por dois grandes 

acidentes da aviação comercial, em 29 de setembro de 2006 (vôo 1907) e em 17 de 

julho  de  2007  (vôo  3054)  e  que  juntos  somaram  353  vítimas  fatais.  A  logística 

necessária a investigação destes acidentes comprometeu diversos setores o órgão e 

númerodevítimas 



 
 
 

93 
 
 
 
 

dos recém criados SERIPA, prejudicando o andamento de diversos trabalhos, como 

provavelmente ocorreu com a elaboração dos relatórios finais. 

Tabela 3 – Classificação dos relatórios finais de acidentes aeronáuticos por ano de 

ocorrência, tipo de aeronave e categoria de atividade no Est. de São Paulo de 2000 a 

2005. 
 
 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 
 

Nº de relatórios finais 10 8 7 6 4 1 36 
 

Tipo de Aeronave 
 

Avião 9 6 5 5 3 1 29 
 

Helicóptero 1 2 2 1 1 - 7 
 

Categoria 
 

Serviço Aéreo Privado (TPP) 4 4 3 4 1 - 16 
 

Táxi Aéreo (TPX) - 2 1 1 - - 4 
  

Transporte Aéreo Público -           1           -           -           -           -           1 
(TPN) 

Privada de Instrução (PRI) 2 - 3 1 3 - 9 
  
Serviços Aéreos Especiais 4          1           -           -           -           1           6 

(SAE) 
 
 
 
 

A figura 15 mostra a classificação dada pelo CENIPA nos relatórios finais 

analisados por tipo de ocorrência. Identifica-se que a falha de motor em vôo com 

33% dos eventos foi a ocorrência mais freqüente, seguida por colisão em vôo com 

obstáculo, com 30,5% e perda de controle em vôo com 16,6 %. Estas três causas 

representam 80% do total. 



 
 
 

94 
 
 
 
 

Figura 15 – Número de ocorrências dos relatórios finais, classificadas de acordo 
com o tipo no Estado de São Paulo, 2000-2005. 
 
 

n = 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.5. – FATORES CONTRIBUINTES DOS ACIDENTES AERONÁUTICOS 
 
 
 
 

A análise comparativa realizada avaliou os fatores indicados nos relatórios 

finais considerados pelo investigador do CENIPA e a análise com o método HFACS, 

realizada pela autora seguindo as descrições operacionalizadas (anexo 5). 
 
 
 
 

4.5.1 Análise Comparativa dos Relatórios Finais 
 
 
 
 
4.5.1.1 – Acidente A



 
 
 

95 
 
 
 
 

Acidente ocorrido com a aeronave PP-EOG, em 18 de janeiro de 2000, no 

município de Mairiporã, Estado de São Paulo, com um helicóptero modelo ―esquilo‖ 

e classificada como colisão em vôo com obstáculo, cujo histórico foi transcrito do 

relatório final. 

Histórico do Acidente: 

A   aeronave   decolou   do   Campo   de   Marte   com   um   piloto   e   mais   três 
tripulantes,  todos  militares  pertencentes  ao  Grupamento  de  Radiopatrulha  Aérea  da 
Polícia Militar do Estado de São Paulo, a fim de realizar uma missão aérea de busca 
e  cerco  de  um  grupo  de  marginais  que  havia  se  evadido  para  a  região  próxima  de 
Franco da Rocha na grande São Paulo. 

O piloto estava realizando um sobrevôo a baixa altura em um local apontado 
por  viaturas  da  Polícia  Militar,  quando  recebeu  a  informação  de  que  uma  senhora 
havia visto dois homens armados seqüestrarem um automóvel de cor preta e fugirem 
em alta velocidade. 

O  piloto  iniciou  um  sobrevôo  da  Rodovia  Fernão  Dias  e  interceptou  um 
veículo  suspeito.  Após  a  chegada  das  viaturas,  o  piloto  realizou  uma  subida  em 
espiral  e,  ao  atingir  a  altura  aproximada  de  70  m  (210  ft),  nivelou  e  reiniciou  o 
sobrevôo da referida rodovia, ainda em busca de veículos suspeitos. 

Próximo  a  Mairiporã-SP,  o  helicóptero  chocou-se  com  os  fios  de  uma  rede 
de alta tensão que cruzava a rodovia. 

O piloto conseguiu conduzir a aeronave para um pouso forçado em uma área 
de vegetação baixa, próxima à rodovia. 

Em  conseqüência,  os  tripulantes  sofreram  lesões  leves  e  a  aeronave  ficou 
completamente destruída. 
 
 
As figuras 16 e 17 ilustram os fatores contribuintes de acordo com a análise 

do  CENIPA  comparativamente  com  a  análise  do  HFACS.  Neste  caso  podemos 

identificar que na analise feita pelo CENIPA foram identificados 3 fatores como 

contribuintes  e  todos  ligados  ao  fator  operacional,  os  fatores  identificados  como 

indeterminados não foram considerados, a análise do HFACS neste caso identificou, 

15 fatores contribuintes muitos deles baseados em fatores organizacionais. 

Os fatores foram identificados a partir do relato feito na análise, constatando 

que  embora  diversos  fatores  ligados  a  aspectos  organizacionais  tenham  sido 

comentados,  não  foram  considerados  na  análise  final  dos  fatores  contribuintes, 

provavelmente porque o modelo utilizado pelo CENIPA não classifica este fatores 

organizacionais.



 
 
 

96 
 
 
 
 

Figura 16 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo CENIPA no acidente A.

FATOR ANÁLISE 

HUMANO 

Fisiológico Não Contribuiu 

Psicológico Indeterminado – A cultura organizacional pode ter 
influenciado na decisão do piloto de manter o vôo a 
baixa altura na presença de obstáculos 

MATERIAL 

Deficiência de projeto Não Contribuiu 

Deficiência de fabricação Não Contribuiu 

Deficiência      de      manuseio      d Não Contribuiu 
e 
mOPatEerRiaAl CIONAL 

Condições                 meteorológica Não Contribuiu 
s 
aDdevfeicriseanst e infra-estrutura Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente instrução Indeterminado   –   A   inexistência   de   um   manual   de 
doutrina     para     o     emprego     do     equipamento     na
s 

Deficiente manutenção oNpãeor aCçoõnetsr iabéureiua s policiais pode ter influenciado. 

Deficiente aplicação de comando Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente controle de tráfego Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente coordenação de cabine Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente julgamento Contribuiu   -   O   piloto   julgou   inadequadamente   que 
poderia manter o vôo a baixa altura apesar de existirem 
redes de alta tensão na região. 

Deficiente pessoal de apoio Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente planejamento Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente supervisão Contribuiu   –   O   comando   permitiu   a   realização   da 
operação  sem  um  manual  consolidado  de  emprego.  A 
falta de co-piloto provocou a sobrecarga de tarefas que 
dificultou a condução do vôo. 

Esquecimento Não Contribuiu 

Indisciplina de vôo Não Contribuiu 

Influência do meio ambiente Não Contribuiu 

Pouca experiência vôo/aeronave Não Contribuiu 

Outros – Falta de sinalização Contribuiu   –   A   rede   de   alta   tensão   não   possuía   
a 
sinalização prevista pela legislação. 



 
 
 

97 
 
 
 
 

Figura 17 - Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo HFACS no acidente A

FATOR ANÁLISE 

INFLUENCIAS ORGANIZACIONAIS 

Clima organizacional Contribuiu – A ausência de normas para a 
operação sugere uma cultura de segurança 
pobre, priorizando a tarefa em detrimento 
da segurança. 

Processo organizacional Contribuiu – permitiam que os limites da 
segurança fossem ultrapassados. 

Gestão de recursos Contribuiu  –  falta  de  pessoal  capacitado 
para execução da tarefa. (ausência do co- 
piloto) 

SUPERVISÃO INSEGURA 

Supervisão inadequada Contribuiu   –   falta   de   treinamento   e 
manutenção da operacionalidade adequada. 

Planejamento inadequado das operações Contribuiu – a gestão do risco foi avaliada 
de     forma     inadequada,     não     havia 
parâmetros para realizar a operação. 

Falha em corrigir problemas inseguros Contribuiu   –   a   operação   não   possuía 
parâmetros      operacionais,      mas      era 
executada com regularidade. 

Violação de fiscalização Contribuiu   –   havia   um   desrespeito   as 
normas      vigentes,      sendo      permitido 
ultrapassá-las quando fosse necessário. 

CONDIÇOES PREVIAS PARA ATOS INSEGUROS 

Fatores Ambientais 

Ambiente tecnológico Contribuiu   –   rede   elétrica   não   estava 
balizada. 

Ambiente físico Não contribuiu 

Condições do operador 

Estados mentais adversos Não contribuiu 

Estados fisiológicos adversos Não contribuiu 

Limitações físicas e mentais Não contribuiu 

Fatores Pessoais 

Gestão da tripulação Contribuiu – sobrecarga de tarefas devido 
a ausência de um co-piloto. 

Prontidão pessoal Contribuiu   –   falta   de   treinamento   e 
informação adequada para realizar a tarefa. 

ATOS INSEGUROS 

Erros 

Erros de decisão Contribuiu – procedimento mal executado. 
 



 
 
 

98 
 
 
 
 
 

FATOR ANÁLISE  
Erros de habilidade Contribuiu   –   falta   de   percepção   dos  

 
perigos envolvidos na operação. 

 
Erros de percepção Contribuiu  –  dificuldade  em  perceber  o s 

obstáculos    devido    à    degradação    da  
atenção.  

 
Violação  
Rotina Contribuiu – tolerância com os desvios da s 

normas.  
 

Excepcional Não contribuiu  
  

 
 

4.5.1.2 – Acidente B 
 
 
 
 

Acidente ocorrido com a aeronave PT- DPF, em 18 de março de 2005 no 

município de Santa Ernestina, no Estado de São Paulo, com uma aeronave PIPER 

modelo  PA-25  e  classificada  como  falha  de  motor  em  vôo,  cujo  histórico  foi 

transcrito do relatório final. 

Histórico do Acidente: 

O  piloto realizava  vôos  de pulverização  em canaviais para a  Usina  Bonfim, 
localizada no município de Guariba  – SP. Durante o retorno da sexta e última etapa 
de pulverização do dia, a aeronave apresentou falha do motor em vôo, obrigando-o a 
realizar  pouso  de  emergência  em  um  campo  arado  situado  no  município  de  Santa 
Ernestina, distante cerca de duas milhas náuticas da base de operação. 

O piloto realizou uma aterragem forçada, tocando o solo por cinco vezes, até 
pilonar, percorrendo 93 metros, acabando por parar no dorso. 

O  piloto,  gravemente  ferido,  foi  retirado  com  vida  da  aeronave  por  uma 
equipe  de  resgate  da  empresa  concessionária  da  rodovia,  com  suspeita  de  fratura 
cervical,  sendo  encaminhado  para  hospitalização,  quando  veio  a  falecer  quatro  dias 
após, em virtude de trauma raquidiano-medular e de outras complicações 
decorrentes. A aeronave sofreu danos graves. 
 

As figuras 18 e 19 mostram a comparação realizada no acidente B e da 

mesma forma podemos notar a ausência de fatores organizacionais na análise 

do   CENIPA   que   apresenta   2   fatores   do   aspecto   operacional   como



 
 
 

99 
 
 
 
 

contribuintes para o acidente e o modelo HFACS identificou 12 fatores, sendo 

7 ligados a fatores organizacionais. 

Figura 18 – Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo CENIPA no acidente B.

FATOR ANÁLISE 

HUMANO 

Fisiológico Não Contribuiu 

Psicológico Não Contribuiu 

MATERIAL 

Deficiência de projeto Não Contribuiu 

Deficiência de fabricação Não Contribuiu 

Deficiência      de      manuseio      d Não Contribuiu 
e 
mOPatEerRiaAl CIONAL 

Condições                 meteorológica Não Contribuiu 
s 
aDdevfeicriseanst e infra-estrutura Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente instrução Não Contribuiu. 

Deficiente manutenção Contribuiu   –   a   análise   do   fator   material   apontou   
a 
fratura do eixo das manivelas com fator preponderante 
do    acidente.    Os    serviços    de    manutenção    foram 
considerados periódicos, todavia não se pode testar sua 
adequabilidade.    Houve    indícios    de    realização    de 

Deficiente aplicação de comando sNeãrov iCçosn ftroirbau diue sede, sem controle e sem registro. 

Deficiente controle de tráfego Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente coordenação de cabine Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente julgamento Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente pessoal de apoio Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente planejamento Não Contribuiu 

Deficiente supervisão Contribuiu  –  tanto  o  operador  quanto  o  mantenedor 
não   puderam   estabelecer   um   histórico   confiável   do 
componente  que  sofreu  falha  devido  a  documentação 
incompleta  e  registros  de  operação  e  manutenção  não 
confiáveis.   O   fato   do   piloto   operar   sem   capacete   
e 
possivelmente  sem  suspensórios  denota  a  carência  de 

Esquecimento sNuãpoe rCvoisnãtori bduasiu o perações por parte da empresa. 

Indisciplina de vôo Não Contribuiu 

Influência do meio ambiente Não Contribuiu 

Pouca experiência vôo/aeronave Não Contribuiu 



 
 
 

100 
 
 
 
 

Figura 19 - Fatores contribuintes identificados pelo HFACS no acidente B

FATOR ANÁLISE 

INFLUENCIAS ORGANIZACIONAIS 

Clima organizacional Contribuiu – A ausência de normas para a 
operação sugere uma cultura de segurança 
pobre, priorizando a tarefa em detrimento 
da segurança. 

Processo organizacional Contribuiu  –  os  procedimentos  adotados 
permitiam  a  operação  da  aeronave  sem 
controle adequado de sua manutenção. 

Gestão de recursos Contribuiu  –  falta  de  pessoal  capacitado 
para execução da tarefa. (falta de pessoal 
capacitado para realizar a manutenção da 
aeronave) 

SUPERVISÃO INSEGURA 

Supervisão inadequada Contribuiu    –    falta    de    pessoal    de 
manutenção  com treinamento adequado. 

Planejamento inadequado das operações Contribuiu – a operação era realizada sem 
a garantia da manutenção adequada e sem 
a     utilização     dos     equipamentos     de 
segurança. 

Falha em corrigir problemas inseguros Contribuiu  –  a  falta  do  preenchimento 
adequado dos controles da manutenção da 
aeronave,  impedindo  sua  rastreabilidade, 
demonstram a complacência do supervisor. 

Violação de fiscalização Contribuiu   –   havia   um   desrespeito   as 
normas      vigentes,      sendo      permitido 
ultrapassá-las quando fosse necessário. 

CONDIÇOES PREVIAS PARA ATOS INSEGUROS 

Fatores Ambientais 

Ambiente tecnológico Não contribuiu 

Ambiente físico Contribuiu – o terreno disponível para o 
pouso de emergência era inadequado. 

Condições do operador 

Estados mentais adversos Não contribuiu 

Estados fisiológicos adversos Não contribuiu 

Limitações físicas e mentais Não contribuiu 

Fatores Pessoais 

Gestão da tripulação Não contribuiu 

Prontidão pessoal Não contribuiu 

  
 



 
 
 

101 
 
 
 
 
 

FATOR ANÁLISE  
ATOS INSEGUROS  

 
Erros  
Erros de decisão Contribuiu       –       procedimentos       de  

manutenção executados de forma precari a. 
 

Erros de habilidade Contribuiu   –   falta   de   percepção   dos  
perigos envolvidos na operação.  

Erros de percepção Contribuiu  –  dificuldade  em  perceber   os 
obstáculos    devido    à    degradação    da  

 
atenção.  

Violação  
Rotina Contribuiu – tolerância com os desvios d as 

 
normas. 

 
Excepcional Não contribuiu  

  

Da mesma forma como no acidente A podemos identificar a dificuldade 

na  classificação  dos  fatores  organizacionais  e  no  acidente  B  os  fatores 

materiais se confundem na análise do investigador com a manutenção e com a 

supervisão. 
 
 
 
 
4.5.2 – Fatores Contribuintes Identificados nos Relatórios Finais na Análise do 

CENIPA 
 
 
 
 

A figura 20 representa como foram classificados os acidentes de acordo com 

os  fatores  contribuintes  apresentados  nos  relatórios  finais  do  CENIPA.  Foram 

identificados 163 fatores separados em humano, material e operacional, em nenhum 

dos relatórios analisados foi considerado que houve contribuição do fator material. A 

média de fatores contribuintes é de 4,52 e o número de fatores operacionais sugere 

que o modelo se restringe a identificação de falhas ativas e, portanto não revela a 

influência dos aspectos organizacionais. 

A sistemática de investigação dos acidentes adotada pelo CENIPA não obriga 

a  presença  de  investigadores  do  fator  humano  nos  acidentes,  isso  ocorre  apenas



 
 
 

102 
 
 
 
 

quando o investigador julgar que é necessário. A formação do investigador não é 

voltada ao fator humano e sim ao operacional e nem sempre o investigador do fator 

humano (médico ou psicólogo) esta disponível, pois embora sejam todos militares, 

nem sempre estão sob o mesmo comando, dificultando sua disponibilidade. Estes 

aspectos podem interferir diretamente na análise do acidente. 
 
 
 
 
Figura 20 – Fatores contribuintes dos relatórios finais de acidentes ocorridos no 

Estado de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 
 
 
 
 
 

160 
140 
120 
100 

80 
60 
40 
20 

0 
Humano Material Operacional 

Fator n = 163 
 

Fonte: CENIPA 
 
 
 
 

A figura 21 mostra o detalhamento dos fatores contribuintes em subdivisões. 

Observamos que o fator operacional compreende os aspectos presentes na maioria 

dos  relatórios.  ―Deficiente  julgamento‖  está  presente  em  80,5%  dos  relatórios, 

―deficiente planejamento‖ e ―deficiente supervisão‖ presentes em 66,7% cada um, a 

―indisciplina de vôo‖ em 38,9%. O fator humano em seu aspecto psicológico está 

presente em 44,4%. 

númerodefatorescontribuintes 



 
 
 

103 
 
 
 
 

Figura  21  –  Número de aspectos  contribuintes  por fator  nos  relatórios  finais  de 
acidentes ocorridos no Estado de São Paulo de 2000-2005, segundo CENIPA 
 
 

n = 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.5.3. Fatores Contribuintes Identificados nos Relatórios Finais na Análise do 

Modelo HFACS 
 
 
 
 

A  análise  utilizando  o  HFACS  resultou  em  370  fatores  contribuintes 

distribuídos, conforme observamos na figura 22, sugerindo a um maior detalhamento 

na  análise  do  CENIPA.  Observamos  uma  maior  distribuição  dos  fatores:  ―atos 

inseguros‖ correspondem  a 35,9%  e ―supervisão  insegura‖  corresponde a 28,4%. 

Com a utilização deste modelo temos uma média de 10,3 fatores contribuintes por 

acidente, aumentando de forma significativa o número de fatores por acidente.



 
 
 

104 
 
 
 
 

Figura 22 – Número de fatores contribuintes utilizando o HFACS nos acidentes 
ocorridos no Est. de São Paulo de 2000-2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

N =370 
 
 
 

Cada grupo foi detalhado em suas subdivisões para melhor identificarmos as 

diferenças com o modelo adotado pelo CENIPA, o que pode ser identificado na 

figura 23. 
 

Nos fatores secundários em que predominam os ―erros de decisão‖ presentes 

em  88,9%,  seguidos  dos  ―erros  de  habilidade  e  decisão‖  e  do  ―planejamento 

inadequado‖, presentes em 86,1% e a ―supervisão inadequada‖ em 77,8%. 
 

O  modelo  HFACS  considera  separadamente  os  fatores  organizacionais, 

supervisão insegura, condição prévia de atos inseguros e atos inseguros sugere que 

todos fazem parte da mesma cadeia de eventos e, se estão estatisticamente separados, 

não devem ser analisados isoladamente. (WIEGMANN et al, 2005).



 
 
 

105 
 
 
 
 

Figura 23 – Número de fatores contribuintes com as subdivisões do HFACS nos 
acidentes ocorridos no Estado de São Paulo de 2000-2005.



 
 
 

106 
 
 
 
 

5. DISCUSSÃO 
 
 
 

5.1 AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 
 
 
 

As  formas  de  investigação  são  semelhantes  quanto  à  constituição  dos 

membros que compõem as equipes de investigação que produzem os relatórios. Há 

certa flexibilidade na composição das equipes, de acordo com a necessidade de cada 

acidente. 

Normalmente o responsável pelas investigações é um piloto, que avalia os 

aspectos operacionais; sua equipe é composta por engenheiros que avaliam o fator 

material  e  outros  especialistas,  tais  como  médicos  e  psicólogos,  que  podem  ser 

requisitados para uma análise mais específica. 

A  filosofia  das  investigações  segue  o  que  é  orientado  pelo  ICAO  no  seu 

Anexo 13, buscando, através da investigação realizada de um acidente ou incidente 

aeronáutico,   prevenir   futuros   acidentes   e   incidentes,   colhendo   e   analisando 

informações para determinar as circunstâncias e as possíveis causas; e, baseado nos 

dados  analisados,  fazer  as  recomendações  adequadas  de  segurança,  buscando 

elementos que possibilitem a prevenção e não sejam usados para imputar culpa. 

A forma de conduzir as investigações de maneira independente também é 

assegurada pela legislação internacional e, portanto, todos os países membros têm 

autonomia para adotar o método e a teoria que lhe conduza ao relatório final. 

As  estatísticas  de  acidentes  não  são  padronizadas.  A  EASA,  através  da 

ECCAIRS, tem tomado a iniciativa de padronizar as comunicações dos acidentes 

em um processo que pode, no futuro, ser um grande facilitador da análise destes 

dados e de mitigação de acidentes ou incidentes. 

Para EAGLE, DAVES E REASON (1992), a investigação das causas de um 

acidente de grande amplitude envolve três etapas: primeiro, os fatos são montados na 

seqüência em que os eventos ocorreram e uma linha do tempo é gerada. Esta etapa 

prevê  investigadores  com  a  indicação  de  "quando"  as  coisas  aconteceram.  Em 

segundo lugar, as falhas ativas são identificadas. Esta etapa, conhecida como ―análise



 
 
 

107 
 
 
 
 

da  função‖,  exige  a  descrição  do  comportamento  de  todo  o  pessoal  envolvido  e 

proporciona aos investigadores o conhecimento ―do que" ocorreu. Em terceiro lugar, 

é feito um exame e uma avaliação da contribuição das falhas latentes. Este passo é 

uma  expansão  da  "análise  do  fluxo  das  informações",  com  ênfase  no  papel  das 

deficiências no sistema de trabalho e ajuda a explicar o "por que" o acidente ocorreu. 

Observa-se   neste   trabalho   que   a   condução   das   investigações   segue 

principalmente a primeira e a segunda etapa. Entretanto, não fica claro se ocorre a 

terceira fase: análise das falhas latentes. Para que esta etapa ocorra, deveria haver, 

obrigatoriamente, compondo as comissões, um especialista para fazer a análise das 

deficiências no sistema de trabalho. Fato que não foi identificado. 

Outro aspecto a ser discutido é a forma de integração entre as agências. Nos 

Estados   Unidos   há   quatro   agências   com   escopos   diferentes   que   mantêm 

independência nas investigações, mas que interagem entre si para que as medidas 

preventivas tenham uma maior efetividade. O FAA atua como agência reguladora e 

com responsabilidades de manutenção de segurança de vôo. 

As  condições  de  trabalho  são  avaliadas  pela  OSHA,  que  tem  também  a 

atribuição de realizar pesquisas para prevenir doenças relacionadas ao trabalho. Os 

aspectos ambientais ficam a cargo do EPA, que está integrado às demais agências 

federais, ficando a cargo do NTSB somente as investigações. 

No  Brasil  não  existe  integração  entre  as  agências.  As  investigações  são 

restritas a um órgão militar, que é responsável também pela prevenção, mas não tem 

legalmente poder regulador. 

O  CENIPA,  órgão  oficialmente  designado  para  investigação  de  acidentes 

aéreos no Brasil, embora esteja sob a legislação da ICAO, é um órgão subordinado 

ao  Ministério  da  Defesa  e  diretamente,  a  um  órgão  militar  do  Comando  da 

Aeronáutica. Isto lhe assegura uma estrutura de funcionamento, mas não lhe dá a 

independência nas investigações dos acidentes, que para a aprovação de relatórios 

finais, está sujeita à hierarquia militar. 

A agência  reguladora  da aviação  civil  (ANAC)  foi criada  em  2005,  mas, 

efetivamente,  passou  a  funcionar  em  2006,  atuando  como  um  elo  do  sistema de



 
 
 

108 
 
 
 
 

prevenção de acidentes, mas não participa diretamente das investigações, ficando 

principalmente como órgão fiscalizador. 

Embora a CT-SST seja uma comissão interministerial, esta não tem nenhum 

vínculo com o Ministério da Defesa e não contempla a investigação dos acidentes 

aéreos.  Sugerindo  que  os  acidentes  aeronáuticos  são  avaliados  de  forma  isolada, 

cabendo uma reflexão sobre a conduta que devemos adotar principalmente no caso 

de se configurarem como acidente de trabalho. 

A  cultura  de  segurança  tem  forte  influência  sobre  os  comportamentos, 

representando  os  valores,  crenças  e  comportamentos  que  são  partilhados  por 

membros de grupos, fornecendo as pistas e indícios quanto à forma como o grupo se 

comporta em diversas situações. A cultura também provoca várias conseqüências, 

influenciando o modo como a informação é partilhada e influenciando a adesão a 

regras e atitudes. (HELMEREICH E DAVIES, 2004) 

Ao compararmos a forma com funcionam, percebemos que tanto nos Estados 

Unidos como na União Européia existe uma integração de diferentes agências que se 

complementam  para  dar  uma  maior  abrangência  às  pesquisas  dos  acidentes  e 

evitando duplicidade de investigações, refletindo uma cultura de integração. 

Identificamos   que   as   agências   internacionais   foram   consideradas   mais 

independentes, ou seja, não tinham interferência direta de um órgão que pode estar 

envolvido operacionalmente no sistema, o que permitiu maior liberdade durante as 

investigações, nas análises e nas recomendações emitidas. 

No Brasil não existe uma integração entre diferentes órgãos na investigação, 

contribuindo para a descentralização de informações que poderiam ser úteis para a 

investigação e análise, bem como prejudicando levantamentos estatísticos por não 

possuírem banco de dados padronizados e, muitas vezes, resultando na duplicidade 

do trabalho de investigar os acidentes. 
 
 
 
 
5.2 INCIDENTES AERONÁUTICOS



 
 
 

109 
 
 
 
 

Quando  nos  deparamos  com  uma  quantidade  tão  grande  de  incidentes  não 

investigados, podemos supor que perdemos informações importantes da realização do 

trabalho e das possíveis soluções de prevenção que foram encontradas para evitar que 

ocorresse  o  acidente,  assim  como  de  situações  desfavoráveis  e  dos  contextos  que 

possivelmente desencadearam acidentes. 

A formação dos investigadores deveria valorizar os aspectos ligados a fatores 

humanos, bem como ampliar o horizonte dos investigadores com teorias mais atuais 

não se limitando aos modelos SHEL e ou se restringindo ao modelo de barreiras de 

REASON (1990) sem avançar para achados teóricos mais atuais: 

―Só  se  encontra  aquilo  que  se  procura‖.  Segundo  LLORY  (1999),  essa 

máxima  paradoxal  fundamenta  a  análise  em  segurança.  O  autor  considera  que  a 

segurança  é  igualmente  alimentada  e  enriquecida  por  certo  número  de  saberes 

práticos,  experiências  de  incidentes  e  quase  acidentes  e  de  eventos  tirados  do 

trabalho cotidiano. Ao mesmo tempo em que a segurança é decorrente de regras e 

princípios  não  formais,  do  tipo  heurístico,  que  permitem  fazer  o  trabalho  e, 

simultaneamente, garantir a segurança. 

Esses  princípios  e  essas  regras  podem  ser  organizacionais,  coletivas  ou 

solidárias  e  permitem  construir  regras  de  redundância  dentro  de  certas  tarefas 

delicadas ou julgadas perigosas pelos trabalhadores individualmente, possibilitando a 

execução do trabalho. 

Ao   re-analisar   dois   incidentes   em   centrais   nucleares   LLORY   (1999) 

considerou  que  o  incidente  pode  ser  estruturado  pela  organização  prescrita  e 

hierárquica, mas que é reforçado pelas participações espontâneas ou informais. 

O desenvolvimento de uma segurança positiva repousa na possibilidade de 

detectar e analisar eventos precursores, sinais frágeis de degradação dos sistemas 

sócio-técnicos e na análise organizacional dos acidentes e incidentes, que deve ser 

baseada na contribuição de quem executa o trabalho. 

AMALBERTI  (2007)  considera  que  o  conhecimento  dos  riscos  é  um  pré- 

requisito para o seu domínio. A identificação dos perigos, das proteções e, a validação 

dos  modelos  pela  experiência,  melhora  a  qualidade  dos  sistemas  de  ―retorno  da 

experiência‖ (REX) e são considerados como processos centrais para qualquer melhoria 

em função da segurança.



 
 
 

110 
 
 
 
 

DIEN,  LLORY  E  MONTMAYEUL  (2004)  consideram  que,  ao  longo  da 

última  década,  houve  uma  mudança  significativa  e  gradual  na  percepção  dos 

acidentes  e  incidentes.  Eles  são  agora  entendidos  não  apenas  como  a  aplicação 

imediata e conseqüência direta da combinação de falhas técnicas e/ou erros humanos, 

mas também como resultado de um contexto organizacional desfavorável. 

Na  medida  em  que  uma  série  de  decisões  e  circunstâncias  desfavoráveis 

geram progressivamente uma situação de pré-acidente, muito antes da ocorrência do 

início  do  evento  e  do  desencadeamento  da  seqüência  do  acidente.  O  contexto 

histórico do acidente é analisado através da progressão no tempo da situação pré- 

acidente. 

As indicações que temos dos incidentes classificados somente por tipo de 

ocorrência não foram considerados como indicadores adequados para a avaliação de 

situações  de  risco  em  que poderiam  sinalizar fraquezas  no  o  sistema de aviação 

fornecendo alarmes. 

Diversos são os autores que sinalizam a importância da analise do incidente, 

fato que não ocorre na prática adota pelo CENIPA, é necessário que se faça uma 

revisão das questões ligadas às práticas utilizadas na investigação dos incidentes, 

visando um incremento desta atividade e uma maior valorização destes aspectos por 

parte dos investigadores, bem como do órgão central para que valorize e determine a 

investigação dos eventos. 

Podemos identificar que esta sistemática é tão arraigada no sistema que o 

próprio fluxograma da investigação do incidente (anexo 7 ) sinaliza em mais de um 

momento a necessidade de confirmação se será ou não investigado, induzindo de 

certa forma o investigador a pensar se deve ou não realizar a investigação. 
 
 
 
 
5.3 ANÁLISES DOS RELATÓRIOS FINAIS 
 
 
 
 

―O homem está sujeito a errar enquanto luta.‖ A frase de GOETHE (2003) 

em Fausto, sugere que o erro humano tem sido objeto de discussão já há muitos



 
 
 

111 
 
 
 
 

séculos,  mais  uma  vez  foi  discutido  e  analisado  considerando-se  o  contexto  dos 

acidentes aéreos ocorridos. 

Quando observamos o principal fator contribuinte utilizando dois diferentes 

modelos de análise, veremos que o ―deficiente julgamento‖ no modelo utilizado pelo 

CENIPA foi apontado em 80,5% dos casos relatórios, o ―erro de decisão‖ em 88,9% 

no  modelo  HFACS.  O  resultado  reforça  a  compreensão  de  que  a  indústria 

aeronáutica avançou nos processos que aumentam a confiabilidade dos componentes 

mecânicos. Os erros e violações devem ser vistos como desvios do comportamento 

desejado  e  a  manutenção  dos  procedimentos  de  segurança,  estabelecidos  por 

componentes organizacionais. (REASON, 2000). 

Em dois estudos semelhantes de WIEGMANN et al (2005) e DAMBIER e 

HINKELBEIN  (2006)  os  erros  de  decisão  apareceram  em  apenas  um  terço  dos 

acidentes  e  foram  associados  à  má  avaliação  da  situação,  principalmente  por 

inexperiência. 

DEKKER  (2002)  considera  que  o  que  ocorre  em  muitos  acidentes  em 

sistemas   complexos   é   que   as   pessoas   estavam   fazendo   exatamente   o   que 

normalmente  estariam  fazendo  e  que  geralmente  estes  procedimentos  rotineiros 

conduzem ao sucesso e à segurança. 

O  que  as  pessoas  fazem  normalmente  faz  sentido  tendo  em  conta  as 

indicações  situacionais,  as  pressões  operacionais,  organizacionais  e  as  normas 

existentes.  Acidentes  raramente  são  precedidos  por  comportamentos  bizarros  ou 

irresponsáveis. As pessoas não têm a intenção de fazer um mau trabalho, como ter 

um acidente aéreo. 

Para DEKKER (2002), devemos averiguar como os fracassos são gerados 

tanto  individualmente  quanto  na  organização  do  trabalho.  Estes  são  sintomas  de 

problemas mais profundos ou subprodutos da fragilidade sistêmica da empresa. 

O modelo HFACS aponta para uma classificação mais detalhada dos erros 

que  facilita  a  sua  análise  e  compreensão,   fazendo-se  uma  distinção  e  uma 

classificação entre erros e violações. 

REASON (2000) questiona o fato de que em muitas organizações é difícil 

determinar onde está a fronteira entre os erros e as violações, onde normalmente a



 
 
 

112 
 
 
 
 

segunda é considerada deliberada. Alguns erros surgem a partir de comportamentos 

que seriam inaceitáveis, enquanto algumas violações são aplicadas pela organização 

e não por falhas individuais e, por isso, não devem ser consideradas inaceitáveis. 

Na   comparação   dos   dois   modelos   analisados   (CENIPA   E   HFCAS) 

encontramos mais  algumas semelhanças, a ―deficiente supervisão‖ no  modelo do 

CENIPA  e  a  ―supervisão  insegura‖  no  modelo  HFACS.  Estes  são  os  aspectos 

aparecem como fator contribuinte em segundo lugar nos acidentes nas duas formas 

de classificação. 

WIEGMANN (2005) considera que o papel de um supervisor é proporcionar 

a  oportunidade  de  sucesso,  não  importando  a  que  nível  de  funcionamento,  deve 

fornecer orientações, oportunidades de formação, liderança, motivação, bem como 

fornecer o modelo adequado a ser imitado. Na mesma linha, uma boa orientação 

profissional  e  supervisão  são  ingredientes  essenciais  para  o  êxito  de  qualquer 

organização.  Capacitar  indivíduos  para  tomar  decisões  e  funcionar  de  forma 

independente também são certamente fatores essenciais. 

Ao utilizarmos o HFACS, observamos que o número de fatores contribuintes 

aumentou, saltando de 163 nos relatórios finais do CENIPA para 370  fatores no 

HFACS, sugerindo uma maior abrangência, principalmente no que se refere a fatores 

organizacionais ligados à gestão de recursos, clima e processos organizacionais, que 

não são apontados na avaliação do relatório final utilizado pelo CENIPA. Embora o 

modelo  HFACS  inclua  as  influências organizacionais,  não  chega a  contemplar o 

conceito de acidente organizacional, conforme é descrito por LLORY (2004). Este 

considera o acidente examinado a partir de uma perspectiva organizacional, como 

resultante   de   fatores   locais,   técnicos,   humanos   e   organizacionais.   Fatores 

possivelmente  genéricos,  muitas  vezes  pré-existentes,  desempenham  um  papel 

agravante no caso de uma disfunção, ou seja, reduzindo defesas, ou mesmo gerando 

outras disfunções, construindo uma ―rede organizacional‖ do acidente. 

De forma diferente do modelo HFACS, a teoria do acidente organizacional de 

LLORY, considera que o ―acidente dá aviso‖. Assim, o período de incubação do 

acidente vê o surgimento e desenvolvimento de fatores organizacionais desfavoráveis



 
 
 

113 
 
 
 
 

em   matéria   de   segurança,   criando   um   "terreno"   mais   propício   para   o   seu 

desenvolvimento. 

LEVESON (2002) considera que a análise de eventos com base em modelos, 

em que um ou vários componentes físicos falham e levam a uma falha de sistema ou 

situação  de  perigo  pode  conduzir  a  explicações  em  que  facilmente  se  perde  a 

complexa  seqüência  de  interações  entre  os  acontecimentos.  Omite  inteiramente 

falhas que não envolvem especificamente um componente. A autora considera que 

seria  necessário  levar  em  conta  fatores  sociais  e  organizacionais,  o  sistema  do 

acidente, as interações disfuncionais, o erro humano, as imperfeições do processo 

decisório, o erro do software, a adaptação do homem e as alterações do ambiente 

organizacional. 

LEVESON (2002) sugere que um modelo de investigação de acidente deve 

incentivar  uma  visão  ampla  do  acidente,  tendo  mecanismos  que  expandem  a 

investigação  para  além  dos  eventos  próximos,  ampliando  a  base  do  evento  e 

incluindo  aspectos  como  as  deficiências  estruturais  na  organização,  a  gestão  das 

deficiências e as falhas na cultura da segurança da sociedade ou indústria. 

O modelo de investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos adotado atualmente no 

Brasil não permite observarmos esta visão mais ampla. A visão que aponta os fatores 

contribuintes diretos, sugerindo uma restrição ao cenário do acidente. 

Uma crítica ao modelo HFCAS é feita por DEKKER (2002a), que considera 

como a maior  armadilha do método, a ilusão de que a classificação e a análise são a 

mesma coisa, ao proporcionar mais informações  sobre os erros humanos acabam 

deslocando-se na direção dos escalões superiores ou mesmo para escalões fora da 

organização, mas sempre para terceiros. 

Outra critica é com relação à dificuldade de identificação do erro quanto a 

causas e conseqüências, por ser um limiar bastante tênue e que pode levar a mistura 

de causas e ser bastante confusa. 

O erro humano como ocorre nas situações de trabalho, resiste à tabulação 

devido às interações complexas do contexto e da diversidade humana que ocorre 

entre a intenção e a ação.



 
 
 

114 
 
 
 
 

A investigação de acidentes necessita de mecanismos que facilitem de alguma 

forma  a  identificação  de  fatores  contribuintes  e  que  sejam  sistemáticos,  pois  as 

considerações   teóricas   nem   sempre   se   aplicam   diretamente   na   prática   do 

investigador. Devemos aliar aspectos teóricos e práticos para ampliar a compreensão 

do acidente.



 
 
 

115 
 
 
 
 

6. CONSIDERAÇÕES FINAIS 
 
 

As  análises  deste  estudo  são  importantes  para  aprimorar  o  método  de 

investigação de acidentes e incidentes aéreos na aviação e, em especial, os da aviação 

geral no Brasil. 

Devemos considerar que a análise permitiu a ampliação do universo em que 

os eventos são desencadeados, possibilitando vislumbrar dificuldades nos órgãos de 

investigação  e  regulação  da  aviação  brasileira  ligadas  a  políticas  de  segurança, 

formação e integração. 
 
 
 
 
6.1 AGÊNCIAS DE INVESTIGAÇÃO 
 
 
 
 

A diferença básica entre os sistemas de investigação da União Européia e dos 

Estados Unidos para o Brasil é a independência que existe nas agências estrangeiras 

permitindo maior liberdade de ação. 

Ao analisarmos  as  práticas  empregadas  na condução  das  investigações  de 

acidentes, não foram identificadas grandes diferenças quanto aos processos utilizados 

pelas agências internacionais dos Estados Unidos, da União Européia e, no Brasil, no 

que se refere às ações iniciais e às condutas adotadas no local do acidente. 

Os  processos  de  investigação  mantêm  equipes  de  pessoas  treinadas  e  em 

sobreaviso,  para  atuar  no  local  do  acidente,  recolhendo  o  maior  número  de 

informações possíveis que subsidie as investigações 

Da mesma forma, ao se considerar a organização dos nossos sistemas e as 

agências ligadas à aviação como parte de um sistema complexo, veremos o quanto se 

faz necessária a melhor integração entre diversos órgãos. 

A integração entre as agências de regulação, investigação, trabalho e saúde, 

possibilitariam  uma  visão  mais  ampla  das  condições  sistêmicas  e  auxiliando  na 

identificação dos riscos que poderiam ser gerenciados, minimizando conseqüências 

de situações que quase sempre são desastrosas.



 
 
 

116 
 
 
 
 

Devemos pensar se a nossa cultura se reflete na forma com que organizamos 

as nossas instituições e as agências de investigação. É necessária uma atuação mais 

sistêmica, que seria preventivamente mais efetiva e que levaria a uma definição mais 

clara das políticas relacionadas a este tema. 

A limitada investigação dos incidentes aeronáuticos torna a prevenção mais 

frágil, diminuindo a possibilidade de identificar e gerenciar situações pré-acidentais, 

bem como de minimizar suas conseqüências dos acidentes. 
 
 
 
 
6.2 RELATÓRIOS FINAIS 
 
 
 
 

Na busca pelo material de análise, os relatórios finais, foram identificados a 

falta de investigação de 74,8% dos incidentes no período analisado o que sugere 

necessidade de uma melhor avaliação das causas desta lacuna. 

O   número   de   relatórios   finais   disponíveis   para   analise   também   era 

correspondente  a  aproximadamente  metade  dos  acidentes  do  período,  sugerindo 

dificuldades do CENIPA em elaborar este material. 

A falta de pessoal especializado pode ser um dos fatores que levou a redução 

do material analisado. Por se tratar de um efetivo militar, que tem se mantido no 

mesmo patamar nos últimos 14 anos, mas tem tido suas atividades diversificadas e 

ampliadas para tratar diferentes objetivos ligados a segurança nacional. 
 
 
 
 
6.3 FATORES CONTRIBUINTES 
 
 
 
 

A análise dos relatórios finais, usando o modelo HFACS, permitiu avaliar um 

leque mais amplo dos fatores contribuintes nos acidentes aeronáuticos, identificando 

falhas  sistêmicas  que  têm  origem  em  problemas  organizacionais  e  que  não  são 

pesquisados adequadamente no modelo utilizado pelo CENIPA.



 
 
 

117 
 
 
 
 

O modelo HFACS foi elaborado como uma ferramenta e traduz na prática, a 

teoria de Reason, porém não contempla todos os aspectos do acidente e não deve ser 

utilizada como sistema isoladamente de investigação. 

A investigação dos acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos não pode ficar restrita 

a um universo teórico e nem a uma análise quantitativa. Da mesma forma como a 

aviação está em constante mudança e suas ligações com o mundo do trabalho são 

bastante complexas, as investigações devem desenvolver-se sob um olhar sistêmico, 

que  possa  englobar  todo  este  universo,  buscando  a  melhoria  constante  de  suas 

ferramentas e da prevenção de acidentes.



 
 
 

118 
 
 
 
 

7. REFERÊNCIAS 
 
 

1.  Agência Nacional da Aviação Civil. RBHA 47. Funcionamento e atividades 
do sistema de registro de aeronáutico brasileiro. [regulamento na internet] 
[acesso em 10 de maio de 2009]. Disponível em: 
www.anac.gov.br/biblioteca/rbha/rbha047.pdf 
 

2.  Agencia Nacional da Aviação Civil. RBHA 65. Despachante operacional de 
vôo  e  mecânico  de  manutenção  aeronáutica.  [regulamento  na  internet]. 
[acesso em 20 jul 2009] Disponível em 
http://www.anac.gov.br/biblioteca/rbha/rbha065.pdf 
 

3.  Airbus. A320 Family.Flydeck.[site na internet].[acesso em 22 de abr 2009]. 
Disponível em: www.aibus.com/en/aircraftfamiles/a320/flght_deck.html 
 

4.  Almeida IM. Abordagem sistêmica de acidentes e sistemas de gestão de saúde 
e segurança do trabalho. Interfacehs. 2006; 1:1-6 
 

5.  Almeida  IM,  Jackson  Filho  JM.  Acidentes  e  sua  prevenção.  RBSO.  São 
Paulo; 2007, 32(115): 7-18. 
 

6.  Almirante M. Memória do Tranporte Publico. [site na internet]. [acesso em 
25 Jan 2009]. Disponível em: www.rota.notlong.com 
 

7.  Amalberti R. The paradoxes of almost totally safe transportation system. Saf 
Sci. 2001, 37:109-126. 
 

8.  Amalberti R. Da gestão dos erros à gestão dos riscos. . In Falzon P. editor. 
Ergonomia. São Paulo: Blucher; 2007,17: 235-247. 
 

9.  Antunes R. Os sentidos do trabalho. São Paulo: Boitempo; 1999. 
 
10. Assunção  AA.  Uma  contribuição  ao  debate  sobre  as  relações  saúde  e 

trabalho. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, 2003, 8 (4): 1005-1018 
 

11. Binder  MCP,  Almeida  IM.  Estudo  de  caso  de  dois  acidentes  do  trabalho 
investigados com o método de árvore de causas. Cadernos de Saúde Pública, 
1997; 13: 749-760. 
 

12. Brasil. Constituição da república federativa do Brasil. Assembléia Nacional 
Constituinte; Brasília; 1988. 
 

13. Brasil. Lei nº. 7.183, de 05 de abril de 1984. Regula o exercício da profissão 
de aeronauta e dá outras providências. [lei na internet]. [acesso em 27 jan 
2008] Disponível em:http://www.anac.gov.br/biblioteca/leis/lei7183%20.pdf



 
 
 

119 
 
 
 
 

14. Brasil. Lei n° 7.565, de 19 de dezembro de 1986. Cria o Código Brasileiro de 
Aeronáutica em substituição ao Código Brasileiro do Ar. [lei na internet]. 
[Acesso em 22 de abril de 2009]. Disponível em: 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/LEIS/L7565compilado.htm 
 

15. Brasil. Lei nº 11.182, de 27 de setembro de 2005. Cria a Agência Nacional de 
Aviação Civil – ANAC, e dá outras providências. [lei na internet]. [acesso em 
25 jan 2008]. Disponívelem:http://www.planalto.gov.br/Ccivil_03/_Ato2004- 
2006/2005/Lei/L11182.htm. 
 

16. Brasil.  Lei  n°  8.213,  de  24  de  julho  de  1991.  Dispõe  sobre  os  planos  e 
benefícios da previdência social e dá outras providencias. [ lei na internet] 
[acesso em 10 jun 2009] Disponível em : 
http://www3.dataprev.gov.br/SISLEX/paginas/42/1991/8213.htm 
 

17. Brasil. Decreto nº 21.713, de 27 de agosto de 1946. Convenção da Aviação 
Civil Internacional. [decreto na internet], [acesso em 9 abr 2009]. Disponível 
em: www.sbda.org.br/textos/Convchic.rtf 
 

18. Brasil. Decreto nº 19.902, de 22 de abril de 1931. Dispõe sobre a criação e 
organização do Departamento de Aeronáutica Civil. [decreto na 
internet].[acesso em 25 jan 2008] Disponível em: 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Decreto/1930-1949/D19902.htm. 
 

19. Brasil. Decreto n° 3.564, de 17 de agosto de 2000. Dispõe sobre a estrutura e 
funcionamento  do  Conselho  de  Aviação  Civil  –  CONAC.  [decreto  na 
internet].[acesso em 9 abr 2009]. Disponível em: 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/decreto/D3564.htm#art3vii 
 

20. Brasil. Decreto n°4.552, de 27 dez 2002. Aprova o regulamento da inspeção 
do trabalho. [decreto na internet], [acesso em  9 jul 2009] Disponível em: 
http://www.jusbrasil.com.br/legislacao/98916/decreto-4552-02 
 

21. Cardoso VAF, Cukierman HL. A abordagem sociotécnica na investigação e 
na  prevenção  de  acidentes  aéreos:  o  caso  do  vôo  RG-241.  RBSO,  São 
Paulo,2007 ; 32: 79-98 
 

22. Centro  de  Investigação  e  Prevenção  de  Acidentes  Aeronáuticos.  CENIPA 
[home   page   na   internet]   Estatísticas.   Desenvolvido   pela   Divisão   de 
Tecnologia da Informação (DTI). [acesso em 22 abr 2007] Disponível em: 
http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/paginas/estatisticas.htm 
 

23. Comando  da  Aeronáutica.  MCA  3-6,  Manual  de  investigações  SIPAER. 
Março   de   2009   [acesso   em   2   março   de   2009]   Disponível   em: 
http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/normas



 
 
 

120 
 
 
 
 

24. Comando   da   Aeronáutica.   NSCA   3-1,   Conceituação   de   Vocábulos, 
Expressões e Siglas de Uso no SIPAER, 31 de outubro de 2008. [acesso em 
22 dez 2007] Disponível em: http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/normas. 
 

25. Comando da Aeronáutica. NSCA 3-2, Estrutura e Atribuiçoes do SIPAER, 31 
de   outubro   de   2008.   [acesso   em   22   dez   2007]   Disponível   em: 
http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/normas 
 

26. Comando da Aeronáutica. NSCA 3-6, Investigação de acidentes aeronáutico, 
incidente aeronáutico e ocorrência de solo, 31 de outubro de 2008. [acesso 
em 22 dez 2007] Disponível em: http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/normas. 
 

27. Comando da Aeronáutica. NSCA 3-10, Formação e capacitação de recursos 
humanos  do  SIPAER,  31  de  outubro  de  2008.  [acesso  em  24  jul  2009] 
Disponível em: http://www.cenipa.aer.mil.br/normas. 
 

28. Costa AAC. Filosofia Sipaer. Brasilia:CENIPA,2000 
 
29. Crouch TD. Asas. Rio de Janeiro: Record,2008. 
 

30. Clot Y. A função psicológica do trabalho. Petrópolis: Vozes. 2007. 
 

31. Dambier M, Hinkelbein J, Analysis of 2004 German General 
AviationAircraft  Accidents  According  to  the  HFACS  Model. Air  Medical 
Journal Associates.2006. 
 

32. De  La  Garza C,  Fadier  E. Segurança  e prevenção:  referências  jurídicas  e 
ergonômicas.   In   Falzon   P.   editor.   Ergonomia.   São   Paulo:   Blucher; 
2007,10:126-135. 
 

33. Dekker  SWA.  Reconstructing  human  contributions  to  accidents:  the  new 
view on error and performance. Journal of Safety Research, [S.l] 2002;33: 
371– 385 
 

34. Dekker  SWA.  The  re-invention  of  human  error.  Technical  Report.  Lund 
University School of Aviation; 2002(a) 
 

35. Dien  Y,  Llory  M,  Montmayeul  R.  Organizational  accidents  investigation 
methodology and lessons learned. J Hazard Mater, 2004; 111:147-153. 
 

36. Eagle   CJ,   Davies   JM,   Reason   J.   Accident   analysis   of   large-scale 
technological disasters applied to an anaesthetic complication. Can J Anaesth, 
1992 ; 39: 2 , 118-22. 
 

37. Edwards  E.  Man  and  Machine  for  safety.  London:  British  Airline  Pilots 
Associations; 1972.



 
 
 

121 
 
 
 
 

38. Edwards  E.  ―Introductory  Overview‖.  Human  Factors  in  Aviation.  San 
Diego: Academic Press; 1988. 
 

39. European Aviation Safety Agency – EASA. [site na internet].[acesso em 10 
de jan de 2009]. Disponível em [http://www.easa.eu.int/]. 
 

40. European  Aviation  Safety  Agency.  Accident  Statistics  Europe  –  EASA 
Member States. EASA Meeting with AIB’S; 2008. 
 

41. European Coordination Centre for Accident and Incident Reporting Systems 
– ECCAIRS.[site na internet]. [acesso em 10 de janeiro 2009] Disponível em 
[http://eccairsportal.jrc.ec.europa.eu/Start.asp]. 
 

42. Goethe  JW.  Fausto.  Castilho  AF,  tradutor.  eBooksLibris.2003  [livro  na 
internet][acesso em 11 de maio de 2009].Disponível em: 
[www.ebookbrasil.org/eLibris/faustogoethe.html]. 
 

43. Gomez  CM,  Lacaz  FAC.  Saúde  do  trabalhador:  novas  e  velhas  questões. 
Ciência e Saúde Coletiva(on line) 2005, 10 (4): 797-807 
 

44. Grant RG. Flight. The Complete History. New York: DK Publishing; 2002. 
 

45. Gross S, Schroder A.  Handbook of Low Cost Airline. Berlin: Eric Schimidt 
Verlag; 2007 
 

46. Hawkins FH. Humans Factors in Flight.England: Asghate;1987 
 

47. Heinrich HW.   Industrial Accident Prevention: A Scientific Approach. New 
York: McGraw-Hill; 1959. 
 

48. Helmreich RL. On error management: lessons from aviation. Education and 
debate. 2000; 320: 781-785 
 

49. Helmreich RL, Davies JM. Culture, threat, and error: lessons from aviation. 
Can J Anesth 2004 ; 51: 6. 
 

50. Helmerich  R.L,  Merritt  AC.  Culture  at  work  in  aviation  and  medicine. 
Aldershot:Ashgate,1998. 
 

51. Instituto Histórico Cultural da Aeronáutica. História Geral da Aeronáutica 
Brasileira. Rio de Janeiro, RJ; 1991. v.2 
 

52. Instituto Histórico Cultural da Aeronáutica. História Geral da Aeronáutica 
Brasileira. Rio de Janeiro, RJ; 1991. v.3



 
 
 

122 
 
 
 
 

53. International Civil Aviation Organization. The magazine of the International 
Civil Aviation Organization.2007;62:2[jornal na internet]. [acesso em 29 de 
abril 2007] Disponível em:  http://www.icao.int/icao/en/jr/2007/6202_en.pdf 
 

54. Internacional   Civil   Aviation   Organization.   Doc.   7300,   Convention   on 
International  Civil  Aviation.  9.ed.  2006  .[acesso  em  15  de  março  2008] 
Disponível em : http://www.icao.int/icaonet/arch/doc/7300/7300_9ed.pdf 
 

55. International  Civil  Aviation  Organization.  Doc.  9859,  Safety  management 
manual.  2  ed.  2009.  [acesso  em  15  de  janeiro  2009]  Disponível  em: 
http://www.icao.int/anb/safetymanagement/DOC_9859_FULL_EN.pdf 
 

56. International  Civil  Aviation  Organization  .Aircraft  Accident  and  Incident 
Investigation.  Annex  13  to  Convention  in  International  Civil  Aviation. 
Montreal ; 2001 
 

57. Krause   SS.   Aircraft   Safety   :Accident   Investigations,   Analyses,   and 
Applications. New York:McGraw-Hill Companies;1996 
 

58. Lavenerie-Wanderley NF. História da Força Aérea Brasileira. 2. ed.. Gráfica 
Brasileira: Rio de Janeiro;1975. 
 

59. Leveson NG. A new approach to system safety engineering. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology;2002. 
 

60. Lima  FPA,  Assunção  AA.  Para  uma  nova  abordagem  da  segurança  do 
trabalho. In Lima FPA e Assunção AA. Análise dos acidentes: Cia de Aços 
Especiais Itabira. Belo Horizonte, 2000. 
 

61. Liker  JK,  Haddad  CJ,  Karlin  J.  Perspectives  on  technology  and  work 
organization. Annu. Rev. Social. Michigan, 1999. 25: 575-596. 
 

62. Llory  M.  L´Accident  de  la  Centrale  Nucléaire  de  Three  Mile  Island. 
L´Harmattan: Paris; 1999. 
 

63. Malagutti   AO.   Evolução   da   Aviação   Civil   no   Brasil.   Brasilia   (DF): 
Consultoria Legislativa; 2001 
 

64. Maurino  DE,  Reason  J,  Johnston  N,  Lee  RB.  Beyond  Aviation  Human 
Factor.Ashgate: Aldershot; 2000. 
 

65. Manuele   AF.   On   the   practice   of   safety.   3.ed.   New   Jersey   :John 
Wiley&Sons,2003. 
 

66. Ministério  do  Trabalho  e  Emprego.  Caminhos  da  análise  de  acidentes  do 
trabalho. Almeida I M ,organizador :Brasília DF, 2003.



 
 
 

123 
 
 
 
 

67. National Transportation Safety Board – NTSB. [site na internet]. [Acesso em 
10 de janeiro de 2009]. Disponível em:[http:// www.ntsb.gov/]. 
 

68. National Transportation Safety Board. Annual Review of Aircraft Accident 
Data 2005: Washington DC; 2009 [acesso em 23 de abril 2009].Disponível 
em: [http://www.ntsb.gov/publictn/2009/ARCO901.pdf]. 
 

69. Newhouse J. Boeing versus Airbus. Osasco: Século Editora; 2008. 
 
70. OACI.   Fundamental   Human   Factors   Concepts.   Human   Factors   Digest 

n°1.Montreal, 1989. 
 

71. OACI. Training of operational personnel in human factors. Human Factors 
Digest n°3. Montreal, 1991. 
 

72. OACI. Operation implications of automation in advancer technology flight 
deck. Human Factors Digest n°5. Montreal, 1992. 
 

73. OACI.  Investigation  of  human  factors  in  accidents  and  incidents.  Human 
Factors Digest n°7. Montreal, 1993. 
 

74. OACI. Human factors, management and organization. Human Factors Digest 
n°10. Montreal, 1993a. 
 

75. OACI. Human factors in aircraft maintenance and inspection. Human Factors 
Digest n°12. Montreal, 1995. 
 

76. OACI. Human factors in cabin safety. Human Factors Digest n°15. Montreal, 
2003. 
 

77. OACI. Cross-cultural factors in aviation safety. Human Factors Digest n°16. 
Montreal, 2004. 
 

78. Oliveira AVM. Regulação da oferta no transporte aéreo: do comportamento 
de  operadoras  em  mercados  liberalizados  aos  atritos  que  emergem  da 
interface com o público-privado. Nectar-ita: São José dos Campos; 2008. 
 

79. Perrow, C. Organizing to reduce the vulnerabilities of complexity. Journal of 
contingencies and crisis management.1999; 7: 151-5. 
 

80. Pessoa  LT.  História  da  Aviação  Comercial  Brasileira.  São  Paulo:  Editora 
Rios; 1989. 
 

81. Reason J. Human Error. Cambridge University Press: New York; 1990.



 
 
 

124 
 
 
 
 

82. Reason   J.  Managing  the  risks   on   organizational   accidents.   Aldershot: 
Ashgate; 1997. 
 

83. Reason J. Safety paradoxes and safety culture. Inj Control Saf Promot.2000; 
7:  3-14. 
 

84. Rao S. Safety culture and accident analysis—A socio-management approach 
based on organizational safety social capital. J Hazard Mater. 2007;142:730– 
740. 
 

85. Shappell S, Detwiler C, Holcomb K,   Hackworth C,   Boquet A, Wiegmann 
DA. Human Error and Commercial Aviation Accidents: Na Analysis Using 
the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System. Human Factors,2007; 
49, 2 : 227–242. 
 

86. Smircich L. Concepts of culture and organization analysis. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 1983. 28: 339-358. 
 

87. Sato L, Lacaz FAC, Bernado MH. Psicologia e saúde do trabalhador: práticas 
e investigações na saúde pública de São Paulo. Estudos de Psicologia. Natal. 
2006. 11 (3): 281-288. 
 

88. Valot  C.  O  transporte,  a  segurança  e  a  ergonomia.  In  Falzon  P.  editor. 
Ergonomia. São Paulo: Blucher; 2007,40:573-586. 
 

89. Wells  AT,  Rodrigues  CC.  Commercial  Aviation  Safety.4.ed.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill,2003. 
 

90. Wiegmann DA, Faaborg T,   Boquet A, Detwiler C, Holcomb K, Shappell 
SA. Human Error and General Aviation Accidents: A Comprehensive, Fine- 
Grained Analysis Using HFACS. Federal Aviation Administration: 
Washington.2005 
 

91. Wiegmann DA, Shappell SA. Applying The Human Factors Analysis And 
Classification System (HFACS) To The Analysis Of Commercial Aviation 
Accident  Data.  11th  International  Symposium  on  Aviation  Psychology. 
Columbus.2001.



 
 
 

125 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 1 
 

DEFINIÇÕES DE ACIDENTE, INCIDENTE GRAVE, INCIDENTE E 

OCORRÊNCIA DE SOLO 
 

Norma de Sistema do Comando da Aeronáutica (NSCA) 3 -1 – Conceituações de 

Vocábulos, Expressões e Siglas de uso no Sistema de Investigação e Prevenção de 

Acidentes Aeronáuticos (SIPAER) de 31 Out. 08 
 
 
 
(...) 

3.2 ACIDENTE AERONÁUTICO 
3.2.1 Toda ocorrência relacionada com a operação de uma aeronave, havida entre o 
momento em que uma pessoa nela embarca com a intenção de realizar um vôo, até o 
momento em que todas as pessoas tenham dela desembarcado e, durante o qual, pelo 
menos uma das situações abaixo ocorra (itens 3.2.1.1, 3.2.1.2 e 3.2.1.3): 
3.2.1.1 Uma pessoa sofra lesão grave ou morra como resultado de: 
a) Estar na aeronave; ou 
b)   Contato   direto   com   qualquer   parte   da   aeronave,   incluindo   aquelas   que   dela 
tenham se desprendido; ou 
c) Submetida à exposição direta do sopro de hélice, rotor ou escapamento de jato, ou 
às suas conseqüências. 
NOTA – Exceção é feita quando as lesões resultem de causas naturais, forem auto- 
infligidas  ou  infligidas  por  terceiros,  ou  forem  causadas  a  pessoas  que  embarcaram 
clandestinamente e se acomodaram em área que não as  destinadas aos passageiros e 
tripulantes. 
3.2.1.2 A aeronave sofra dano ou falha estrutural que: 
a)   Afete   adversamente   a   resistência   estrutural,   o   seu   desempenho   ou   as   suas 
características de vôo; e 
b) Normalmente exija a realização de grande reparo ou a substituição do componente 
afetado. 
NOTA – Exceção é feita para falha ou danos limitados ao motor, suas carenagens ou 
acessórios;  ou  para  danos  limitados  a  hélices,  pontas  de  asa,  antenas,  pneus,  freios, 
carenagens do trem, amassamentos leves e pequenas perfurações no revestimento da 
aeronave. 
3.2.1.3 A aeronave seja considerada desaparecida ou completamente inacessível. 
3.2.2 As lesões decorrentes de um Acidente Aeronáutico que resultem em fatalidade 
até 30 dias da data da ocorrência são consideradas lesões fatais. 
3.2.3  Uma  aeronave  será  considerada  desaparecida  quando  as buscas  oficiais forem 
encerradas e os destroços não forem encontrados. 
3.2.4   Em   vôos   de   ensaio   experimental   com   aeronave   militar   ou   de   empresa 
homologada,   não   serão   classificadas   como   acidente   aeronáutico   as   ocorrências 
relacionadas  diretamente  ao  objetivo  do  ensaio,  ficando  o  estabelecimento  desta



 
 
 

126 
 
 
 
 

relação a cargo do Comando Investigador, após análise preliminar do evento frente à 
documentação técnica que suporta o referido ensaio. 
 
 
3.61.Incidente Aeronáutico 
Toda  ocorrência  associada  à  operação  de  uma  aeronave,  havendo  intenção  de  vôo, 
que  não  chegue  a  se  caracterizar  como  um  acidente  aeronáutico  ou  uma  ocorrência 
de solo, mas que afete ou possa afetar a segurança da operação. 
(...) 
 

3.63 Incidente Grave (NSCA 3-1/2008) 
Incidente   ocorrido   sob   circunstâncias   em   que   um   acidente   quase   ocorreu.   A 
diferença entre o incidente grave e o acidente está apenas nas conseqüências. 
3.63.2 Uma lista   exemplificativa de   ocorrências   a serem   classificadas como 
incidentes graves podem ser encontradas no Manual de Investigação do SIPAER 
 

(....) 
 

3.85 Ocorrência de Solo 
Todo  incidente,  envolvendo  aeronave  no  solo,  do  qual  resulte  dano  ou  lesão,  desde 
que   não   haja   intenção   de   realizar   vôo,   ou,   havendo   esta   intenção,   o(s)   fato(s) 
motivador   (es)   esteja(m)   diretamente   relacionado(s)   aos   serviços   de   rampa,   aí 
incluídos  os  de  apoio  e  infra-estrutura  aeroportuários,  e  não  tenha(m)  tido  qualquer 
contribuição  da  movimentação  da  aeronave  por  meios  próprios  ou  da  operação  de 
qualquer um de seus sistemas.



 
 
 

127 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 2 
 
 

Quadro 1 - Resumo Cronológico da Aviação no Brasil e no Mundo

Período Mundo Brasil 

1906 1° Vôo 14-Bis – Paris  

1914 Hidroavião Criação do Aeroclub do Brasil - 1ª 
Escola de aviação 

1914-1918 I Grande Guerra Mundial  

    Aviões       utilizados       no 
combate; 

    Melhorias na aerodinâmica; 
    Aumento  da  potência  dos 

motores 

1925  Regulamentação     do     transporte 
aéreo no Brasil - Lei 4911 de 12 de 
janeiro 1925 

1927 Primeira travessia do Atlântico 1ª  linha  aérea  regular  -  Condor 
– (LINDBERGH) Syndikat começa a operar no Brasil 

Fundação  da  Viação  Aérea  Rio- 
Grandense (VARIG) 

1929  Fundação da NYRBA que operava 
a Linha Nova York – Rio – Buenos 
Aires 

1930     Construção      de      aviões Criação    de    linhas    de    correio 
maiores,    que    percorriam operadas pela Aviação do Exército 
distâncias    maiores,    mais e pela Aviação Naval 
velozes    e    voavam    em 
maiores altitudes. 

    Introdução       da       rádio- 
comunicação. 

    Surgimento      do      piloto 
automático. 

1931  Criação     do     Departamento     de 
Aeronáutica Civil - DAC 

1933  Fundação   da   Viação   Aérea   São 
Paulo 

1936  Inicio  da  operação  da  linha  São 
Paulo – Rio de Janeiro ( até hoje a 
linha  de  maior  tráfego  da  aviação 
no Brasil) 



 
 
 

128

Período Mundo Brasil 

1939  
Início   da   II   Grande   Guerra 
Mundial 

1941  Criação       do       Ministério       da 
Aeronáutica,       unificação       das 
operações militares na Força Aérea 
Brasileira (FAB) 

1939         -     Utilização de Caças,  
1945     Bombardeios     de     longa 

distância; 
    Primeiros Jatos (1944) 

1944 Convenção   sobre   a   Aviação Brasil é um dos países signatários 
Civil   Internacional   (Chicago, da Convenção. 
EUA) 

1946 Inicio da produção industrial de  

helicópteros (Bell 47B) 

1950 Utilização  de  jatos  na  Guerra Dezesseis       empresas       aéreas, 
da Coréia atendiam de 358 cidades. 

1952 Primeira aeronave comercial a  

jato. – Comet. 

1958 Boeing    lança    seu    primeiro  

avião de passageiros a jato. 

1960  Crise econômica reduz o numero de 
empresas  através  de  fusões  para 
apenas   quatro:   VARIG,   VASP, 
Transbrasil e Cruzeiro. 

1970 Surgem as primeiras aeronaves Surgem    empresas    regionais    – 
de fuselagem larga (widebody), NORDESTE,   RIO   SUL,   TABA, 
como   capacidade   para   mais TAM E A VOTEC 
passageiros 

1980 Introdução    de    sistemas    de  

gerenciamento        de        vôos 
eletrônicos 

1991 Introdução do glass cockpit Ministério  da  Aeronáutica  passa  a 
monitorar as tarifas aéreas. 

1994  Inicio do Plano Real com aumento 
do poder aquisitivo e maior procura 
pelo transporte aéreo 

   



 
 
 

129

Período Mundo Brasil 

1999  Criação do Ministério da Defesa e 
extinção      do      Ministério      da 
Aeronáutica que se transforma em 
Comando. 

2000  Criação  do  Conselho  da  Aviação 
Civil, para assessorar o   Presidente 
da   República   na   formulação   da 
política nacional da aviação civil 

2001 Atentado    terrorista    da    Al- Criação da Gol Transportes Aéreos. 
Qaeda  contra  o  Word  Trade Paralisação da Transbrasil. 
Center em Nova York e contra 
o  Pentágono  em  Washington 
iniciou  uma  crise  no  mercado 
aviação mundial. 

2005  Criação   da   Agencia  de  Aviação 
Civil (ANAC) 
Paralisação da VASP 

2006  Acidente entre um Boeing da Gol e 
jato    Legacy    no    Mato    Grosso 
deixando   154   mortos.Tem   inicio 
uma crise aérea no Pais. 

2007  Acidente com o vôo 3054 da TAM 
no  Aeroporto  de  Congonhas  em 
São Paulo deixando 199 mortos. 



 
 
 

130 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 3 

Quadro 2 – Possível interação cultural em operação de rotina na aviação. (tradução 

livre, ICAO 2004)

Membros da Membros e artefatos da Interações e Interfaces 
Cultura 1 Cultura 2 

Pessoas  

Pilotos Pilotos Cockpits multiculturais, fusões 
de        empresas,        alianças, 
contratos 

Comissários de 
Comissários de Bordo Treinamentos,     objetivos     e 

Bordo expectativas diferentes. 

Controladores de Vôo Língua          estrangeira          e 
Controladores de Vôo intercambio   com   tripulações 

estrangeiras. 

Companhias Aéreas Pessoal de Terra Diferentes               prioridades, 
confusão em torno de normas. 

Passageiros Diferentes   expectativas  sobre 
Pessoal do Aeroporto 

os serviços. 

Pessoal em treinamento Formação  em  outro  país,  em 
outra aeronave. 

Investigadores Equipes              internacionais, 
Investigadores de 

enquadramentos          jurídicos 
diferentes. 

Acidentes 
Artefatos  

Legislação Local 
Manuais Escritos   em   uma   parte   do 

mundo    são    traduzidos    ou 
Outros interpretados  em  outras  partes 

do mundo. 

Aeronaves Equipamentos      que      fazem 
sentido    em    uma   parte   do 
mundo podem não fazer tanta 
lógica em outra. 

Proficiência        técnica        da 

manutenção pode ser diferente 
em cada parte do mundo 

. 

 



 
 
 

131

Regulamentos Criados  para  um  determinado 
contexto econômico, político e 

 social  que  são  interpretados  e 
aplicados  em  outras  partes do 
mundo. 

Aspectos Jurídicos Diferentes      paradigmas      de 
investigação   de   acidentes   e 
diferentes        enquadramentos 
jurídicos. 



 
 
 

132 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 4 
 

ORGANOGRAMA DA EASA



 
 
 

133 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 5 
 

Quadro  3  -  Descrição  sumária  das  categorias  causais  da  HFACS  –  adaptação 
baseada em SHAPPELL et al (2007)

Influências Organizacionais 

Clima Organizacional Atmosfera  predominante  na  organização  /  visão 
interna, incluindo políticas de comando, estrutura e 
cultura. 

Processo operacional Processo   formal   pelo   qual   a   visão   de   uma 
organização  é  levada  a  cabo,  incluindo  operações, 
procedimentos e de supervisão, entre outros. 

Gestão de recursos Como os recursos humanos, monetários e materiais 
são geridos para realização das metas estabelecidas. 

Supervisão Insegura 

Supervisão Inadequada Supervisão e gestão de pessoal e recursos incluindo a 
formação  profissional,  orientação,  operacionalidade 
e liderança, entre outros aspectos. 

Planejamento     Inadequado Gestão e atribuição de trabalho, incluindo aspectos 
de   gestão   de   risco,   emparelhamento   tripulantes 

das operações 
operacionais, tempo, etc. 

Falha         para         corrigir Os casos em que as deficiências entre os indivíduos, 
equipamentos,      formação,      ou      outras      áreas 

problemas conhecidos 
relacionadas com a segurança são "conhecidas" para 
o supervisor continuam ocorrendo com aquiescência. 

Violações de Fiscalização O   desrespeito   voluntário   pelas   regras   vigentes, 
regulamentos,       instruções,       ou       normas       e 
procedimentos operacionais pelos gestores durante o 
exercício das suas funções. 

Condições prévias para Atos inseguros 

Fatores ambientais Ambiente tecnológico: Esta categoria engloba uma 
variedade  de  questões,  incluindo  a  concepção  de 
equipamentos e controles, display / características da 
interface,  check-list,  layouts,  fatores  da  tarefa  e 
automação. 

Ambiente   físico:   Incluem-se   tanto   a   definição 
operacional (por exemplo, clima, altitude, terreno) e 
a temperatura ambiente (por exemplo, como o calor, 
vibração, iluminação, toxinas). 

 



 
 
 

134

  

Condições prévias para Atos inseguros 

Condição do operador Estados mentais adversos: Condições psicológicas e/ 
ou mentais que afetam negativamente o desempenho, 
tais  como  a  fadiga  mental,  atitudes  perniciosas  e 
motivação descabida. 

Estados fisiológicos adversos: condições fisiológicas 
que impedem operações seguras, tais como a doença, 
intoxicação, uso de medicamentos e anormalidades 
médicas que sabidamente afetam o desempenho. 

Limitações     físicas     e     mentais:     deficiências 
permanentes físicas ou mentais que tenham impacto 
negativo  sobre  o  desempenho,  tais  como  a  visão 
deficiente,  falta  de  força  física,  mental  aptidão, 
conhecimentos  gerais  e  uma  variedade  de  outras 
doenças mentais crônicas. 

Fatores Pessoais Gestão da tripulação a bordo: Inclui uma variedade 
de      questões      relacionadas      à      comunicação, 
coordenação e trabalho de equipe   que impactam o 
desempenho. 

Prontidão pessoal: habilidades pessoais que facilitam 
o trabalho. 

Atos inseguros 

Erros Erros de decisão: representam atitudes conscientes, 
comportamento que prossegue tal como concebido, 
revelando-se   insuficiente   ou   inadequada   para   a 
situação.  Estes  erros  normalmente  manifestam-se 
como procedimentos mal executados, má escolha, ou 
simplesmente  a  má  interpretação  e  /  ou  utilização 
indevida de informações relevantes. 

Erros de Habilidade: comportamento que ocorre com 
pouco     ou     nenhum     pensamento     consciente. 
Freqüentemente  aparece  como  quebra  de  padrões 
varredura visual, a ativação/ desativação inadvertida 
dos interruptores, intenções esquecidas, omissões em 
check-list, desempenhos técnicos inadequados. 

Erros  de  Percepção:  Estes  erros  surgem  quando 
entrada sensorial é degradada, como quando se trata 
de voar à noite, em más condições meteorológicas, 
ou de visibilidade ruim. Confrontados com situações 
em que a informação é incompleta ou imperfeita, as 



 
 
 

135

 tripulações podem correr o risco de dimensionar mal 
distâncias, altitude e taxas de descida, bem como de 
responder corretamente a uma ilusão vestibular . 

Atos inseguros 

Violação Violações de rotina: este tipo de violação tende a ser 
habitual por natureza e muitas vezes são ativadas por 
um sistema de supervisão e de gestão que tolera tais 
desvios das normas. 

Violações   excepcionais:   desvios   da   norma,   não 
necessariamente   como   um   indicativo   típico   do 
comportamento  padrão  do  indivíduo  nem  tolerado 
pela autoridade. 



 
 
 

136 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 6 
 

Quadro 4 – Comparação das Agências quanto a subordinação, atribuições, segurança de vôo e investigação de acidentes. 

Agências Aspectos 

Subordinação Atribuições Segurança de Vôo Investigação de Acidentes 

EASA Organismo   independente Promover  normas  comuns  de  segurança  e Gerenciar     o     Programa     SAFA     da Acompanhar      o      progresso      das 
da União Européia é proteção   ambiental   no   setor   a   aviação   a Comunidade    Européia;    assegurar    os investigações       de       acidentes       e 
regido pelo direito nível  europeu:  regulamentação;  inspeções, níveis     de     segurança     se     mantenha incidentes;     ser     representada    nas 
comunitário e formação  e  programas  de  normalização  de elevados; gerar cultura de segurança. comissões       de       investigação    e 
responsável perante os assuntos  relacionados  à  segurança  de  vôo; recolher              as              informações 
Estados  –  Membros  e  as certificação  no  domínio  da  segurança  e  da relacionadas  às  ocorrências;  atender 
instituições da UE. compatibilidade    ambiental    de    aeronaves, recomendações         de         segurança 
O  organograma  pode  ser motores  e  peças;  certificação  e  supervisão dirigidas       à       agência;    fornecer 
visto no Anexo 4. de     entidades     de     projeto;     produção     e relatórios    e    estatísticas    sobre    as 

manutenção de aeronaves. recomendações        de        segurança; 
manter a coordenação com 
organismos europeus de 
investigação  de  acidente;  identificar 
deficiências e disseminas as 
informações relacionadas a 
segurança de vôo. 

ECCAIRS Subordinada ao JRC Oferecer  aos  Estados-Membros  de  UE  um Reunir  conhecimentos  provenientes 
sistema de comunicação de incidentes de    relatórios    de    incidentes    dos 
automatizado. diferentes estados membros. 



 
 
 

137

Agências Aspectos 

Subordinação Atribuições Segurança de Vôo Investigação de Acidentes 

FAA Subordinada  ao  Departamento  do Regulação      da      aviação      nos Regulamentação      da      segurança; Responsável   pela   investigação 
Comércio   desde   sua   criação   em Estados Unidos:  certificar  pilotos regulação  econômica  das  empresas de   acidentes   até   a   criação   da 
1926 até 1967 passando após esta e    aeronaves;    controladores    de aéreas;  responsável  pela  segurança NTSB em 1967. 
data       ao       Departamento       dos tráfego aéreo. da aviação civil até 2001 quando foi 
Transportes, onde permaneceu até criada   a   ―Transportation   Security 
o momento. Administration”,         devido         aos 

atentados     terroristas     de     11     de 
setembro. 

OSHA Subordinado    ao    Ministério    do Autoriza  a  execução  de  normas Desenvolve programas relacionados  
Trabalho para      garantir      condições      de a    certificação    de    aeroportos    em 

trabalho seguro e saudável conjunto com a FAA. 
Trabalha        junto        à        indústria 
aeronáutica para fornecer condições 
de trabalho seguro e saudável. 

EPA Criada  em  1970  pelo  Congresso Proteger a saúde dos humanos e o Considera  o  impacto  ambiental  em  
americano e pela Casa Branca meio ambiente relação     a     aeroportos,     materiais 

utilizados   em   aeronaves,   poluição 
do ar e controle de ruídos. 



 
 
 

138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Agências Aspectos 

Subordinação Atribuições Segurança de Vôo Investigação de Acidentes 

NTSB Agencia Federal Determinar   as   prováveis   causas   de Realizar  estudos  sobre  problemas  de Conduzir  equipes  americanas  em 
independente,   criada   em acidentes   de   transporte   e   formular segurança;  manter  censo  de  acidentes acidentes   de   companhias   aéreas 
1976. Seu organograma recomendações   para     melhorar     a aéreos;    avaliar       as       salvaguardas estrangeiras            para            assistir 
pode  ser  visto  no  Anexo segurança no transporte. utilizadas  no   transporte  de  materiais autoridades       estrangeiras       com 
8. Revisar     pareceres    de    certificados perigosos. relação   a   disposições   da   OACI; 

suspensos ou revogados pelo FAA. coordenar    recursos    do    governo 
federal  e  outras  organizações  para 
apoiar   a   autoridade   local   e   as 
companhias aéreas na assistência a 
sinistrados e suas famílias em 
acidentes aéreos; conduzir 
investigações dos acidentes de 
forma  a  melhorar  a  segurança  de 
vôo  e  que  não  caracterizem  prova 
em tribunal. 

Agências Aspectos 

Subordinação Atribuições Segurança de Vôo Investigação de Acidentes 

CENIPA Subordinado ao Planejar, orientar, coordenar, controlar Elaborar      e      acompanhar          as Realizar           investigações           de 
Comando da e       executar       as       atividades       de Recomendações       de          segurança acidentes e incidentes aeronáuticos 
Aeronáutica. Seu investigação     e     de     prevenção     de operacionais. e      de      ocorrências      de      solo; 
organograma pode ser acidentes aeronáuticos. supervisionar        e             analisar 
visto no Anexo 9. investigações   desenvolvidas   pelo 

SIPAER; orientar, coordenar e 
controlar as atividades de natureza 
técnica,   ligada   as   investigações; 
elaborar os  relatórios  finais; 



 
 
 

139 
 
 
 
 
 

indicar representantes para 
acompanhamento das 
investigações de interesse do 
SIPAER ocorridas no exterior; 

ANAC Tem sua origem no DAC Agencia reguladora independente, tem Possui     uma     Gerencia     Geral     de A GGIP finalidade de assessorar a 
e   foi   criada   em   2005 como objetivos: manter a continuidade Investigação e Prevenção que funciona direção     da     agência     sobre     os 
ficando   subordinada   ao na   prestação   de   serviço   público   de como um elo do SIPAER assuntos       de       investigação       e 
Ministério   da   Defesa   – âmbito nacional; preservar o equilíbrio prevenção             de             acidentes 
Seu   organograma   pode econômico-financeiro    dos      agentes aeronáuticos na aviação civil. 
ser visto no anexo10. públicos e privados responsáveis pelos 

diversos  segmentos  da  aviação  civil; 
cumprir a legislação pertinente ao 
sistema por ela regulado. 

CT-SST Comissão composta por Propor  o  aperfeiçoamento  do  sistema Elaboração  de  um  Programa  nacional 
representantes dos nacional   de   segurança   e   saúde   no de Saúde e Segurança no Trabalho. 
Ministérios da Previdência trabalho   por   meio   de   definição   de 
Social; Trabalho e Emprego papéis  e  mecanismos  de  interlocução 
e Saúde. 

permanente entre seus membros. 



 
 
 

140 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 7 
 
 

LISTA DOS ACIDENTES ANALISADOS

Prefixo da Data do Tipo de Tipo de Tipo de Ocorrência 
Aeronave Acidente Registro Equipamento 

PT-KMB 05/jan/00 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
BE-55 OBSTÁCULO 

PP-EOG 18/jan/00 SAE HEL COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
AS-350 BA OBSTÁCULO 

PP-GVQ 21/jan/00 PRI AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
P-56 VÔO 

PP-GKI 24/abr/00 PRI AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
PA-18 VÔO 

PT-DOG 10/mai/00 SAE AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
PA-25-260 VÔO 

PT-YJD 01/jun/00 TPP HEL COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
R-44 OBSTÁCULO 

PT-LQS 17/jul/00 SAE AVIÃO POUSO FORÇADO 
C-90 

PT-JCO 20/set/00 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO COM 
V35-B OBSTÁCULO NO SOLO 

PT-NBU 11/dez/00 TPP AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
BEM-710C VÔO 

PT-IEE 16/dez/00 SAE AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
AC-681 EM VÔO 

PT-AMW 25/jan/01 SAE AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
AERONCA EM VÔO 
15 AC 

PT-MST 09/mar/01 TPN AVIÃO FALHA DE SISTEMA EM 
BOEING 707 VÔO 

PT-HXZ 25/abr/01 TPP HEL FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
BH - 06 VÔO 

PT-EHL 05/jun/01 TPX AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
BEM-820C EM VÔO 



 
 
 

141

Prefixo Data do Tipo de Tipo de Tipo de Ocorrência 
da Acidente Registro Equipamento 
Aeronave 

PT-RUM 23/jun/01 TPX AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
EMB  810 D VÔO 

PP-MPA 27/jul/01 TPP HEL PERDA DE CONTROLE 
A 109 E EM VÔO 

PT-BQM 23/out/01 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
C-185 A OBSTÁCULO 

PT-RIR 18/dez/01 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
BEM 711 T OBSTÁCULO 

PT-YNI 31/jan/02 PRI HEL PERDA DE CONTROLE 
RH - 22 EM SOLO 

PT-YSP 11/abr/02 TPX HEL PERDA DE CONTROLE 
BK - 117 EM VÔO 

PT-OFA 24/mai/02 TPP AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
E – 720 D VÔO 

PP-HMP 11/jul/02 PRI AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
NEIVA 56 C OBSTÁCULO 

PT-ETT 28/jul/02 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
EMB  820 C OBSTÁCULO 

PT-CLU 05/ago/02 PRI AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
C-172 G EM VÔO 

PT-DTN 09/set/02 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
PA-28 R OBSTÁCULO 

PT-XJS 04/jan/03 - AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
C-525 EM SOLO 

PT-NMD 04/fev/03 TPP AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
EMB -710C EM VÔO 

PT-ERX 18/mai/03 TPP AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
EMB – 810C EM VÔO 

PT-LME 23/jul/03 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
C-551 OBSTÁCULO 

PT-VOU 07/ago/03 TPP AVIÃO COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
EMB 810 D OBSTÁCULO 

PP-MIL 25/out/03 PRI HEL COLISÃO COM O SOLO 
R-22 BETA 

PT-YVE 11/fev/04 PRI HEL COLISÃO EM VÔO COM 
HU-30 OBSTÁCULO 



 
 
 

142 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     

Prefixo Data do Tipo de Tipo de Tipo de Ocorrência 
da Acidente Registro Equipamento 
Aeronave 

PT-KYB 01/abr/04 PRI AVIÃO FALHA DE MOTOR EM 
C 150 J VÔO 

PP-HLV 21/ago/04 PRI AVIÃO PERDA DE CONTROLE 
P56C - 1 EM VÔO 

PR-HVR 30/ago/04 TPP HEL FALHA DE MOTOR EM 
A-119 VÔO 

PT-DPF 18/mar/05 SAE AVIÃO FALHA DO MOTOR EM 
PIPER PA25 VÔO 



 
 
 

143 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 8 
 

ORGANOGRAMA NTSB



 
 
 

144 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 9 
 

 
ORGANOGRAMA PARCIAL DO COMANDO DA 

AÉRONÁUTICA



 
 
 

145 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 10 
 

ORGANOGRAMA PARCIAL DA ANAC 
 
 

DIRETOR 
PRESIDENTE 
 

GABINETE PROCURADORIA 
 
 

OUVIDORIA CORREGEDORIA 
    
    

AS SESSORIA DE ASSESSORIA  
CO MUNICAÇÃO TÉCNICA  
 SOCIAL   

 
 AUDITORIA INTERNA  
ASSESSORIA 

PA RLAMENTAR  
   
 GGIP  
  
  

SUPERINTENDENCIA Sup. Executiva e de 
DE ADM. E FINANÇAS Planejamento 

       
GER 1 GER 2 GER 3 GER 4 GER 5 GER 6 GER 7 



 
 
 

146 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 11 
 

Fluxograma  de  investigação  de  acidente  aeronáutico  e  de  incidente 
aeronáutico grave.



 
 
 

147 
 
 
 
 

ANEXO 12 
 

FLUXOGRAMA DE INVESTIGAÇÃO DE INCIDENTE AERONÁUTICO 
E OCORRÊNCIA DE SOLO.



 
 
 

148



 
 
 

149 



Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Reliability Engineering and System Safety
Abbre
Operati
Ship Of
Executi
Human
Quantit

n Corr
E-m

jev@pre

0951-83
doi:10.1
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress
Quantitative risk analysis offshore—Human and organizational factors
Jon Espen Skogdalen n, Jan Erik Vinnem
Department of Industrial Economics, Risk Management and Planning, University of Stavanger, 4036 Stavanger, Norway
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 May 2010
Received in revised form
10 December 2010
Accepted 24 December 2010
Available online 4 January 2011

Keywords:
Quantitative Risk Analysis
Human factors
Organizational factors
viations: ALARP, As Low As Reasonably Pra
onal Risk Analysis; DP, Dynamic Positioning;
fshore; HSE, Health, Safety and Environment
ve [United Kingdom]; HOF, Human and Orga
Reliability Analysis; PSA, Petroleum Safety a
ative Risk Analysis
esponding author. Tel./fax: +47 99 02 41 71.
ail addresses: jon.espen.skogdalen@gmail.com
ventor.no (J.E. Vinnem).

20/$ - see front matter & 2011 Elsevier Ltd. A
016/j.ress.2010.12.013
a b s t r a c t

Quantitative Risk Analyses (QRAs) are one of the main tools for risk management within the Norwegian
and UK oil and gas industry. Much criticism has been given to the limitations related to the QRA-models
and that the QRAs do not include human and organizational factors (HOF-factors). Norway and UK
offshore legislation and guidelines require that the HOF-factors are included in the QRAs. A study of 15
QRAs shows that the factors are to some extent included, and there are large differences between the
QRAs. The QRAs are categorized into four levels according to the findings. Level 1 QRAs do not describe
or comment on the HOF-factors at all. Relevant research projects have been conducted to fulfill the
requirements of Level 3 analyses. At this level, there is a systematic collection of data related to HOF.
The methods are systematic and documented, and the QRAs are adjusted. None of the QRAs fulfill the
Level 4 requirements. Level 4 QRAs include the model and describe the HOF-factors as well as explain
how the results should be followed up in the overall risk management. Safety audits by regulatory
authorities are probably necessary to point out the direction for QRA and speed up the development.

& 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

Authorities are basing their regulations and operators are
basing their designs on the use of Quantitative Risk Analyses
(QRAs) as a tool to determine which safety barriers are needed, as
well as what should be the dimensioning loads and requirements.
QRA processes have been used by the offshore industry for more
than three decades. QRAs have traditionally been focused on
technical systems and capabilities. Much less attention has been
focused on the human and organizational factors (HOFs). The
knowledge about HOFs started within the field of ergonomics; the
art and science of interfacing people with the systems that they
design, construct, operate and maintain. This approach is funda-
mentally one that focuses on a proactive reduction in the like-
lihoods of malfunctions [1]. During the past decade much
research effort has been aimed to reveal, isolate and measure/
predict human and organizational factors and their influence
on risk.
cticable; BORA, Barrier and
FPSO, Floating Production
and Health and Safety
nizational Factor; HRA,
uthority [Norway]; QRA,

(J.E. Skogdalen),

ll rights reserved.
During the period between 1970 and about 2000, there was an
extensive new building activity in the North Sea. Since 2000, the
new buildings have reduced to one, or possibly a couple of new
production facilities per year in the entire North Sea. Currently,
operations, maintenance and modification of existing facilities are
the main focus in the North Sea, and decommissioning will also
soon be a main activity. In addition, the trend towards more
extensive use of floating production systems, operations in the
arctic and deepwater suggests that operational aspects of safety
will be more important in the future, in order to mitigate hazards
and control risks. Revealing the HOFs are therefore of great
importance to the oil and gas industry.

This article has three objectives. The first objective is to study
in what way the legislation related to offshore activities on the
Norwegian shelf is influencing QRAs’ development. Special atten-
tion is given to reveal if and how requirements considering
human and organizational factors are included in regulations.
Secondly, a set of QRAs is investigated to see in what way the
legislation is reflected, and if and how the human and organiza-
tional factors are included. Thirdly, a classification of different
levels for the integration of human and organizational factors in
QRAs is defined.

The research method used is almost in reverse fashion from
traditional research, and may at first appear to contradict the
scientific method. Rather than beginning by researching and
developing a hypothesis, the first step was data collection in the
form of gathering QRAs. From the data collected, the key points
were extracted and marked with a series of codes related to
human and organizational factors. The codes were then grouped



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 469
into similar concepts. From these concepts, categories in form of
levels of QRAs were defined.

Several professionals have made the following comment in
regard to this article, that ‘‘QRAs do not include human and
organizational factors. Case closed!’’ However, there is little
research to prove the validity of this statement. The field of QRAs
is under constant development, and everyday hundreds of highly
skilled people are doing their best to ensure further development
among regulators, operators and consultancy firms. This article is
a contribution to establish the present state of QRA.

This article does not include an explanation of how QRAs
are performed. For literature regarding this matter, refer to
Refs. [2–4]. Legislation related to the Norwegian continental shelf
form the basis for this analysis. In addition, regulations related to
the British shelf are briefly described, owing to the close relation-
ship between the Norwegian and British shelves. The data, (QRAs)
is mainly from the Norwegian Continental Shelf. The scientific
area of human and organizational factors is enormous and not
settled. This article focuses on how human and organizational
factors are reflected to control and avoid major accidents. ‘Major
accident’ in the offshore industry is often understood to be an
accident sequence that is out of control and that has the potential
to cause five fatalities or more. This may be, for instance, gas leaks
where ignition has occurred or, in the case of structural failure,
where at least local structural failure has occurred. This inter-
pretation is in accordance with HSE’s definition [5]. Hazards in the
QRA, which can potentially cause major accidents are: process
leaks, blowouts, riser and pipeline accidents, structural collapse,
loss of stability/position and riser accidents. Helicopter accidents
are also major accidents, and they are not included in this article.

The history of the QRA as part of safety engineering is shortly
described in section 2. It is important to understand the frame-
work that QRA has been and is being developed under. Human
and organizational factors and how they interact in the risk
analysis process, are described. Thereafter the legislation, guide-
lines and official documents from HSE and the Norwegian
Petroleum Safety Authority are reviewed and presented. The
results from the analyses of QRAs and HOFs are described in
section 3. The discussion and conclusion follows thereafter.
2. Theory

2.1. QRA as part of safety engineering

QRA is used as the abbreviation for ‘Quantified Risk Assess-
ment’ or ‘Quantitative Risk Analysis’. The context usually has to
be considered in order to determine which of these two terms is
applicable. Risk assessment involves risk analysis, as well as an
evaluation of the results. QRA is applied frequently to offshore
operations. This technique is also referred to as Probabilistic Risk
Assessment (PRA), Probabilistic Safety Assessment (PSA), Concept
Safety Evaluation (CSE) and Total Risk Analysis (TRA). Despite
more than two decades of use and development, no convergence
towards a universally accepted term has been seen. QRA and TRA
are the most commonly used abbreviations [2]. In this article the
term QRA refers to all the different techniques.

The status of the QRAs is very much a part of the development
of safety regimes in the offshore industry. Oil-drilling on the
Norwegian continental shelf began in the summer of 1966. The
first drilling rigs were American, as were the drilling equipment,
the expertise, the language and the culture. The Norwegian
workers referred jokingly to certain rigs as ‘Texas’. Key features
of the culture found on board these rigs were a frenetic pace of
work, a high degree of risk-taking and numerous accidents.
Workers were constantly reminded of accidents, either because
they were frequent or through stories, myths and symbols.
Accident rates approached 70 accidents per 1,000 rig days. Since
many accidents were never reported, the actual figure was most
likely higher [6]. The first major accident was an explosion and
short duration fire on the Ekofisk Alpha platform, causing three
fatalities during evacuation. The second major accident was a
blowout that occurred on April 23rd, 1977, on the steel jacket
wellhead platform Ekofisk Bravo, during a workover on a produc-
tion well. The BOP was not in place on the platform, and could not
be reassembled correctly in time. All personnel were evacuated
without injuries by means of evacuation capsules and one dinghy,
and were subsequently rescued by a supply vessel. The well was
mechanically capped 7 days after the blowout [2]. The ‘Texas
Period’ culminated with the catastrophe that occurred on March
27th 1980. The accommodation platform Alexander L. Kielland
capsized on the Ekofisk field in the Norwegian sector of the North
Sea, killing 123 oil workers [7]. The disaster came as a shock and
sparked off many initiatives in order to prevent a similar
catastrophe from reoccurring. An extensive program (‘Safety Off-
shore’) was initiated in 1978 in order to implement the Norwe-
gian culture, work approach and worker protection on the
Norwegian continental shelf. The Government followed-up with
a series of directives, with requirements for education, training,
safety courses and other safety measures. QRAs played an
important role in the requirements, and in 1980, the Norwegian
Petroleum Directorate issued its Guidelines for safety evaluation
of platform conceptual design [8]. These guidelines required that
QRA should be carried out for all new offshore installations in
Norway in the conceptual design phase. After an initial period, an
efficient methodology was established, and subsequently
extended to the analysis of existing installations. A significant
step in the development of offshore use of QRAs resulted from the
official inquiry led by Lord Cullen in the UK, following the tragic
accident on the Piper Alpha platform in 1988. Lord Cullen in his
report, recommended QRAs to be implemented into the UK
legislation in much the same way as had been done in Norway
nearly 10 years earlier. In 1991, the Norwegian Petroleum
Directorate replaced the 1981 guidelines for risk assessment with
Regulations for the Use and Execution of Risk Analysis that
formally, though less so in practice, extended the scope consider-
ably for these studies. Since 1992, the Safety Case Legislation in
the UK has required, although not formally but in practice, that
the industry use offshore risk analyses as part of the safety cases
for existing and new installations. From mid 1995, the safety
cases have been extended with the assessment of provisions for
Prevention of Fire and Explosion and Emergency Response
(PFEER), according to the so-called PFEER regulations [9]. These
have, over time, become a small core group of international
standards, of the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), reflecting a risk-based approach to decision-making in the
offshore industry (see Refs. [10–13]).

An important role of the QRAs was to improve the incorpora-
tion of safety in design, owing to the fact that a high number of
accidents had their root in the design process. During the first
decade, the focus was mainly on the engineering phases, thus
after the installation type and concept had been decided. QRAs
were not commonly used during the initial choice of the high-
level concept for fulfilling the system objectives. When designing
oil and gas installations, it made no sense for the contractor
responsible for the detailed design to question the high-level
choices that led the operator to define the need for the specified
installation, rather than another type of installation or other
design capacities. Another issue that followed defining the
boundaries for design was the inclusion of the operation phase
where humans and organizational factors played an even more
important role [14]. The QRAs were updated due to several



470 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
factors, for instance: experience, modifications, model improve-
ments, changes in criteria, operational mode, manning level and
maintenance philosophy. Safety systems were usually addressed
on an individual basis that did not allow dependencies and
common mode/cause failures to be identified. For instance,
release statistics in the 1990s showed that half of the leaks from
hydrocarbon systems on the Norwegian Continental Shelf were
caused by manual interventions in the system [4,15]. Engineered
defenses were often partially deactivated during these operations,
in order to avoid disruption of stable production. These occur-
rences indicated that safety barriers relating to containment of
leaks did not function sufficiently. There is an obvious need to
better understand the performance of barriers (both technical and
non-technical) during operations [4].

According to Bea [16], experience has shown that the primary
hazard is not the ocean environment itself; the industry has
learned how to engineer, build, operate and maintain structures
that can survive the extreme storms, earthquakes, ice and sea
floor soil movements that frequent the offshore environment. The
primary hazard is associated with human and organizational
factors (HOFs) that develop during installations lifecycles. Studies
have shown that while the majority of the structure failures occur
during operations and maintenance, a majority of these failures
have sources that are founded during the design phase. Structures
are engineered and designed to have inherent flaws; they cannot
be built as intended and they are difficult to operate and
maintain. While they may have the requisite strength or capacity,
they lack the required durability, serviceability and compatibility
[17]. The design and operation phases of a structure are carried
out by two separate organizations. Decisions made in the design
phase influence, and should therefore be reflected in the later
phases where HOFs are largely influencing the major hazards. The
need for understanding the human and organizational factors
(HOF) were also pointed out early by the HSE [18].

‘‘Management of human factors is increasingly recognized as
having a vital role to play in the control of risk y. Successful
management of human factors and control of risk involves the
development of systems designed to take proper account of
human capabilities and fallibilities y. It is now widely accepted
that the majority of accidents in industry generally are in some
way attributable to human as well as technical factors in the
sense that actions by people initiated or contributed to accidents,
or people could have acted better to avert them’’.

Major hazard prevention, the use of QRAs and revelation of
HOFs are important elements of risk management.
2.2. Human and organizational factors

It is not the intent of this article to attempt to determine a final
definition for human and organizational factors. However, it is
important to ensure that some understanding of how the expressions
are understood by the authors is mentioned. There are three areas of
influence on people at work, namely: (a) the organization, (b) the job
(c) personal factors. These are directly affected by: (a) the system for
communication within the organization and (b) the training systems
and procedures in operation; all of which are directed at preventing
human error [19]. Human factors are understood as the branch of
science and technology, which includes what is known and theorized
about human behavioral and biological characteristics that can be
applied validly to the specification, design, evaluation, operation and
maintenance of products and systems to enhance safe, effective and
satisfying use by individuals, groups and organizations [20]. Human
factors are seen as a range of issues, including the perceptual, physical
and mental capabilities of people, as well as the interactions of
individuals with their jobs and the working environments, the
influence of equipment and system design on human performance
and, above all, the organizational characteristics that influence safety-
related behavior at work. The terms ‘human factors’ and ‘human
error’ are often used interchangeably, but, as pointed out by Gordon
[21], it is important to distinguish between the underlying causes of
accidents (human factors) and their immediate causes (human
errors). Traditionally, human factors are defined as the interaction
between man and machine, although many variations exist (see Ref.
[22]). Human error can be defined as: ‘‘the failure of planned actions
to achieve their desired ends—without the intervention of some
unforeseeable event’’ [23]. According to Jacobs and Haber [24], human
errors may be of various origins and part of larger, organizational
processes that encourage unsafe acts, which ultimately produce
system failures.

Organizational factors are characterized by the division of
tasks, design of job positions, including selection, training and
cultural indoctrination, and their coordination to accomplish the
activities. The main issues of organization and safety include
factors such as complexity (chemical/process, physical, control
and task), size and age of plant and organizational safety perfor-
mance shaping factors such as leadership, culture, rewards,
manning, communications and coordination and social norms
and pressures [25]. The term operational risk is most commonly
found in risk management programs of financial institutions,
which must organize their risk management program according
to Basel II [26]. Operational risk is then defined as: ‘‘The risk of loss
resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and
systems or from external events’’. Practically this can be described
as a company’s acceptance of the fact that its people, processes
and systems are imperfect, and that losses will arise from errors
and ineffective operations. The losses the companies are prepared
to accept, because the cost of correcting the errors or improving
the systems is disproportionate to the benefit they will receive,
determines their hunger for operational risk.

The term ‘operational risk’ has, within safety engineering, been
linked mostly to the complexity and framework for processes and
systems, and is often overlapped by the definitions for human and
organizational factors. Within safety engineering is acceptance of
operational risk not been pursued in the same way as within
finance. Operations are performed by humans as part of an
organization. They can all be described by factors. In this article,
the operational factors are not distinguished.

To predict human reliability in the QRA processes, Human
Reliability Analysis (HRA) is often used. The following list of high-
level requirements captures the essence of HRA. The HRA method
should [27]:

 identify human response (errors are the main focus) in the
QRA context,


 estimate response probabilities,


 identify causes of errors to support development of preventive

or mitigating measures,


 include a systematic procedure for generating reproducible

qualitative and quantitative results,


 have a causal model of human response with roots in cognitive

and behavioral sciences, and with:
J elements (e.g. Personal Shaping Factors) that are directly or

indirectly observable, and
J a structure that provides unambiguous and traceable links

between its input and output


 be detailed enough to support data collection, experimental

validation and various applications of QRA. Data and model are
two tightly coupled entities.

The model should be data-informed. Conversely, the data
collocation and analysis must be model-informed. A coordinated



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 471
model-based collection and analysis of experimental and filed data
should support the development and application of the model and
the quantification of its parameters [27].

There have also been parallel efforts to develop methods for
the formal inclusion of human and organizational factors into
QRA. Examples from the nuclear and airline industry includes
Model of Accident Causation using Hierarchical Influence Net-
work (MACHINE) [28], the Work Process Analysis Model (WPAM)
[29,30], System-Action-Management (SAM) [31], Omega Factor
Model [32], I-RISK [33,34], Integrated Safety Model (ISM) [35],
and Causal Modeling of Air Safety [36]. With respect to QRA in the
offshore industry, Organizational Risk Influence Model (ORIM)
[37], Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis (BORA) [38,39] and
Operational Conditional Safety (OTS) [4,15] are relevant. Common
among these are the following parts:
(1)
 a set of organizational factors,

(2)
 a link to the system risk model,

(3)
 a set of modeling techniques,

(4)
 a set of measurement methods.
For example, SAM describes the organization using a set of
theories: a rule-based model for rule-based decisions, a rational
and a bounded-rational model for knowledge-based decisions,
and a model related to the actual execution for skill-based
actions. The selection of relevant organizational factors depends
on which of the explicit models can best describe a given decision.
The existing frameworks and methods have some similar steps
and features, but they also have many unique features. The key
questions in this line of research can be summarized thus:
(1)
 What are the organizational factors that affect risk?

(2)
 How do these factors influence risk?

(3)
 How much do they contribute to risk?
Each method answers these questions in different ways [40].
Many proposed methods still lack sufficient theoretical and/or
experimental basis for their key ingredients. Missing from all
methods is a fully implemented model of the underlying causal
mechanisms linking measurable Personal Shaping Factors (PSF) or
other characteristics of the context of operator response. The
problem extends to the quantification of HOFs where the majority
of the proposed approaches still rely on implicit functions relating
PSFs to probabilities. Again, often only limited theoretical or
empirical bases are provided for such relations. In many cases
numbers are the result of expert elicitation using arbitrary
scales [27].

Several of the methods use variations of the Bayesian Belief
Network (BBN) or the Influence Diagram. WPAM utilizes flow
diagrams to relate work processes and organizational factors.
Measuring and estimating model elements in organizational
safety models pose significant challenges. Some of the proposed
safety causal models have relied exclusively on expert judgment
for measurement. WPAM suggests surveys, behavioral checklists
and interviews, in addition to expert judgment. These measure-
ment methods were suggested by Jacobs and Haber [24] in their
list of twenty organizational factors developed for the nuclear
power industry [40]. Others have used a combination of expert
and historical data (e.g. BORA).

Defining and modeling safety barriers is central when analyz-
ing the influence of human and organizational factors. The
concept of safety barriers is applied in practice, discussed in the
literature and required in legislation and standards within differ-
ent industries. Safety barriers are physical or non-physical means
planned to prevent, control or mitigate undesired events or
accidents. The means may range from a single technical unit or
human action to a complex socio-technical system. The term
‘planned’ implies that at least one of the purposes of the means is
to reduce the risk. In line with ISO:13702 [11], the term ‘preven-
tion’ means reduction of the likelihood of a hazardous event, and
‘control’ means limiting the extent and/or duration of a hazardous
event to prevent escalation, while ‘mitigation’ means reduction of
the effects of a hazardous event. Undesired events are, e.g.,
technical failures, human errors, external events or a combination
of these occurrences that may realize potential hazards. Accidents
are undesired and unplanned events that lead to loss of human
lives, personal injuries, environmental damage and/or material
damage [41].

Barrier systems may be classified according to several dimen-
sions, for example, as passive or active barrier systems, and as
physical, technical or human/operational barrier systems. Several
attributes are necessary in order to characterize the performance
of safety barriers; functionality/effectiveness, reliability/availabil-
ity, response time, robustness and finally a description of the
triggering event or condition. For some types of barriers, not all
the attributes are relevant or necessary in order to describe the
barrier performance [41].

The terminology proposed by a working group named ‘Work-
ing together for safety’ (see Ref. [41]) involves the levels, barrier
function, barrier element (or system) and the barrier influencing
factor. The following definitions are extracted from Sklet [41,42]:

 Barrier function: A function planned to prevent, control or
mitigate undesired events or accidents.


 Barrier element: Part of barrier, but not sufficient in order to

achieve the required overall function alone.


 Barrier influencing factor: Factor that influences the perfor-

mance of barriers.

QRAs studies for the offshore petroleum industry have tradi-
tionally had a rather narrow analysis of barrier performance. The
nuclear industry on the other hand, has carried out extensive
studies of barrier performance [4,15,38,39].

2.3. Human and organizational factors and major accidents

For a long time, it was assumed that occupational accidents
were a relevant basis on which major hazard risks were judged.
Occupational accidents were often judged to be a result of human
error. In the late 1990s, in the Norwegian petroleum sector, it was
apparent that occupational accidents were not relevant for
evaluation of major hazard risks, at least to the authorities and
their advisors. Unfortunately this was not apparent globally. One
of the main findings after the Texas City refinery explosion in
2005, was that major hazard risks had not been evaluated
properly on the basis of occupational accident statistics [43]. In
the same way, human error was judged to be the root cause for
several major accidents, for example, in the case of the accident at
Esso’s gas plant at Longford, Victoria, in Australia in September
1998 [44]. This was the position taken by Esso at the Royal
Commission. The company argued that operators and their super-
visors on duty at the time should have known that the attempt to
reintroduce warm hydrocarbons in liquid phase could result in
brittle fracture of the steel and release of hydrocarbons. The
company claimed that operators had been trained to be aware of
the problem and Esso even produced the training records of one
operator in an attempt to show that he should have known better.
However, the Commission took view of the fact that none of those
on duty at the time understood just how dangerous the situation
was, indicating a systematic training failure [45]. Not even the
plant manager, who was away from the plant at the time of the



472 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
incident, understood the dangers of cold metal embrittlement.
The Commission concluded that inadequate training of operators
and supervisors was the ‘real cause’ of the accident. Therefore, it
is clear that operator error does not adequately account for the
Longford incident. According to Reason [46], this is a general
finding of all inquiries into major accidents. For the Norwegian
offshore installations, manual intervention related to mainte-
nance is one of the main contributors to major accident risk.
When accident and incident investigations are considered, it is
often the case that human and organizational errors dominate.
Consider, for instance, the 2004 Snorre Alpha subsea gas blowout
in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea. The main categories of
deviations that contributed to the accident were: failure to follow
steering documentation, lack of appreciation of and execution of
risk assessments, inadequate management involvement and
requirements for well barriers not fulfilled [47]. There is a need
to analyze human and organizational factors in a structured way
where these factors are not only seen as a cause but also as
barriers to avoid major accidents.

2.4. Norwegian legislation

The Norwegians regulations cover the field of health, environ-
ment and safety (HES), but note that this field encompasses
safety, working environment, health, external environment and
financial assets; the latter includes production and transport
regularity (operational availability). The regulation is divided into
five categories:

 Framework regulations


 Management [of health, environment and safety] regulations


 Information duty regulations


 Facilities regulations


 Activity regulations

The regulations attach much importance to risk reduction
principles related to health, environment and safety, as means
for reducing the risk of accident, personal injury, health injury
and harm to the environment to the greatest degree possible. The
structure of the regulations reflects the fact that the requirements
are largely common or multidisciplinary and hence is not
repeated. The requirements related to safety barriers are an
example of the multidisciplinary approach. The provisions of the
regulations are largely formulated as functional requirements.
The functional requirements impose requirements to various
aspects, characteristics or qualities that the product, process or
service in question is intended to have. The particular require-
ment expresses what result the product, process or service is
to produce, and what the supervisory authorities wish to
achieve with the requirement. The guidelines to the respective
regulations recommend solutions, inter alia in the form of
industry standards (recognized norms) as a means of fulfilling
the requirements contained in the regulations. If a recommended
solution is opted for, the requirement is considered to be
fulfilled [48].

In the Facilities regulations (especially Section 9), human and
organizational factors are focused upon. It states that plants,
systems and equipment plants shall have a design that is robust
and as simple as possible, so that the possibility of human error or
mistake is limited. The guidelines comment that the principles
relating to risk reduction, harm or danger of harm to people, the
environment or to financial assets shall be prevented or limited,
in accordance with the legislation relating to health, the environ-
ment and safety, including internal requirements and acceptance
criteria. Over and above this level, the risk shall be further
reduced to the extent possible. Assessments on the basis of this
provision shall be made in all phases of the petroleum activities.
In effectuating risk reduction, the party responsible shall choose
the technical, operational or organizational solutions which,
according to an individual as well as an overall evaluation of
the potential harm and present and future use, offer the best
results, provided the associated costs are not significantly dis-
proportionate to the risk reduction achieved [2,49].

In the Norwegian offshore legislation, barriers play an essen-
tial role in the prevention and mitigation of incidents and
accidents. In the facilities regulations, it is stated that the operator
or the party responsible for the operation of a facility, shall
stipulate the strategies and principles on which the design, use
and maintenance of barriers shall be based, so that the barrier
function is ensured throughout the lifetime of the facility. It shall
be known what barriers have been established, and for which
function they are intended in relation to risk reduction. It shall be
known what performance requirements have been defined in
respect of the technical, operational or organizational elements,
and which are necessary for the individual barrier to be effective.
It shall be known which barriers are not functioning or have been
impaired. The party responsible shall take necessary actions to
correct or compensate for missing or impaired barriers [50]. For
more information about barriers see Refs. [41,51].

The Management regulation, Section 14, states that quantita-
tive risk analyses and other necessary analyses shall be carried
out to identify contributors to major accident risk. Section 15
requires that quantitative risk analyses that provide a balanced
and as comprehensive picture as possible of the risk, shall be
carried out. Section 6 requires that the operator shall set accep-
tance criteria for major accident risk, and that this should include
acceptance criteria for personnel on the facility as a whole, and
for groups of personnel, which are particularly risk-exposed. The
Management regulations focus also on the working environment
and requires, in Section 17, that necessary analyses shall be
carried out, which will ensure a sound working environment,
and provide decision support in the choice of technical, opera-
tional and organizational solutions. The analyses shall, inter alia,
contribute to improving the health, well-being and security
of the employees, and prevent personal injury, death and work-
related disease as a result of: (a) mistakes that may lead to
situations of hazard and accident and (b) exposure and physical or
mental strain [50]. Attention is also given to the QRA follow-up,
and in Section 21 it is stated that the party responsible shall
follow-up to see that all elements of their and other participants’
management system are established and functioning as intended,
and that a fully satisfactory level of health, environment and
safety exists. This follow-up shall contribute to identifying tech-
nical, operational or organizational weaknesses, failures and
deficiencies. Methods, frequency and extent of the follow-up
and the degree of independence in conducting it, will be adapted
to the significance of the element to health, environment and
safety [50].
2.5. UK regulation

The UK’s Offshore Safety Case Regulations came into force in
1992. A ‘Safety Case’ is a written document within which the
company must demonstrate that an effective management sys-
tem is in place to control risks to workers and, in particular, to
reduce the risks from a major accident to ‘As Low As Reasonably
Practicable’ (ALARP) [52]. The duty holder (owner or operator) of
every offshore installation operating in British waters is required
to prepare a Safety Case and submit it to the UK HSE Offshore
Safety Division for formal acceptance. The main thrust of a Safety



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 473
Case is a demonstration by the installation operator that the risks
to the installation from Major Accident Hazards have been
reduced to ALARP. Traditionally, the offshore industry has found
it difficult to integrate human and organizational factors into the
Safety Cases. Although there is a requirement to address human
factor issues, the guidance has been unclear on how this should
be achieved. A variety of tools and techniques have been initiated
by a legislative focus, which are currently in use to varying
degrees by different operators. There are two sections within
Safety Cases, which are of high importance, the Safety Manage-
ment System and Risk Assessment sections. Within these sec-
tions, are a number of factors that should be addressed in order to
meet the legislative requirements of the Safety Case [20]. Human
and organizational factors are among those to be addressed, and
in Principle 1 it is stated that: ‘‘The safety case should demonstrate
that the management system is adequate to ensure compliance with
the relevant statutory provisions’’. A safety case that does not
include the following elements in the descriptions of the manage-
ment system is unlikely to demonstrate that the system is
adequate[53]: organizational structure, accountability and safety
culture, professional health and safety advice, involvement of the
workforce and risk assessment systems.

The HSE clearly states that many forms of organizational
change can affect management of major hazards. Changes could
include, changes to roles and responsibilities, organizational
structure, staffing levels, staff disposition or any other change
that could directly or indirectly affect the control of the hazard
[18]. HSE also states the link between QRAs and the human and
organizational factors by requiring in Principle 8 that, where the
lines of defense against major hazards and escalation are pre-
sented, the role of the human element should be made clear, and
a demonstration provided, so that the lines of defenses can be
delivered reliably when required. The HSE expects that assess-
ments would progress through the following stages to provide an
appropriate demonstration [54]: Qualitative (Q), in which
frequency and severity are determined purely qualitatively,
Semi-quantitative (SQ), in which frequency and severity are
approximately quantified within ranges and/or Quantified risk
assessment (QRA), in which full quantification occurs.

For a new installation, the greatest scope to eliminate or
minimize hazards is at the design stage. The design process
should address all contributors to risk from major accident
hazards, with emphasis on the most significant risks. Risks should
be reduced to ensure compliance with the relevant statutory
provisions, primarily through sound engineering design, sup-
ported by appropriate management controls and human factor
assessment [52]. Human performance problems should be eval-
uated systematically. This should involve evaluating the feasibil-
ity of tasks, identifying control measures and providing an input
to the design of procedures and personnel training, as well as the
interfaces between personnel and the plant. The depth of analysis
should be appropriate to the severity of the consequences of
failure of the tasks [52,54].
2.6. Examples of HOF and safety barriers

If a certain hazard mechanism is dominated by HOFs, a
detailed analysis of operational barriers should be performed in
the design phases. One practical example where this was done is
related to collision risk between shuttle tanker (ST) and FPSO in
relation to offloading. The collision scenario most feared, is called
‘drive-off’. This implies a powered yet uncontrolled forward
movement of the shuttle tanker causing a collision. Usually the
shuttle tanker uses dynamic positioning (DP) for station keeping
and the FPSO has a fixed 12–16 point anchoring system and
ability to weather wane (rotate) 3601 unassisted. The DP system is
a fully automated system. The system receives input usually from
two or three positioning (reference) systems and thrust measure-
ments from each propeller/thruster and speed measurements.
There are also warning and alarm limits associated with auto-
matic actions such as controlled disconnection of the hose before
the hose is torn off. Active human intervention is not required
during normal operations. The role of the DP operator is mostly
passive and involves monitoring and fine adjustment tasks. If the
DP system fails and cause a drive-off and a possible collision, the
tasks for the DP operator changes dramatically. The intervention
by the DP operator on the bridge is the only remaining option to
control the situation. This implies that when alarms activate in
response to a failure, the control response is completely depen-
dent on the DP operator. The DP operator has a very limited time-
span (in the order of 30–45 s) for completion of an emergency
response. The drive-off scenario is particularly critical, due to the
movement of the shuttle tanker towards the FPSO. The fact that
the shuttle tanker often will accelerate towards the FPSO implies
that it increases the impact speed of a collision. Hence, a quick
response is needed. When these aspects were analyzed during the
design phase of new systems from around the year 2000, the
frequency of incidents and accidents was significantly reduced
from several per year in the North Sea in the late 1990s, to less
than once every three years, in the 2000s. For more details see
Ref. [55].

Another example of the importance of better understanding
the HOFs as part of the QRA-modeling is the preliminary findings
pertaining to failures of safety barriers in the Deepwater Horizon
accident. There are several initiatives to investigate the accident,
and what they all have in common, is the fact that they do not
point to a single failure, but multiple violations of safety barriers.
During the time this article was written, the official investigation
by the Presidential Commission was not completed. Summarized
are some of the findings to date [56,57]:

 The annulus cement barrier failed to isolate the hydrocarbons


 The shoe track barriers possibly failed to isolate the

hydrocarbons


 The negative-pressure test was accepted although well integ-

rity had not been established


 Influx was not recognized until hydrocarbons were in the riser


 Well control response actions failed to regain control of

the well


 Diversion to the mud gas separator resulted in gas venting

onto the rig


 The fire and gas system did not prevent hydrocarbon ignition


 The BOP emergency mode did not seal the well

It can be seen that the failure of several safety barriers in the
Deepwater Horizon accident was based on human intervention.
The Deepwater Horizon accident has demonstrated a need for
further improvement related to modeling of risk related to deep-
water drilling as well as understanding HOFs.

Both UK and Norwegian regulations require that risk is
considered using QRA, and that safety barriers are analyzed and
included in the QRA. HOFs are essential parts of the safety
barriers, and several barriers are solely based on human inter-
vention. The safety barriers represent an essential part of the risk-
reducing measures during operations and maintenance. It is
therefore the authors’ view that it is not possible to fulfill the
requirements in the regulations without including HOF in the
QRAs. The HOFs should be analyzed in a structured manner, and
should also be as close to reality as practically possible.



474 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
3. Results

3.1. About the data (QRAs)

Altogether, fifteen QRAs for different installations were col-
lected from five different operator companies. The collection was
based upon a random sample among all installations on the
Norwegian Shelf. In addition, two safety cases for UK installations
were collected. The QRAs are internal company documents and
their results are not published. The document owner is often the
installation management, and the QRA is treated as sensitive
information owing to the detailed information about the installa-
tions’ weak spots. As a result, the information retrieval took close
to a year. A high response rate was emphasized, and finally, all
requested QRAs except one were collected. Table 1 shows the year
of last revision of report and the number of reports

In Norway, there are three dominant consultancy firms con-
ducting QRAs. The QRAs are usually regulated by framework
agreements. The budget in man-hours is usually about 1500–
2500 h over a period of 3–5 months. The main results are usually
summarized in a main report. In addition, the different hazards
are further described in appendices and sub-appendices. The
main report is usually about 50–150 pages. The appendices are
usually 500–1500 pages in length. The analyses use mostly the
same generic data sources, accident statistics, failure databases
(loss of containment etc.), equipment failure databases, physical
properties of various substances and company internal accident
and incident databases. The use and interpretation of the data
differs.

As described in the objective, the research method used for
this study was somewhat in reverse fashion from traditional
research. Based on the examination of the QRA, a set of terms
related to human and organizational factors were chosen. Pre-
defined terms or tools were also used to describe or calculate
human and organizational factors, including: human error,
human factor, Human Error Probability (HEP), Human Reliability
Assessment (HRA), organizational error, organizational factor,
culture, safety culture, safety climate, Risk influence factor (RIF),
Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis (BORA), and Human Error
Assessment and Reduction Technique (HEART). The QRAs were
categorized according to the level at which they included,
analyzed, described, quantified and explained human and orga-
nizational factors. As a result of the examination, the QRAs have
been categorized into four levels.
3.2. Level 1—‘‘HOF not existing’’

Level 1 analysis gives no attention to human and organiza-
tional factors. At this level the QRA is solely a technical analysis
consisting of technical inputs such as number of valves, flanges,
bends, instrument connections, risers, pipelines, pressure vessels,
number of supply vessel operations, number of crane operations,
etc. The generic data sources are not sorted or adjusted for any
human or organizational factors. Frequencies for initiating events
are calculated separately for each piece of equipment or system,
Table 1
Year of QRA and number of reports/installations.

QRA Year Installations

2008–2009 4
2006–2008 3
2004–2006 5
2002–2004 2
2000–2002 1
and each leak category is based either on system or equipment
values. The different inputs are calculated using fault-tree and/or
event-tree analysis. According to guidelines for QRA [58], the
following risk elements related to major hazard risk should as a
minimum be considered for offshore oil and gas installations:

 Blowouts, including shallow gas and reservoir zones, unignited
and ignited


 Process leaks, unignited and ignited.


 Utility areas and systems fires and explosions.


 Fire in accommodation areas.


 Falling/swinging objects.


 Transportation accidents.


 Transport of personnel from shore to the installation.


 Helicopter crash.


 Collisions, including fields related traffic and external traffic,

drifting and under power.


 Riser and pipeline accidents.


 Accidents from subsea production systems.


 Escape, evacuation and rescue accidents, i.e. until a so-called

‘safe place’ has been reached.


 Structural collapse, including collapse of bridges between fixed

and/or floating installations.


 Foundation failure.


 Loss of stability/position.

All suggested risk-reducing measures for Level 1 analyses are
related to technical solutions, for instance, passive fire protection,
riser bumper protection, etc. Consequences are expressed
numerically (e.g., the number of people potentially killed) and
their likelihood of occurrence are expressed as probabilities or
frequencies.

3.3. Level 2—‘‘HOF explained’’

The Level 2 analysis does explain the importance of the
human, operational and organizational factors. The explanations
are related to the technical analysis and the influence on the
system is only explained to a limited extent. Human error has, to
some extent, been considered implicitly. For instance, component
failure rate data used in the QRA reflects to some extent good and
bad design/operations for both old and new installations. Human
error as a cause of failure is partly embodied in the failure rate
data. One example is the failure database related to onshore oil
pipelines reported in the CONCAWE (CONservation of Clean Air
and Water in Europe) reports on ‘‘Performance of Oil Industry
Cross-Country Pipelines in Western Europe’’ [59]. In a Level 2
analysis the incidents are divided into mechanical failure and
operational error. However the result is not adjusted to reflect the
actual status for the installation for which the QRA is performed.

The Level 2 analyses also often include experience from
incident reporting systems. Examples of previous incidents and
their relation to major hazard risk are often shortly described. The
recommendations that prevent recurrence of the events leading
up to the incident can sometimes be addressed as assumptions.
The recommendations are often related to human and organiza-
tional factors.

Another example is the use of interviews and reviews related
to barriers, and the awareness the crew have to human interac-
tion as a barrier. One example is the barrier element that the crew
is discovering gas leaks. Using interviews the risk analysis team
tries to reveal to what extent this is likely based on earlier
incidents, routines, competence and training. The process opera-
tors are interviewed to reveal the response time for human
interaction in control room when a gas detection alarm sounds.



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 475
Interviews are also used to describe whether changes in the
workforce influence the risk. In one of the QRAs, the human
ergonomic is commented to not be satisfactory and may lead to
longer response time.

The Level 2 analyses do not follow a structured pattern related
to revealing and analyzing the human and organizational factors.
The specific results from the interviews, experience from earlier
incidents and/or document review are not included in the QRA-
models, but are described in text. The role of HOFs as possible
hazard causes as well as safety barriers, is explained.

For Level 2 analysis the study of HOFs appear often to be based
on a specific request from the customer (installation operator).
Therefore, the problems related to the working environment of
individual installations are often the basis for the HOFs selected.
An area of particular attention, unsurprisingly, is staffing.
3.4. Level 3—‘‘HOF explained and the models are adjusted’’

Level 3 analyses study the human and organizational factors in
a structured way and also adjust the QRA-models based on the
results from the studies. The Level 3 analyses are based on named
and documented methods for revealing and analyzing human and
organizational factors, for example BORA [4,15,38,39], Human
Error Probability (HEP), Human Reliability Assessment (HRA),
Human Error Assessment and Reduction Technique (HEART),
Human Error Probability Index (HEPI) [60]and Technique for
Human Error Rate Prediction (THERP). In some of the analyses
the methods are combined. In other just parts of a method are
used. One example is related to human operations in connection
with discovery, identification and rectification of plant malfunc-
tions in the control room and in the field. The risk analysis team
has, by means of interviews with control room operators and field
operators, sought to assess the operators’ confidence toward the
reliability of instrument readings in the Central Control Room
(CCR) when leaks occur. Also the possibility of a successful
intervention from the CCR and/or by field operators in the case
of a leak (oil or gas) in the process area on the platform is
assessed. Based on the interviews, the HOF-factors are revealed
and the QRA-models are adjusted. With respect to the example, it
is argued that the factors related to human error are conservative.
This is based on the interviews and experience from earlier
incidents, showing that field operators have intervened with
success on a number of occasions (gas or oil leaks). Thorough
knowledge and familiarity with each part of the plant the
operators had the necessary assuredness to prevent panicky
reactions that could have led to failed operations, and instead
controlled the incidents.

The HOFs that are studied in Level 3 analyses are related to but
limited to work practice, competence, communication, manage-
ment, procedures, safety management system, workload and
physical working environment and change management. Each of
these can again be divided into subgroups, e.g. competence,
training, education (both general and specific), courses, system
knowledge, etc. The methods used to study the HOFs are inter-
views, document review of procedures and safety management
system and review of earlier incidents.

HOFs in relation to gas detection are often studied in the Level
3 analysis. The steps that influence the risk were explained and
included among others maintenance, the operators’ ability and
training to detect and respond to leaks and the collaboration
between the operator and central control room. The capability to
isolate a leak locally and manually was often described. The
control room’s response to depressurize process systems was also
described.
In one of the QRAs were HOFs related to evacuation and escape
studied and formed basis for input to the QRA-model. In another
QRA were the HOFs in relation to stand-by vessel operations and
the hazards related to collision studied. The model included
various tasks of the crew members and the stressful surroundings
of the work environment.

The Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis is so far the most
documented methodology to include HOFs in offshore QRAs. The
BORA analyses the effect of safety barriers introduced to prevent
hydrocarbon releases. BORA-Release comprises the following
main steps [38,39,61]:
1.
 development of a basic risk model, including release scenarios,

2.
 modeling the performance of safety barriers,

3.
 assignment of industry average probabilities/frequencies and

risk quantification based on these probabilities/frequencies,

4.
 development of risk influence diagrams,

5.
 scoring of risk influencing factors,

6.
 weighting of risk influencing factors,

7.
 adjustment of industry average probabilities/frequencies,

8.
 recalculation of the risk in order to determine the platform-

specific risk related to hydrocarbon release.

The BORA project has investigated which barriers exist to
prevent initiating events from actually developing into a leak.
Many of these barriers are human and organizational rather than
technical. One example of such barriers is an error documented as
follows: ‘‘valve in wrong position after maintenance’’. Barriers
intended to prevent the valve in wrong position are self-checking
work tasks (i.e. the person performing the work should check the
valves when work is accomplished). An independent person
should then check the valves and carry out a leak test. These
barriers are described and modeled in the BORA project. The
project do also describe which barriers must fail in order for a
leak to occur. A wide range of platform-specific conditions are
included in the methodology, e.g., employee competence, working
environment issues, accessibility and arid quality of documenta-
tion and procedures. By evaluating the state of such factors
mentioned on the installation in question, the factors can be
considered when the leak frequency is set.

3.5. Level 4—‘‘HOF explained, models adjusted and included in the
overall risk management’’

Guidelines, requirements and research form the basis for
Level 4 QRA analysis. Level 4 analysis includes the same struc-
tured approach to reveal, model and calculate the human and
organizational factors as the Level 3 analysis, with the addition
that at this level the human and organizational factors are just as
important as the technical ones. HOFs form the basis for the
preparations, analysis and interpretation of the results in the QRA.
The safety barriers are defined and explained with regards to how
the different HOFs influence. The status of the technical factors
and the HOFs is controlled by the use of risk indicators. The QRA is
updated based on the indicators and other means to evaluate the
status for the technical factors and HOFs.

Level 4 analyses are a central part of the company’s safety and
risk management system. The QRA is thereby a part of the
decision-making process where the definition of goals and objec-
tives are key elements. The decision problem is characterized by
expected losses and gains and uncertainties. Risk management is
managed according to the principles for ALARP. The QRA form the
basis for training and drills. The QRA is known and accepted at all
levels of the organization and form the basis for the daily risk
management.



476 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479

Table 2
Level and requirements.

Level Requirements

Level 4  The QRA is an integrated part of the safety and risk management system.
 Results from the QRA form the basis for daily risk management.
 The QRA is known and accepted at all levels of the organization.
 QRA is combined with risk indicators to reveal the status of the safety barriers.

Level 3  Systematic collection of data is related to HOF.
 QRA-models are adjusted according to findings from HOF.
 Identifies causes of errors to support development of preventive or mitigating measures.
 Includes a systematic procedure for generating reproducible qualitative and quantitative results (BORA, OTS y)

Level 2  Explains the importance of HOF
 The HOF-factors’ influence on different part of the system are partly described
 Human error is calculated separately
 Interviews with parts of the crew. The results are revealed but the models and calculation are not adjusted.

Level 1  Analysis of technical and operational factors. Technical factors are valves, flanges, bends, instrument connections, water depth, pressure,
hydrocarbon composition. Operational factors are number of flights, number of shipping arrivals etc.
 Risk-reducing measures are technical; for example, passive fire protection and riser bumper protection. They can also be operational, like fewer

shipping arrivals.

Result of the QRAs

Table 3
Level and number of installations.

Level Number of
installations

1—None existing 5
2—Explained but not adjusted 8
3—Explained and the models are adjusted 2
4—Explained, models adjusted and included in the overall 0

risk management
Necessary sensitivity calculations and evaluations of uncer-
tainties are done as part of the QRA. The QRA also forms the basis
for easy updates based on revised input. The risk analysis team
and the management work close together to ensure that the
objectives with the QRA are in accordance with long-term goals
for safety, and can be used as important input to the strategy for
attaining the goals.

The requirements related to the different levels are summar-
ized in Table 2.

Table 3 shows the different levels of QRA analysis defined in
this article, including the number of installations containing each
level of analysis.

Not surprisingly do none of analyses fulfill the requirements
for a Level 4 analysis. This level is the authors’ interpretation of
the intentions given in guidelines, requirements and research
described earlier in the article.
4. Discussions

QRA methodology should focus on establishing good princi-
ples, methods and models for analyzing and describing risk. The
use of risk analysis in risk assessment should focus on establish-
ing good principles, methods and models for evaluating risk,
communicating risk and managing risk. The question remains,
‘‘how good is good enough’’? It is clearly not sufficient to simply
refer to the fulfillment of requirements set by various standards.
One needs to go one step further and ask what the basis is for
establishing the standard. We share the belief with Aven [62] that
there are some principles that should be fulfilled; (a) The analysis
team should have a thorough understanding of the system
performance and the decision-making process and context.
(b) Models used should have sufficiently accurate representations
of the world, their suitability in describing the world have been
evaluated. (c) All observable quantities of the analysis should be
precisely defined. (d) The meanings of risk and uncertainty should
be fully understood and treated consistently. (e) The background
information for the assessments should be documented.

We cannot verify if the analysis team has a thorough under-
standing of the system performance and the decision-making
process and context, but it is possible to reveal if they have tried
to collect the necessary information. As seen, there are major
differences between the different levels of QRA. The situation is
similar in relation to the models, if they are sufficiently accurate
representations of the world. We have evaluated how detailed the
models are in relation to HOFs. Performing a QRA is extensive
work, and it can take years before revisions are made. The QRA
can be a valuable basis for risk control, as well as a risk manage-
ment strategy. Safety and risk indicators are an important part of
the follow-up process of a QRA, and the same criteria are relevant
for both QRAs and risk indicators. Risk indicators must be:
observable and quantifiable, sensitive to change, transparent
and easily understood, robust against manipulation and valid
[63]. The reliability and validity of risk analysis have been
discussed previously by Aven and Heide [64]. It is our under-
standing that incorporating the HOFs in QRAs is essential to fulfill
the legislation requirements. Incorporation of HOFs must be done
in accordance with the described principles for QRAs.

The need to consider HOF and the extent of the consideration
varies according to the objectives and the timing of the QRA
study. For example, if the QRA is used in order to define Design
Accidental Loads, then the focus is on design aspects, and the
need for HOF consideration is limited. Still it is important to
determine the likelihood of accidents, which needs to reflect the
HOF contributions to accident frequencies, at least on an overall
level. When the QRA is used in the operations phase in order to
propose measures that may reduce risk, it is essential to include
detailed modeling of HOF mechanisms and contributions, as a
basis for identification of possible risk-reducing measures,



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 477
including technical as well as operational measures. There may be
exceptions to this general principle.

The QRA as part of the total risk management system has been
described as an essential part of the Level 4 analysis, but this in
itself does not ensure minimization of the risk. At one end of the
spectrum, the most prudent strategies rely on a robust system
design, frequent preventive maintenance and early response to
warnings of deterioration. At the other end, strategies are driven
only by an aggressive production schedule. They rely on a less
robust (and often cheaper) system design and minimal inspection
and maintenance, in the hope of obtaining maximum production
at minimum initial cost with minimum interruptions in opera-
tions. Many risk management strategies are based on intermedi-
ate solutions such as having a robust system that would require
minimal maintenance. The difference, of course, lies in the long-
term costs, the actual frequency of operation interruptions and
the probability and costs of catastrophic failures [65]. As
described in section 2.2 the legislation requires focus on HOF,
but does not demand to which depth these considerations shall
be performed. One difficulty with organizational assessments is
that they usually rely on observations and interviews. For a
method to be reliable and valid, the results should not depend
on the assessor. This requirement is hard to fulfill, because signals
of deteriorating performance may be hard to detect and the
assessor may have certain prejudices. The methods have also to
be based on mutual trust between the assessor and those
assessed that recommendations will be to the point and fairly
treated. Assessors sometimes negotiate a kind of agreement with
those to be assessed as to how data will be collected, validated
and reported. Some of the difficulties can be solved by training
the assessors, but training alone cannot compensate for the need
of insight, tact and discretion [66]. Another difficulty is connected
to the fact that all organizational factors interact with each other.
It is therefore difficult to build models of organizational behavior
in the form of cause–consequence relationships. A theory of how
performance is related to various organizational factors could
help in this respect, but unfortunately no such theory currently
exists. In approaching organizational problems it is necessary to
identify key variables and to select a framework within which the
problem can be defined and solved. Sometimes it is necessary to
combine methods or even create new ones. Also, the use of
different approaches can sometimes provide additional validation
of the results that have been obtained [67].

This article has documented that although there has been a
requirement in the legislation for almost ten years, the considera-
tion of HOFs in the QRA studies is usually quite superficial. This is
one of the reasons why the revised NORSOK Z-013 [68] has
strengthened the requirements and states: ‘‘An evaluation of the
effect of human and organizational factors shall be performed. This
may range from a qualitative discussion to a detailed analysis of
human and organizational errors, depending on the criticality of such
aspects for the risk picture.’’ The analysis of HOF aspects in QRA
studies for Shuttle tanker—FPSO collision risk, and its success in
contributing to reducing the occurrence rate of incidents and
accidents, shows that it is possible to successfully account for the
HOFs. Another example is the ongoing research activity ‘Risk
OMT’, Risk Modeling—Integration of Organizational, Human and
Technical factors [4] that is expected to provide detailed modeling
for the analysis of hydrocarbon fire and explosion risk.

The Norwegian performance based regulations specify the
performance or function that is to be attained or maintained by
the party responsible. The regulatory role here involves defining
the safety standards and acceptance criteria, which companies
must meet. Norway authority’s intention of such a regulatory
regime is to have the operator focus on Health, Safety and
Environmental performance and to be ‘self-regulatory’ regarding
this matter [69]. We have earlier stated that it is not possible to
fulfill the requirements in the regulations without including HOF
in the QRAs. However, there is a large degree of responsibility and
freedom for the operator, to demonstrate how their safety
management system and performance comply with the regula-
tions. The regulatory authority has the opportunity to sanction
their view through use of safety audits. In October 2009 the PSA
conducted an audit of one main operator’s use of quantitative risk
analysis (TRA/QRA). The objective of the audit was to assess
whether the operator had established internal requirements and
work processes, which ensure that the assumptions, conditions,
limitations and recommendations of the risk analysis were
fulfilled. In the PSA notification letter, the PSA asked to be
presented with the operator’s requirements and guidelines,
including practical examples and experiences acquired from their
own facilities on the Norwegian Shelf. Several items with room
for improvement were identified, e.g., no competence require-
ments had been set relating to relevant positions offshore, which
require detailed knowledge of the risk analysis that had been
carried out (limitations, assumptions and results) [70]. The audit
was a clear message from the PSA that the QRA should be a part of
the safety management system. The audit revealed that the QRA
was not incorporated into the safety management systems, and
thereby the operational risk management where HOFs are essen-
tial. Even though the findings were serious, there have not been
any following audits conducted of the operator, or any other
operator. Several similar audits can reduce the gross variance in
the application of the QRAs.

This article documents the relationship between HOFs, legislation
requirements and the different levels of QRAs. The focus has been on
the Norwegian and UK Shelves and performance-based regulations.
Following the Macondo well blowout the U.S. has adopted partly the
performance-based regulation by making essential components of the
API RP 75 mandatory [71]. According to API RP 75 hazard analysis is
to be performed to identify, evaluate and, where unacceptable, reduce
the likelihood and/or minimize the consequences of uncontrolled
releases and other safety or environmental incidents. Human factors
should be considered in this analysis [72].
5. Conclusion

As clearly stated in the previous chapters, HOFs play an
important role in the Norwegian and UK legislation. HOFs must
be modeled and their role as safety barriers must be revealed to
fulfill the legislation requirements. The study of the QRAs shows
that there are large differences between the analyses and this is
also reflected in the four level classification system. The QRAs
differ largely depending on the extent to which they incorporate
HOFs, and none of the QRAs are fulfilling the requirements to
include HOFs such that they can be considered as Level 4 analysis.
Relevant research projects have been conducted to fulfill the
requirements of Level 3 analysis. Further research needs to be
carried out, and the different scientific disciplines need to be
further united to be considered as a Level 4 analysis. Further
safety audits by regulatory authorities focusing on QRAs are most
likely necessary to point out the direction and role for QRAs.
Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to the operators who contributed by
providing QRAs. A special thanks also to Jr. Specialist Jahon Khorsandi
at UC Berkeley for reviews and comments. We also appreciate the
comments and suggestions made by the referees, and the financial
support from the Norwegian Research Council and Statoil.



478 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
References

[1] Bea R. Risk assessment and management of offshore structures. Progress in
Structural Engineering and Materials 2001;3:180–7.

[2] Vinnem JE. Offshore Risk Assessment. 2nd ed.. London: Springer; 2007.
[3] Aven T. Foundations of Risk Analysis: A Knowledge and Decision-Oriented

Perspective. Chichester: Wiley; 2003.
[4] Vinnem JE, Seljelid J, Haugen S, Aven T. Generalized methodology for

operational risk analysis of offshore installations. Journal of Risk and
Reliability 2008;223:11.

[5] HSE. The Offshore Installations (Safety Case) Regulations, 2005. [cited: 20
September, 2010]. Available at: /http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2005/
20053117.htmS.

[6] Haukelid K. Theories of (safety) culture revisited - An anthropological
approach. Safety Science 2008;46:413–26.

[7] Næsheim T. NOU, The ‘‘Alexander L. Kielland’’ accident. Oslo, Norwegian;
1981.

[8] Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. Guidelines for safety evaluation of plat-
form conceptual design. Oslo; 1981.

[9] Vinnem JE. Evaluation of methodology for QRA in offshore operations.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1998;61:39–52.

[10] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 10418 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—basic surface pro-
cess safety systems. 2nd ed. Geneva; 2003.

[11] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 13702 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—control and mitigation of fires and explosions on
offshore production installations—requirements and guidelines. 1st ed.
Geneva; 1999.

[12] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 15544 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—Requirements and
guidelines for emergency response. 1st ed. Geneva; 2000.

[13] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 17776 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—guidelines on
tools and techniques for hazard identification and risk assessment. 1st ed.
Geneva; 2000.

[14] Hale A, Kirwan B, Kjellén U. Safe by design: where are we now? Safety
Science 2007;45:305–27.

[15] Vinnem JE, Haugen S, Kongsvik T, Seljelid J, Steen S, Sklet S, et al. Operational
Safety Condition—Concept Development. Norway: Esrel Stavanger; 2007.

[16] Bea R. Human and Organizational factors in design and operation of deep-
water structures. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, USA; 2002.

[17] Bea R. Human and organizational factors in reliability assessment and
management of offshore structures. Risk Analysis 2002;22:29–45.

[18] HSE. Organisational change and major hazards, HSE Books; 2003.
[19] Stranks J. The Manager’s Guide to Health and Safety at Work. London: Kogan

Page Ltd.; 2006.
[20] Goodwin S. Human Factors in QRA. Report for International Association of Oil

and Gas Producers. Rev.00: Det Norske Veritas Ltd.; 2007.
[21] Gordon RPE. The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore

oil industry. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 1998;61:95–108.
[22] Dempsey P, Wogalter M, Hancock P. Defining ergonomics/human factors.

International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors 2006:32.
[23] Schönbeck M, Rausand M, Rouvroye J. Human and organisational factors in

the operational phase of safety instrumented systems: A new approach.
Safety Science 2010;48:310–8.

[24] Jacobs R, Haber S. Organizational processes and nuclear power plant safety.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1994;45:75–83.

[25] Bellamy LJ, Geyer TAW, Wilkinson J. Development of a functional model
which integrates human factors, safety management systems and wider
organisational issues. Safety Science 2008;46:461–92.

[26] BIS. Basel II: Revised international capital framework. Bank for Internatinal
Settlements; 2010. Available at: /http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsca.htmS.

[27] Mosleh A, Chang YH. Model-based human reliability analysis: Prospects and
requirements. Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 2004;83:241–53.

[28] Embrey DE. Incorporating management and organisational factors into
probabilistic safety assessment. Reliability Engineering and System Safety.
1992;38:199–208.

[29] Davoudian K, Wu J-S, Apostolakis G. The work process analysis model
(WPAM). Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1994;45:107–25.

[30] Davoudian K, Wu J-S, Apostolakis G. Incorporating organizational factors into
risk assessment through the analysis of work processes. Reliability Engineer-
ing and System Safety. 1994;45:85–105.

[31] Elisabeth Paté-Cornell M, Murphy DM. Human and management factors
in probabilistic risk analysis: the SAM approach and observations from
recent applications. Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1996;53:
115–126.

[32] Mosleh A, Golfeiz E. An approach for assessing the impact of organizational
factors on risk. Technical Research Report. Center for Technology Risk
Studies, University of Maryland at College Park, MD, USA; 1999.

[33] Papazoglou IA, Bellamy LJ, Hale AR, Aneziris ON, Ale BJM, Post JG, et al.
I-Risk: development of an integrated technical and management risk meth-
odology for chemical installations. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process
Industries 2003;16:575–91.

[34] Oh J, Brouwer W, Bellamy L, Hale A, Ale B, Papazoglou I. The I-Risk project:
development of an integrated technical and management risk control and
monitoring methodology for managing and quantifying on-site and off-site
risks. Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management. London: Springer;
1998. p. 2485–91.

[35] Wreathall J, Schurman D, Modarres M, Anderson N, Roush M, Mosleh A. US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission: A framework and method for the amalga-
mation of performance indicators at nuclear power plants 1 and 2. US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington DC, USA; 1992.

[36] Ale BJM, Bellamy LJ, Cooke RM, Goossens LHJ, Hale AR, Roelen ALC, et al.
Towards a causal model for air transport safety - an ongoing research project.
Safety Science 2006;44:657–73.

[37] Øien K. A framework for the establishment of organizational risk indicators.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 2001;74:147–67.

[38] Aven T, Sklet S, Vinnem JE. Barrier and operational risk analysis of hydro-
carbon releases (BORA-Release) Part I. Method description. Journal of
Hazardous Materials 2006;137:681–91.

[39] Sklet S, Vinnem JE, Aven T. Barrier and operational risk analysis of hydro-
carbon releases (BORA-Release) Part II: results from a case study. Journal of
Hazardous Materials 2006;137:692–708.

[40] Mohaghegh Z, Mosleh A. Incorporating organizational factors into probabil-
istic risk assessment of complex socio-technical systems: Principles and
theoretical foundations. Safety Science 2009;47:1139–58.

[41] Sklet S. Safety barriers: definition, classification, and performance. Journal of
Loss Prevention in the Process Industries 2006;19:494–506.

[42] Sklet S. Safety Barriers on Oil and Gas Platforms. Trondheim: NTNU; 2005.
[43] Baker J, Bowman F, Erwin G, Gorton S, Hendershot D, Leveson N. The report of

the BP U.S. Refineries independent safety review panel; 2007.
[44] Dawson D, Brooks B. Esso Longford gas plant accident: report of the Longford

Royal Commission: Longford Royal Commission; 1999.
[45] Hopkins A. Lessons from Longford: the Esso gas plant explosion. Sydney: CCH

Australia Ltd.; 2000.
[46] Reason J. Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. Aldershot:

Ashgate; 1997.
[47] Brattbakk M, Østvold L, Zwaag C, Hiim H. Investigation of gas blowout on

Snorre A, Well 34/7-P31A, 28 November 2004. Petroleum Safety Authority,
Norway; 2005. p. 53.

[48] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. The Continental Shelf. Sta-
vanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://www.ptil.no/
regulations/the-continental-shelf-article4246-87.htmlS.

[49] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. Regulations relating to health,
enviroment and safety in the petroleum activities (The Facilities Regula-
tions). Stavanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://
www.ptil.no/regulations/S.

[50] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. Regulations relating to health,
enviroment and safety in the petroleum activities (The Managment Regula-
tions). Stavanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://
www.ptil.no/regulations/S.

[51] Aven T, Hauge S, Sklet S, Vinnem J. Methodology for incorporating
human and organizational factors in risk analyses for offshore installa-
tions. International Journal of Materials and Structural Reliability 2006;4:
1–14.

[52] Health and Safety Executive. A guide to the Offshore Installations (Safety
Case) Regulations 2005. HSE Books; 2006.

[53] Health and Safety Executive. Assessment Principles for Offshore Safety Cases
(APOSC); 2006. p. 30.

[54] Health and Safety Executive. Guidance on Risk Assessment for Offshore
Installations. HSE Information sheet; 2006. p. 25.

[55] Vinnem JE, Liyanage JP. Human-technical interface of collision risk
under dynamic conditions: an exploratory learning case from the North
Sea. International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction 2008;4:
34–47.

[56] Salazar K. Increased safety measures for energy development on the outer
Continental Shelf. Department of the Interior; 2010.

[57] BP Deepwater Horizon Accident Investigation Report; 2010. p. 192.
[58] Standards Norway. Norsok Standard: risk and emergency preparedness

analysis, Z-013. Norwegian Technology Centre. Oslo; 2001.
[59] Davis PM, Dubois J, Levi G, Uhlig F. Performance of European crosscountry oil

pipelines. Statistical summary of reported spillages in 2006 and since 1971.
CONCAWE, Oil Pipelines Management Group 2008:54.

[60] Khan FI, HEPI A. new tool for human error probability calculation for offshore
operation. Safety Science 2006;44:313.

[61] Seljelid J, Haugen S, Sklet S, Vinnem JE. Operational risk analysis—total
analysis of physical and non-physical barriers. BORA Handbook. Rev.00,
Bryne; June 2006. p. 60.

[62] Aven T. Risk analysis and science. International Journal of Reliability, Quality
and Safety Engineering 2004;11:1–15.

[63] Vinnem J. Risk indicators for major hazards on offshore installations. Safety
Science 2010;48:770–87.

[64] Aven T, Heide B. Reliability and validity of risk analysis. Reliability Engineer-
ing and System Safety. 2009;94:1862–8.

[65] Baron MM, Pate-Cornell ME. Designing risk-management strategies for
critical engineering systems. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
1999;46:87–99.

[66] Wahlström B. Organisational factors, their definition and influence on
nuclear safety. Technical Research Centre of Finland 2000:22.

[67] Wahlström B, Wilpert B, Cox S, Solá R, Rollenhagen C. Learning organizations
for nuclear safety 2002.



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 479
[68] Standards Norway. Norsok Standard: Risk and emergency preparedness analysis,
Z-013 Draft edition 3rd ed., Norwegian Technology Centre, Oslo; 2010.

[69] DNV. Report OLF/NOFO—summary of differences between offshore drilling
regulations in Norway and U.S. Gulf of Mexico; 2010. p. 100.

[70] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway. Report following the audit of Exxon
Mobil’s use of quantitative risk analyses. Stavanger; 2009. p. 4.
[71] Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. Fact
Sheet—The Workplace Safety Rule—On Safety and Environmental Manage-
ment Systems (SEMS); 2010. p. 2.

[72] American Petroleum Institute. Recommended Practice for Development of a
Safety and Environmental Management Program for Offshore Operations and
Facilities. API Recommended practice, vol. 75. 3rd ed; 2010.



Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Reliability Engineering and System Safety
Abbre
Operati
Ship Of
Executi
Human
Quantit

n Corr
E-m

jev@pre

0951-83
doi:10.1
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ress
Quantitative risk analysis offshore—Human and organizational factors
Jon Espen Skogdalen n, Jan Erik Vinnem
Department of Industrial Economics, Risk Management and Planning, University of Stavanger, 4036 Stavanger, Norway
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 May 2010
Received in revised form
10 December 2010
Accepted 24 December 2010
Available online 4 January 2011

Keywords:
Quantitative Risk Analysis
Human factors
Organizational factors
viations: ALARP, As Low As Reasonably Pra
onal Risk Analysis; DP, Dynamic Positioning;
fshore; HSE, Health, Safety and Environment
ve [United Kingdom]; HOF, Human and Orga
Reliability Analysis; PSA, Petroleum Safety a
ative Risk Analysis
esponding author. Tel./fax: +47 99 02 41 71.
ail addresses: jon.espen.skogdalen@gmail.com
ventor.no (J.E. Vinnem).

20/$ - see front matter & 2011 Elsevier Ltd. A
016/j.ress.2010.12.013
a b s t r a c t

Quantitative Risk Analyses (QRAs) are one of the main tools for risk management within the Norwegian
and UK oil and gas industry. Much criticism has been given to the limitations related to the QRA-models
and that the QRAs do not include human and organizational factors (HOF-factors). Norway and UK
offshore legislation and guidelines require that the HOF-factors are included in the QRAs. A study of 15
QRAs shows that the factors are to some extent included, and there are large differences between the
QRAs. The QRAs are categorized into four levels according to the findings. Level 1 QRAs do not describe
or comment on the HOF-factors at all. Relevant research projects have been conducted to fulfill the
requirements of Level 3 analyses. At this level, there is a systematic collection of data related to HOF.
The methods are systematic and documented, and the QRAs are adjusted. None of the QRAs fulfill the
Level 4 requirements. Level 4 QRAs include the model and describe the HOF-factors as well as explain
how the results should be followed up in the overall risk management. Safety audits by regulatory
authorities are probably necessary to point out the direction for QRA and speed up the development.

& 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

Authorities are basing their regulations and operators are
basing their designs on the use of Quantitative Risk Analyses
(QRAs) as a tool to determine which safety barriers are needed, as
well as what should be the dimensioning loads and requirements.
QRA processes have been used by the offshore industry for more
than three decades. QRAs have traditionally been focused on
technical systems and capabilities. Much less attention has been
focused on the human and organizational factors (HOFs). The
knowledge about HOFs started within the field of ergonomics; the
art and science of interfacing people with the systems that they
design, construct, operate and maintain. This approach is funda-
mentally one that focuses on a proactive reduction in the like-
lihoods of malfunctions [1]. During the past decade much
research effort has been aimed to reveal, isolate and measure/
predict human and organizational factors and their influence
on risk.
cticable; BORA, Barrier and
FPSO, Floating Production
and Health and Safety
nizational Factor; HRA,
uthority [Norway]; QRA,

(J.E. Skogdalen),

ll rights reserved.
During the period between 1970 and about 2000, there was an
extensive new building activity in the North Sea. Since 2000, the
new buildings have reduced to one, or possibly a couple of new
production facilities per year in the entire North Sea. Currently,
operations, maintenance and modification of existing facilities are
the main focus in the North Sea, and decommissioning will also
soon be a main activity. In addition, the trend towards more
extensive use of floating production systems, operations in the
arctic and deepwater suggests that operational aspects of safety
will be more important in the future, in order to mitigate hazards
and control risks. Revealing the HOFs are therefore of great
importance to the oil and gas industry.

This article has three objectives. The first objective is to study
in what way the legislation related to offshore activities on the
Norwegian shelf is influencing QRAs’ development. Special atten-
tion is given to reveal if and how requirements considering
human and organizational factors are included in regulations.
Secondly, a set of QRAs is investigated to see in what way the
legislation is reflected, and if and how the human and organiza-
tional factors are included. Thirdly, a classification of different
levels for the integration of human and organizational factors in
QRAs is defined.

The research method used is almost in reverse fashion from
traditional research, and may at first appear to contradict the
scientific method. Rather than beginning by researching and
developing a hypothesis, the first step was data collection in the
form of gathering QRAs. From the data collected, the key points
were extracted and marked with a series of codes related to
human and organizational factors. The codes were then grouped



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 469
into similar concepts. From these concepts, categories in form of
levels of QRAs were defined.

Several professionals have made the following comment in
regard to this article, that ‘‘QRAs do not include human and
organizational factors. Case closed!’’ However, there is little
research to prove the validity of this statement. The field of QRAs
is under constant development, and everyday hundreds of highly
skilled people are doing their best to ensure further development
among regulators, operators and consultancy firms. This article is
a contribution to establish the present state of QRA.

This article does not include an explanation of how QRAs
are performed. For literature regarding this matter, refer to
Refs. [2–4]. Legislation related to the Norwegian continental shelf
form the basis for this analysis. In addition, regulations related to
the British shelf are briefly described, owing to the close relation-
ship between the Norwegian and British shelves. The data, (QRAs)
is mainly from the Norwegian Continental Shelf. The scientific
area of human and organizational factors is enormous and not
settled. This article focuses on how human and organizational
factors are reflected to control and avoid major accidents. ‘Major
accident’ in the offshore industry is often understood to be an
accident sequence that is out of control and that has the potential
to cause five fatalities or more. This may be, for instance, gas leaks
where ignition has occurred or, in the case of structural failure,
where at least local structural failure has occurred. This inter-
pretation is in accordance with HSE’s definition [5]. Hazards in the
QRA, which can potentially cause major accidents are: process
leaks, blowouts, riser and pipeline accidents, structural collapse,
loss of stability/position and riser accidents. Helicopter accidents
are also major accidents, and they are not included in this article.

The history of the QRA as part of safety engineering is shortly
described in section 2. It is important to understand the frame-
work that QRA has been and is being developed under. Human
and organizational factors and how they interact in the risk
analysis process, are described. Thereafter the legislation, guide-
lines and official documents from HSE and the Norwegian
Petroleum Safety Authority are reviewed and presented. The
results from the analyses of QRAs and HOFs are described in
section 3. The discussion and conclusion follows thereafter.
2. Theory

2.1. QRA as part of safety engineering

QRA is used as the abbreviation for ‘Quantified Risk Assess-
ment’ or ‘Quantitative Risk Analysis’. The context usually has to
be considered in order to determine which of these two terms is
applicable. Risk assessment involves risk analysis, as well as an
evaluation of the results. QRA is applied frequently to offshore
operations. This technique is also referred to as Probabilistic Risk
Assessment (PRA), Probabilistic Safety Assessment (PSA), Concept
Safety Evaluation (CSE) and Total Risk Analysis (TRA). Despite
more than two decades of use and development, no convergence
towards a universally accepted term has been seen. QRA and TRA
are the most commonly used abbreviations [2]. In this article the
term QRA refers to all the different techniques.

The status of the QRAs is very much a part of the development
of safety regimes in the offshore industry. Oil-drilling on the
Norwegian continental shelf began in the summer of 1966. The
first drilling rigs were American, as were the drilling equipment,
the expertise, the language and the culture. The Norwegian
workers referred jokingly to certain rigs as ‘Texas’. Key features
of the culture found on board these rigs were a frenetic pace of
work, a high degree of risk-taking and numerous accidents.
Workers were constantly reminded of accidents, either because
they were frequent or through stories, myths and symbols.
Accident rates approached 70 accidents per 1,000 rig days. Since
many accidents were never reported, the actual figure was most
likely higher [6]. The first major accident was an explosion and
short duration fire on the Ekofisk Alpha platform, causing three
fatalities during evacuation. The second major accident was a
blowout that occurred on April 23rd, 1977, on the steel jacket
wellhead platform Ekofisk Bravo, during a workover on a produc-
tion well. The BOP was not in place on the platform, and could not
be reassembled correctly in time. All personnel were evacuated
without injuries by means of evacuation capsules and one dinghy,
and were subsequently rescued by a supply vessel. The well was
mechanically capped 7 days after the blowout [2]. The ‘Texas
Period’ culminated with the catastrophe that occurred on March
27th 1980. The accommodation platform Alexander L. Kielland
capsized on the Ekofisk field in the Norwegian sector of the North
Sea, killing 123 oil workers [7]. The disaster came as a shock and
sparked off many initiatives in order to prevent a similar
catastrophe from reoccurring. An extensive program (‘Safety Off-
shore’) was initiated in 1978 in order to implement the Norwe-
gian culture, work approach and worker protection on the
Norwegian continental shelf. The Government followed-up with
a series of directives, with requirements for education, training,
safety courses and other safety measures. QRAs played an
important role in the requirements, and in 1980, the Norwegian
Petroleum Directorate issued its Guidelines for safety evaluation
of platform conceptual design [8]. These guidelines required that
QRA should be carried out for all new offshore installations in
Norway in the conceptual design phase. After an initial period, an
efficient methodology was established, and subsequently
extended to the analysis of existing installations. A significant
step in the development of offshore use of QRAs resulted from the
official inquiry led by Lord Cullen in the UK, following the tragic
accident on the Piper Alpha platform in 1988. Lord Cullen in his
report, recommended QRAs to be implemented into the UK
legislation in much the same way as had been done in Norway
nearly 10 years earlier. In 1991, the Norwegian Petroleum
Directorate replaced the 1981 guidelines for risk assessment with
Regulations for the Use and Execution of Risk Analysis that
formally, though less so in practice, extended the scope consider-
ably for these studies. Since 1992, the Safety Case Legislation in
the UK has required, although not formally but in practice, that
the industry use offshore risk analyses as part of the safety cases
for existing and new installations. From mid 1995, the safety
cases have been extended with the assessment of provisions for
Prevention of Fire and Explosion and Emergency Response
(PFEER), according to the so-called PFEER regulations [9]. These
have, over time, become a small core group of international
standards, of the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), reflecting a risk-based approach to decision-making in the
offshore industry (see Refs. [10–13]).

An important role of the QRAs was to improve the incorpora-
tion of safety in design, owing to the fact that a high number of
accidents had their root in the design process. During the first
decade, the focus was mainly on the engineering phases, thus
after the installation type and concept had been decided. QRAs
were not commonly used during the initial choice of the high-
level concept for fulfilling the system objectives. When designing
oil and gas installations, it made no sense for the contractor
responsible for the detailed design to question the high-level
choices that led the operator to define the need for the specified
installation, rather than another type of installation or other
design capacities. Another issue that followed defining the
boundaries for design was the inclusion of the operation phase
where humans and organizational factors played an even more
important role [14]. The QRAs were updated due to several



470 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
factors, for instance: experience, modifications, model improve-
ments, changes in criteria, operational mode, manning level and
maintenance philosophy. Safety systems were usually addressed
on an individual basis that did not allow dependencies and
common mode/cause failures to be identified. For instance,
release statistics in the 1990s showed that half of the leaks from
hydrocarbon systems on the Norwegian Continental Shelf were
caused by manual interventions in the system [4,15]. Engineered
defenses were often partially deactivated during these operations,
in order to avoid disruption of stable production. These occur-
rences indicated that safety barriers relating to containment of
leaks did not function sufficiently. There is an obvious need to
better understand the performance of barriers (both technical and
non-technical) during operations [4].

According to Bea [16], experience has shown that the primary
hazard is not the ocean environment itself; the industry has
learned how to engineer, build, operate and maintain structures
that can survive the extreme storms, earthquakes, ice and sea
floor soil movements that frequent the offshore environment. The
primary hazard is associated with human and organizational
factors (HOFs) that develop during installations lifecycles. Studies
have shown that while the majority of the structure failures occur
during operations and maintenance, a majority of these failures
have sources that are founded during the design phase. Structures
are engineered and designed to have inherent flaws; they cannot
be built as intended and they are difficult to operate and
maintain. While they may have the requisite strength or capacity,
they lack the required durability, serviceability and compatibility
[17]. The design and operation phases of a structure are carried
out by two separate organizations. Decisions made in the design
phase influence, and should therefore be reflected in the later
phases where HOFs are largely influencing the major hazards. The
need for understanding the human and organizational factors
(HOF) were also pointed out early by the HSE [18].

‘‘Management of human factors is increasingly recognized as
having a vital role to play in the control of risk y. Successful
management of human factors and control of risk involves the
development of systems designed to take proper account of
human capabilities and fallibilities y. It is now widely accepted
that the majority of accidents in industry generally are in some
way attributable to human as well as technical factors in the
sense that actions by people initiated or contributed to accidents,
or people could have acted better to avert them’’.

Major hazard prevention, the use of QRAs and revelation of
HOFs are important elements of risk management.
2.2. Human and organizational factors

It is not the intent of this article to attempt to determine a final
definition for human and organizational factors. However, it is
important to ensure that some understanding of how the expressions
are understood by the authors is mentioned. There are three areas of
influence on people at work, namely: (a) the organization, (b) the job
(c) personal factors. These are directly affected by: (a) the system for
communication within the organization and (b) the training systems
and procedures in operation; all of which are directed at preventing
human error [19]. Human factors are understood as the branch of
science and technology, which includes what is known and theorized
about human behavioral and biological characteristics that can be
applied validly to the specification, design, evaluation, operation and
maintenance of products and systems to enhance safe, effective and
satisfying use by individuals, groups and organizations [20]. Human
factors are seen as a range of issues, including the perceptual, physical
and mental capabilities of people, as well as the interactions of
individuals with their jobs and the working environments, the
influence of equipment and system design on human performance
and, above all, the organizational characteristics that influence safety-
related behavior at work. The terms ‘human factors’ and ‘human
error’ are often used interchangeably, but, as pointed out by Gordon
[21], it is important to distinguish between the underlying causes of
accidents (human factors) and their immediate causes (human
errors). Traditionally, human factors are defined as the interaction
between man and machine, although many variations exist (see Ref.
[22]). Human error can be defined as: ‘‘the failure of planned actions
to achieve their desired ends—without the intervention of some
unforeseeable event’’ [23]. According to Jacobs and Haber [24], human
errors may be of various origins and part of larger, organizational
processes that encourage unsafe acts, which ultimately produce
system failures.

Organizational factors are characterized by the division of
tasks, design of job positions, including selection, training and
cultural indoctrination, and their coordination to accomplish the
activities. The main issues of organization and safety include
factors such as complexity (chemical/process, physical, control
and task), size and age of plant and organizational safety perfor-
mance shaping factors such as leadership, culture, rewards,
manning, communications and coordination and social norms
and pressures [25]. The term operational risk is most commonly
found in risk management programs of financial institutions,
which must organize their risk management program according
to Basel II [26]. Operational risk is then defined as: ‘‘The risk of loss
resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and
systems or from external events’’. Practically this can be described
as a company’s acceptance of the fact that its people, processes
and systems are imperfect, and that losses will arise from errors
and ineffective operations. The losses the companies are prepared
to accept, because the cost of correcting the errors or improving
the systems is disproportionate to the benefit they will receive,
determines their hunger for operational risk.

The term ‘operational risk’ has, within safety engineering, been
linked mostly to the complexity and framework for processes and
systems, and is often overlapped by the definitions for human and
organizational factors. Within safety engineering is acceptance of
operational risk not been pursued in the same way as within
finance. Operations are performed by humans as part of an
organization. They can all be described by factors. In this article,
the operational factors are not distinguished.

To predict human reliability in the QRA processes, Human
Reliability Analysis (HRA) is often used. The following list of high-
level requirements captures the essence of HRA. The HRA method
should [27]:

 identify human response (errors are the main focus) in the
QRA context,


 estimate response probabilities,


 identify causes of errors to support development of preventive

or mitigating measures,


 include a systematic procedure for generating reproducible

qualitative and quantitative results,


 have a causal model of human response with roots in cognitive

and behavioral sciences, and with:
J elements (e.g. Personal Shaping Factors) that are directly or

indirectly observable, and
J a structure that provides unambiguous and traceable links

between its input and output


 be detailed enough to support data collection, experimental

validation and various applications of QRA. Data and model are
two tightly coupled entities.

The model should be data-informed. Conversely, the data
collocation and analysis must be model-informed. A coordinated



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 471
model-based collection and analysis of experimental and filed data
should support the development and application of the model and
the quantification of its parameters [27].

There have also been parallel efforts to develop methods for
the formal inclusion of human and organizational factors into
QRA. Examples from the nuclear and airline industry includes
Model of Accident Causation using Hierarchical Influence Net-
work (MACHINE) [28], the Work Process Analysis Model (WPAM)
[29,30], System-Action-Management (SAM) [31], Omega Factor
Model [32], I-RISK [33,34], Integrated Safety Model (ISM) [35],
and Causal Modeling of Air Safety [36]. With respect to QRA in the
offshore industry, Organizational Risk Influence Model (ORIM)
[37], Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis (BORA) [38,39] and
Operational Conditional Safety (OTS) [4,15] are relevant. Common
among these are the following parts:
(1)
 a set of organizational factors,

(2)
 a link to the system risk model,

(3)
 a set of modeling techniques,

(4)
 a set of measurement methods.
For example, SAM describes the organization using a set of
theories: a rule-based model for rule-based decisions, a rational
and a bounded-rational model for knowledge-based decisions,
and a model related to the actual execution for skill-based
actions. The selection of relevant organizational factors depends
on which of the explicit models can best describe a given decision.
The existing frameworks and methods have some similar steps
and features, but they also have many unique features. The key
questions in this line of research can be summarized thus:
(1)
 What are the organizational factors that affect risk?

(2)
 How do these factors influence risk?

(3)
 How much do they contribute to risk?
Each method answers these questions in different ways [40].
Many proposed methods still lack sufficient theoretical and/or
experimental basis for their key ingredients. Missing from all
methods is a fully implemented model of the underlying causal
mechanisms linking measurable Personal Shaping Factors (PSF) or
other characteristics of the context of operator response. The
problem extends to the quantification of HOFs where the majority
of the proposed approaches still rely on implicit functions relating
PSFs to probabilities. Again, often only limited theoretical or
empirical bases are provided for such relations. In many cases
numbers are the result of expert elicitation using arbitrary
scales [27].

Several of the methods use variations of the Bayesian Belief
Network (BBN) or the Influence Diagram. WPAM utilizes flow
diagrams to relate work processes and organizational factors.
Measuring and estimating model elements in organizational
safety models pose significant challenges. Some of the proposed
safety causal models have relied exclusively on expert judgment
for measurement. WPAM suggests surveys, behavioral checklists
and interviews, in addition to expert judgment. These measure-
ment methods were suggested by Jacobs and Haber [24] in their
list of twenty organizational factors developed for the nuclear
power industry [40]. Others have used a combination of expert
and historical data (e.g. BORA).

Defining and modeling safety barriers is central when analyz-
ing the influence of human and organizational factors. The
concept of safety barriers is applied in practice, discussed in the
literature and required in legislation and standards within differ-
ent industries. Safety barriers are physical or non-physical means
planned to prevent, control or mitigate undesired events or
accidents. The means may range from a single technical unit or
human action to a complex socio-technical system. The term
‘planned’ implies that at least one of the purposes of the means is
to reduce the risk. In line with ISO:13702 [11], the term ‘preven-
tion’ means reduction of the likelihood of a hazardous event, and
‘control’ means limiting the extent and/or duration of a hazardous
event to prevent escalation, while ‘mitigation’ means reduction of
the effects of a hazardous event. Undesired events are, e.g.,
technical failures, human errors, external events or a combination
of these occurrences that may realize potential hazards. Accidents
are undesired and unplanned events that lead to loss of human
lives, personal injuries, environmental damage and/or material
damage [41].

Barrier systems may be classified according to several dimen-
sions, for example, as passive or active barrier systems, and as
physical, technical or human/operational barrier systems. Several
attributes are necessary in order to characterize the performance
of safety barriers; functionality/effectiveness, reliability/availabil-
ity, response time, robustness and finally a description of the
triggering event or condition. For some types of barriers, not all
the attributes are relevant or necessary in order to describe the
barrier performance [41].

The terminology proposed by a working group named ‘Work-
ing together for safety’ (see Ref. [41]) involves the levels, barrier
function, barrier element (or system) and the barrier influencing
factor. The following definitions are extracted from Sklet [41,42]:

 Barrier function: A function planned to prevent, control or
mitigate undesired events or accidents.


 Barrier element: Part of barrier, but not sufficient in order to

achieve the required overall function alone.


 Barrier influencing factor: Factor that influences the perfor-

mance of barriers.

QRAs studies for the offshore petroleum industry have tradi-
tionally had a rather narrow analysis of barrier performance. The
nuclear industry on the other hand, has carried out extensive
studies of barrier performance [4,15,38,39].

2.3. Human and organizational factors and major accidents

For a long time, it was assumed that occupational accidents
were a relevant basis on which major hazard risks were judged.
Occupational accidents were often judged to be a result of human
error. In the late 1990s, in the Norwegian petroleum sector, it was
apparent that occupational accidents were not relevant for
evaluation of major hazard risks, at least to the authorities and
their advisors. Unfortunately this was not apparent globally. One
of the main findings after the Texas City refinery explosion in
2005, was that major hazard risks had not been evaluated
properly on the basis of occupational accident statistics [43]. In
the same way, human error was judged to be the root cause for
several major accidents, for example, in the case of the accident at
Esso’s gas plant at Longford, Victoria, in Australia in September
1998 [44]. This was the position taken by Esso at the Royal
Commission. The company argued that operators and their super-
visors on duty at the time should have known that the attempt to
reintroduce warm hydrocarbons in liquid phase could result in
brittle fracture of the steel and release of hydrocarbons. The
company claimed that operators had been trained to be aware of
the problem and Esso even produced the training records of one
operator in an attempt to show that he should have known better.
However, the Commission took view of the fact that none of those
on duty at the time understood just how dangerous the situation
was, indicating a systematic training failure [45]. Not even the
plant manager, who was away from the plant at the time of the



472 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
incident, understood the dangers of cold metal embrittlement.
The Commission concluded that inadequate training of operators
and supervisors was the ‘real cause’ of the accident. Therefore, it
is clear that operator error does not adequately account for the
Longford incident. According to Reason [46], this is a general
finding of all inquiries into major accidents. For the Norwegian
offshore installations, manual intervention related to mainte-
nance is one of the main contributors to major accident risk.
When accident and incident investigations are considered, it is
often the case that human and organizational errors dominate.
Consider, for instance, the 2004 Snorre Alpha subsea gas blowout
in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea. The main categories of
deviations that contributed to the accident were: failure to follow
steering documentation, lack of appreciation of and execution of
risk assessments, inadequate management involvement and
requirements for well barriers not fulfilled [47]. There is a need
to analyze human and organizational factors in a structured way
where these factors are not only seen as a cause but also as
barriers to avoid major accidents.

2.4. Norwegian legislation

The Norwegians regulations cover the field of health, environ-
ment and safety (HES), but note that this field encompasses
safety, working environment, health, external environment and
financial assets; the latter includes production and transport
regularity (operational availability). The regulation is divided into
five categories:

 Framework regulations


 Management [of health, environment and safety] regulations


 Information duty regulations


 Facilities regulations


 Activity regulations

The regulations attach much importance to risk reduction
principles related to health, environment and safety, as means
for reducing the risk of accident, personal injury, health injury
and harm to the environment to the greatest degree possible. The
structure of the regulations reflects the fact that the requirements
are largely common or multidisciplinary and hence is not
repeated. The requirements related to safety barriers are an
example of the multidisciplinary approach. The provisions of the
regulations are largely formulated as functional requirements.
The functional requirements impose requirements to various
aspects, characteristics or qualities that the product, process or
service in question is intended to have. The particular require-
ment expresses what result the product, process or service is
to produce, and what the supervisory authorities wish to
achieve with the requirement. The guidelines to the respective
regulations recommend solutions, inter alia in the form of
industry standards (recognized norms) as a means of fulfilling
the requirements contained in the regulations. If a recommended
solution is opted for, the requirement is considered to be
fulfilled [48].

In the Facilities regulations (especially Section 9), human and
organizational factors are focused upon. It states that plants,
systems and equipment plants shall have a design that is robust
and as simple as possible, so that the possibility of human error or
mistake is limited. The guidelines comment that the principles
relating to risk reduction, harm or danger of harm to people, the
environment or to financial assets shall be prevented or limited,
in accordance with the legislation relating to health, the environ-
ment and safety, including internal requirements and acceptance
criteria. Over and above this level, the risk shall be further
reduced to the extent possible. Assessments on the basis of this
provision shall be made in all phases of the petroleum activities.
In effectuating risk reduction, the party responsible shall choose
the technical, operational or organizational solutions which,
according to an individual as well as an overall evaluation of
the potential harm and present and future use, offer the best
results, provided the associated costs are not significantly dis-
proportionate to the risk reduction achieved [2,49].

In the Norwegian offshore legislation, barriers play an essen-
tial role in the prevention and mitigation of incidents and
accidents. In the facilities regulations, it is stated that the operator
or the party responsible for the operation of a facility, shall
stipulate the strategies and principles on which the design, use
and maintenance of barriers shall be based, so that the barrier
function is ensured throughout the lifetime of the facility. It shall
be known what barriers have been established, and for which
function they are intended in relation to risk reduction. It shall be
known what performance requirements have been defined in
respect of the technical, operational or organizational elements,
and which are necessary for the individual barrier to be effective.
It shall be known which barriers are not functioning or have been
impaired. The party responsible shall take necessary actions to
correct or compensate for missing or impaired barriers [50]. For
more information about barriers see Refs. [41,51].

The Management regulation, Section 14, states that quantita-
tive risk analyses and other necessary analyses shall be carried
out to identify contributors to major accident risk. Section 15
requires that quantitative risk analyses that provide a balanced
and as comprehensive picture as possible of the risk, shall be
carried out. Section 6 requires that the operator shall set accep-
tance criteria for major accident risk, and that this should include
acceptance criteria for personnel on the facility as a whole, and
for groups of personnel, which are particularly risk-exposed. The
Management regulations focus also on the working environment
and requires, in Section 17, that necessary analyses shall be
carried out, which will ensure a sound working environment,
and provide decision support in the choice of technical, opera-
tional and organizational solutions. The analyses shall, inter alia,
contribute to improving the health, well-being and security
of the employees, and prevent personal injury, death and work-
related disease as a result of: (a) mistakes that may lead to
situations of hazard and accident and (b) exposure and physical or
mental strain [50]. Attention is also given to the QRA follow-up,
and in Section 21 it is stated that the party responsible shall
follow-up to see that all elements of their and other participants’
management system are established and functioning as intended,
and that a fully satisfactory level of health, environment and
safety exists. This follow-up shall contribute to identifying tech-
nical, operational or organizational weaknesses, failures and
deficiencies. Methods, frequency and extent of the follow-up
and the degree of independence in conducting it, will be adapted
to the significance of the element to health, environment and
safety [50].
2.5. UK regulation

The UK’s Offshore Safety Case Regulations came into force in
1992. A ‘Safety Case’ is a written document within which the
company must demonstrate that an effective management sys-
tem is in place to control risks to workers and, in particular, to
reduce the risks from a major accident to ‘As Low As Reasonably
Practicable’ (ALARP) [52]. The duty holder (owner or operator) of
every offshore installation operating in British waters is required
to prepare a Safety Case and submit it to the UK HSE Offshore
Safety Division for formal acceptance. The main thrust of a Safety



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 473
Case is a demonstration by the installation operator that the risks
to the installation from Major Accident Hazards have been
reduced to ALARP. Traditionally, the offshore industry has found
it difficult to integrate human and organizational factors into the
Safety Cases. Although there is a requirement to address human
factor issues, the guidance has been unclear on how this should
be achieved. A variety of tools and techniques have been initiated
by a legislative focus, which are currently in use to varying
degrees by different operators. There are two sections within
Safety Cases, which are of high importance, the Safety Manage-
ment System and Risk Assessment sections. Within these sec-
tions, are a number of factors that should be addressed in order to
meet the legislative requirements of the Safety Case [20]. Human
and organizational factors are among those to be addressed, and
in Principle 1 it is stated that: ‘‘The safety case should demonstrate
that the management system is adequate to ensure compliance with
the relevant statutory provisions’’. A safety case that does not
include the following elements in the descriptions of the manage-
ment system is unlikely to demonstrate that the system is
adequate[53]: organizational structure, accountability and safety
culture, professional health and safety advice, involvement of the
workforce and risk assessment systems.

The HSE clearly states that many forms of organizational
change can affect management of major hazards. Changes could
include, changes to roles and responsibilities, organizational
structure, staffing levels, staff disposition or any other change
that could directly or indirectly affect the control of the hazard
[18]. HSE also states the link between QRAs and the human and
organizational factors by requiring in Principle 8 that, where the
lines of defense against major hazards and escalation are pre-
sented, the role of the human element should be made clear, and
a demonstration provided, so that the lines of defenses can be
delivered reliably when required. The HSE expects that assess-
ments would progress through the following stages to provide an
appropriate demonstration [54]: Qualitative (Q), in which
frequency and severity are determined purely qualitatively,
Semi-quantitative (SQ), in which frequency and severity are
approximately quantified within ranges and/or Quantified risk
assessment (QRA), in which full quantification occurs.

For a new installation, the greatest scope to eliminate or
minimize hazards is at the design stage. The design process
should address all contributors to risk from major accident
hazards, with emphasis on the most significant risks. Risks should
be reduced to ensure compliance with the relevant statutory
provisions, primarily through sound engineering design, sup-
ported by appropriate management controls and human factor
assessment [52]. Human performance problems should be eval-
uated systematically. This should involve evaluating the feasibil-
ity of tasks, identifying control measures and providing an input
to the design of procedures and personnel training, as well as the
interfaces between personnel and the plant. The depth of analysis
should be appropriate to the severity of the consequences of
failure of the tasks [52,54].
2.6. Examples of HOF and safety barriers

If a certain hazard mechanism is dominated by HOFs, a
detailed analysis of operational barriers should be performed in
the design phases. One practical example where this was done is
related to collision risk between shuttle tanker (ST) and FPSO in
relation to offloading. The collision scenario most feared, is called
‘drive-off’. This implies a powered yet uncontrolled forward
movement of the shuttle tanker causing a collision. Usually the
shuttle tanker uses dynamic positioning (DP) for station keeping
and the FPSO has a fixed 12–16 point anchoring system and
ability to weather wane (rotate) 3601 unassisted. The DP system is
a fully automated system. The system receives input usually from
two or three positioning (reference) systems and thrust measure-
ments from each propeller/thruster and speed measurements.
There are also warning and alarm limits associated with auto-
matic actions such as controlled disconnection of the hose before
the hose is torn off. Active human intervention is not required
during normal operations. The role of the DP operator is mostly
passive and involves monitoring and fine adjustment tasks. If the
DP system fails and cause a drive-off and a possible collision, the
tasks for the DP operator changes dramatically. The intervention
by the DP operator on the bridge is the only remaining option to
control the situation. This implies that when alarms activate in
response to a failure, the control response is completely depen-
dent on the DP operator. The DP operator has a very limited time-
span (in the order of 30–45 s) for completion of an emergency
response. The drive-off scenario is particularly critical, due to the
movement of the shuttle tanker towards the FPSO. The fact that
the shuttle tanker often will accelerate towards the FPSO implies
that it increases the impact speed of a collision. Hence, a quick
response is needed. When these aspects were analyzed during the
design phase of new systems from around the year 2000, the
frequency of incidents and accidents was significantly reduced
from several per year in the North Sea in the late 1990s, to less
than once every three years, in the 2000s. For more details see
Ref. [55].

Another example of the importance of better understanding
the HOFs as part of the QRA-modeling is the preliminary findings
pertaining to failures of safety barriers in the Deepwater Horizon
accident. There are several initiatives to investigate the accident,
and what they all have in common, is the fact that they do not
point to a single failure, but multiple violations of safety barriers.
During the time this article was written, the official investigation
by the Presidential Commission was not completed. Summarized
are some of the findings to date [56,57]:

 The annulus cement barrier failed to isolate the hydrocarbons


 The shoe track barriers possibly failed to isolate the

hydrocarbons


 The negative-pressure test was accepted although well integ-

rity had not been established


 Influx was not recognized until hydrocarbons were in the riser


 Well control response actions failed to regain control of

the well


 Diversion to the mud gas separator resulted in gas venting

onto the rig


 The fire and gas system did not prevent hydrocarbon ignition


 The BOP emergency mode did not seal the well

It can be seen that the failure of several safety barriers in the
Deepwater Horizon accident was based on human intervention.
The Deepwater Horizon accident has demonstrated a need for
further improvement related to modeling of risk related to deep-
water drilling as well as understanding HOFs.

Both UK and Norwegian regulations require that risk is
considered using QRA, and that safety barriers are analyzed and
included in the QRA. HOFs are essential parts of the safety
barriers, and several barriers are solely based on human inter-
vention. The safety barriers represent an essential part of the risk-
reducing measures during operations and maintenance. It is
therefore the authors’ view that it is not possible to fulfill the
requirements in the regulations without including HOF in the
QRAs. The HOFs should be analyzed in a structured manner, and
should also be as close to reality as practically possible.



474 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
3. Results

3.1. About the data (QRAs)

Altogether, fifteen QRAs for different installations were col-
lected from five different operator companies. The collection was
based upon a random sample among all installations on the
Norwegian Shelf. In addition, two safety cases for UK installations
were collected. The QRAs are internal company documents and
their results are not published. The document owner is often the
installation management, and the QRA is treated as sensitive
information owing to the detailed information about the installa-
tions’ weak spots. As a result, the information retrieval took close
to a year. A high response rate was emphasized, and finally, all
requested QRAs except one were collected. Table 1 shows the year
of last revision of report and the number of reports

In Norway, there are three dominant consultancy firms con-
ducting QRAs. The QRAs are usually regulated by framework
agreements. The budget in man-hours is usually about 1500–
2500 h over a period of 3–5 months. The main results are usually
summarized in a main report. In addition, the different hazards
are further described in appendices and sub-appendices. The
main report is usually about 50–150 pages. The appendices are
usually 500–1500 pages in length. The analyses use mostly the
same generic data sources, accident statistics, failure databases
(loss of containment etc.), equipment failure databases, physical
properties of various substances and company internal accident
and incident databases. The use and interpretation of the data
differs.

As described in the objective, the research method used for
this study was somewhat in reverse fashion from traditional
research. Based on the examination of the QRA, a set of terms
related to human and organizational factors were chosen. Pre-
defined terms or tools were also used to describe or calculate
human and organizational factors, including: human error,
human factor, Human Error Probability (HEP), Human Reliability
Assessment (HRA), organizational error, organizational factor,
culture, safety culture, safety climate, Risk influence factor (RIF),
Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis (BORA), and Human Error
Assessment and Reduction Technique (HEART). The QRAs were
categorized according to the level at which they included,
analyzed, described, quantified and explained human and orga-
nizational factors. As a result of the examination, the QRAs have
been categorized into four levels.
3.2. Level 1—‘‘HOF not existing’’

Level 1 analysis gives no attention to human and organiza-
tional factors. At this level the QRA is solely a technical analysis
consisting of technical inputs such as number of valves, flanges,
bends, instrument connections, risers, pipelines, pressure vessels,
number of supply vessel operations, number of crane operations,
etc. The generic data sources are not sorted or adjusted for any
human or organizational factors. Frequencies for initiating events
are calculated separately for each piece of equipment or system,
Table 1
Year of QRA and number of reports/installations.

QRA Year Installations

2008–2009 4
2006–2008 3
2004–2006 5
2002–2004 2
2000–2002 1
and each leak category is based either on system or equipment
values. The different inputs are calculated using fault-tree and/or
event-tree analysis. According to guidelines for QRA [58], the
following risk elements related to major hazard risk should as a
minimum be considered for offshore oil and gas installations:

 Blowouts, including shallow gas and reservoir zones, unignited
and ignited


 Process leaks, unignited and ignited.


 Utility areas and systems fires and explosions.


 Fire in accommodation areas.


 Falling/swinging objects.


 Transportation accidents.


 Transport of personnel from shore to the installation.


 Helicopter crash.


 Collisions, including fields related traffic and external traffic,

drifting and under power.


 Riser and pipeline accidents.


 Accidents from subsea production systems.


 Escape, evacuation and rescue accidents, i.e. until a so-called

‘safe place’ has been reached.


 Structural collapse, including collapse of bridges between fixed

and/or floating installations.


 Foundation failure.


 Loss of stability/position.

All suggested risk-reducing measures for Level 1 analyses are
related to technical solutions, for instance, passive fire protection,
riser bumper protection, etc. Consequences are expressed
numerically (e.g., the number of people potentially killed) and
their likelihood of occurrence are expressed as probabilities or
frequencies.

3.3. Level 2—‘‘HOF explained’’

The Level 2 analysis does explain the importance of the
human, operational and organizational factors. The explanations
are related to the technical analysis and the influence on the
system is only explained to a limited extent. Human error has, to
some extent, been considered implicitly. For instance, component
failure rate data used in the QRA reflects to some extent good and
bad design/operations for both old and new installations. Human
error as a cause of failure is partly embodied in the failure rate
data. One example is the failure database related to onshore oil
pipelines reported in the CONCAWE (CONservation of Clean Air
and Water in Europe) reports on ‘‘Performance of Oil Industry
Cross-Country Pipelines in Western Europe’’ [59]. In a Level 2
analysis the incidents are divided into mechanical failure and
operational error. However the result is not adjusted to reflect the
actual status for the installation for which the QRA is performed.

The Level 2 analyses also often include experience from
incident reporting systems. Examples of previous incidents and
their relation to major hazard risk are often shortly described. The
recommendations that prevent recurrence of the events leading
up to the incident can sometimes be addressed as assumptions.
The recommendations are often related to human and organiza-
tional factors.

Another example is the use of interviews and reviews related
to barriers, and the awareness the crew have to human interac-
tion as a barrier. One example is the barrier element that the crew
is discovering gas leaks. Using interviews the risk analysis team
tries to reveal to what extent this is likely based on earlier
incidents, routines, competence and training. The process opera-
tors are interviewed to reveal the response time for human
interaction in control room when a gas detection alarm sounds.



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 475
Interviews are also used to describe whether changes in the
workforce influence the risk. In one of the QRAs, the human
ergonomic is commented to not be satisfactory and may lead to
longer response time.

The Level 2 analyses do not follow a structured pattern related
to revealing and analyzing the human and organizational factors.
The specific results from the interviews, experience from earlier
incidents and/or document review are not included in the QRA-
models, but are described in text. The role of HOFs as possible
hazard causes as well as safety barriers, is explained.

For Level 2 analysis the study of HOFs appear often to be based
on a specific request from the customer (installation operator).
Therefore, the problems related to the working environment of
individual installations are often the basis for the HOFs selected.
An area of particular attention, unsurprisingly, is staffing.
3.4. Level 3—‘‘HOF explained and the models are adjusted’’

Level 3 analyses study the human and organizational factors in
a structured way and also adjust the QRA-models based on the
results from the studies. The Level 3 analyses are based on named
and documented methods for revealing and analyzing human and
organizational factors, for example BORA [4,15,38,39], Human
Error Probability (HEP), Human Reliability Assessment (HRA),
Human Error Assessment and Reduction Technique (HEART),
Human Error Probability Index (HEPI) [60]and Technique for
Human Error Rate Prediction (THERP). In some of the analyses
the methods are combined. In other just parts of a method are
used. One example is related to human operations in connection
with discovery, identification and rectification of plant malfunc-
tions in the control room and in the field. The risk analysis team
has, by means of interviews with control room operators and field
operators, sought to assess the operators’ confidence toward the
reliability of instrument readings in the Central Control Room
(CCR) when leaks occur. Also the possibility of a successful
intervention from the CCR and/or by field operators in the case
of a leak (oil or gas) in the process area on the platform is
assessed. Based on the interviews, the HOF-factors are revealed
and the QRA-models are adjusted. With respect to the example, it
is argued that the factors related to human error are conservative.
This is based on the interviews and experience from earlier
incidents, showing that field operators have intervened with
success on a number of occasions (gas or oil leaks). Thorough
knowledge and familiarity with each part of the plant the
operators had the necessary assuredness to prevent panicky
reactions that could have led to failed operations, and instead
controlled the incidents.

The HOFs that are studied in Level 3 analyses are related to but
limited to work practice, competence, communication, manage-
ment, procedures, safety management system, workload and
physical working environment and change management. Each of
these can again be divided into subgroups, e.g. competence,
training, education (both general and specific), courses, system
knowledge, etc. The methods used to study the HOFs are inter-
views, document review of procedures and safety management
system and review of earlier incidents.

HOFs in relation to gas detection are often studied in the Level
3 analysis. The steps that influence the risk were explained and
included among others maintenance, the operators’ ability and
training to detect and respond to leaks and the collaboration
between the operator and central control room. The capability to
isolate a leak locally and manually was often described. The
control room’s response to depressurize process systems was also
described.
In one of the QRAs were HOFs related to evacuation and escape
studied and formed basis for input to the QRA-model. In another
QRA were the HOFs in relation to stand-by vessel operations and
the hazards related to collision studied. The model included
various tasks of the crew members and the stressful surroundings
of the work environment.

The Barrier and Operational Risk Analysis is so far the most
documented methodology to include HOFs in offshore QRAs. The
BORA analyses the effect of safety barriers introduced to prevent
hydrocarbon releases. BORA-Release comprises the following
main steps [38,39,61]:
1.
 development of a basic risk model, including release scenarios,

2.
 modeling the performance of safety barriers,

3.
 assignment of industry average probabilities/frequencies and

risk quantification based on these probabilities/frequencies,

4.
 development of risk influence diagrams,

5.
 scoring of risk influencing factors,

6.
 weighting of risk influencing factors,

7.
 adjustment of industry average probabilities/frequencies,

8.
 recalculation of the risk in order to determine the platform-

specific risk related to hydrocarbon release.

The BORA project has investigated which barriers exist to
prevent initiating events from actually developing into a leak.
Many of these barriers are human and organizational rather than
technical. One example of such barriers is an error documented as
follows: ‘‘valve in wrong position after maintenance’’. Barriers
intended to prevent the valve in wrong position are self-checking
work tasks (i.e. the person performing the work should check the
valves when work is accomplished). An independent person
should then check the valves and carry out a leak test. These
barriers are described and modeled in the BORA project. The
project do also describe which barriers must fail in order for a
leak to occur. A wide range of platform-specific conditions are
included in the methodology, e.g., employee competence, working
environment issues, accessibility and arid quality of documenta-
tion and procedures. By evaluating the state of such factors
mentioned on the installation in question, the factors can be
considered when the leak frequency is set.

3.5. Level 4—‘‘HOF explained, models adjusted and included in the
overall risk management’’

Guidelines, requirements and research form the basis for
Level 4 QRA analysis. Level 4 analysis includes the same struc-
tured approach to reveal, model and calculate the human and
organizational factors as the Level 3 analysis, with the addition
that at this level the human and organizational factors are just as
important as the technical ones. HOFs form the basis for the
preparations, analysis and interpretation of the results in the QRA.
The safety barriers are defined and explained with regards to how
the different HOFs influence. The status of the technical factors
and the HOFs is controlled by the use of risk indicators. The QRA is
updated based on the indicators and other means to evaluate the
status for the technical factors and HOFs.

Level 4 analyses are a central part of the company’s safety and
risk management system. The QRA is thereby a part of the
decision-making process where the definition of goals and objec-
tives are key elements. The decision problem is characterized by
expected losses and gains and uncertainties. Risk management is
managed according to the principles for ALARP. The QRA form the
basis for training and drills. The QRA is known and accepted at all
levels of the organization and form the basis for the daily risk
management.



476 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479

Table 2
Level and requirements.

Level Requirements

Level 4  The QRA is an integrated part of the safety and risk management system.
 Results from the QRA form the basis for daily risk management.
 The QRA is known and accepted at all levels of the organization.
 QRA is combined with risk indicators to reveal the status of the safety barriers.

Level 3  Systematic collection of data is related to HOF.
 QRA-models are adjusted according to findings from HOF.
 Identifies causes of errors to support development of preventive or mitigating measures.
 Includes a systematic procedure for generating reproducible qualitative and quantitative results (BORA, OTS y)

Level 2  Explains the importance of HOF
 The HOF-factors’ influence on different part of the system are partly described
 Human error is calculated separately
 Interviews with parts of the crew. The results are revealed but the models and calculation are not adjusted.

Level 1  Analysis of technical and operational factors. Technical factors are valves, flanges, bends, instrument connections, water depth, pressure,
hydrocarbon composition. Operational factors are number of flights, number of shipping arrivals etc.
 Risk-reducing measures are technical; for example, passive fire protection and riser bumper protection. They can also be operational, like fewer

shipping arrivals.

Result of the QRAs

Table 3
Level and number of installations.

Level Number of
installations

1—None existing 5
2—Explained but not adjusted 8
3—Explained and the models are adjusted 2
4—Explained, models adjusted and included in the overall 0

risk management
Necessary sensitivity calculations and evaluations of uncer-
tainties are done as part of the QRA. The QRA also forms the basis
for easy updates based on revised input. The risk analysis team
and the management work close together to ensure that the
objectives with the QRA are in accordance with long-term goals
for safety, and can be used as important input to the strategy for
attaining the goals.

The requirements related to the different levels are summar-
ized in Table 2.

Table 3 shows the different levels of QRA analysis defined in
this article, including the number of installations containing each
level of analysis.

Not surprisingly do none of analyses fulfill the requirements
for a Level 4 analysis. This level is the authors’ interpretation of
the intentions given in guidelines, requirements and research
described earlier in the article.
4. Discussions

QRA methodology should focus on establishing good princi-
ples, methods and models for analyzing and describing risk. The
use of risk analysis in risk assessment should focus on establish-
ing good principles, methods and models for evaluating risk,
communicating risk and managing risk. The question remains,
‘‘how good is good enough’’? It is clearly not sufficient to simply
refer to the fulfillment of requirements set by various standards.
One needs to go one step further and ask what the basis is for
establishing the standard. We share the belief with Aven [62] that
there are some principles that should be fulfilled; (a) The analysis
team should have a thorough understanding of the system
performance and the decision-making process and context.
(b) Models used should have sufficiently accurate representations
of the world, their suitability in describing the world have been
evaluated. (c) All observable quantities of the analysis should be
precisely defined. (d) The meanings of risk and uncertainty should
be fully understood and treated consistently. (e) The background
information for the assessments should be documented.

We cannot verify if the analysis team has a thorough under-
standing of the system performance and the decision-making
process and context, but it is possible to reveal if they have tried
to collect the necessary information. As seen, there are major
differences between the different levels of QRA. The situation is
similar in relation to the models, if they are sufficiently accurate
representations of the world. We have evaluated how detailed the
models are in relation to HOFs. Performing a QRA is extensive
work, and it can take years before revisions are made. The QRA
can be a valuable basis for risk control, as well as a risk manage-
ment strategy. Safety and risk indicators are an important part of
the follow-up process of a QRA, and the same criteria are relevant
for both QRAs and risk indicators. Risk indicators must be:
observable and quantifiable, sensitive to change, transparent
and easily understood, robust against manipulation and valid
[63]. The reliability and validity of risk analysis have been
discussed previously by Aven and Heide [64]. It is our under-
standing that incorporating the HOFs in QRAs is essential to fulfill
the legislation requirements. Incorporation of HOFs must be done
in accordance with the described principles for QRAs.

The need to consider HOF and the extent of the consideration
varies according to the objectives and the timing of the QRA
study. For example, if the QRA is used in order to define Design
Accidental Loads, then the focus is on design aspects, and the
need for HOF consideration is limited. Still it is important to
determine the likelihood of accidents, which needs to reflect the
HOF contributions to accident frequencies, at least on an overall
level. When the QRA is used in the operations phase in order to
propose measures that may reduce risk, it is essential to include
detailed modeling of HOF mechanisms and contributions, as a
basis for identification of possible risk-reducing measures,



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 477
including technical as well as operational measures. There may be
exceptions to this general principle.

The QRA as part of the total risk management system has been
described as an essential part of the Level 4 analysis, but this in
itself does not ensure minimization of the risk. At one end of the
spectrum, the most prudent strategies rely on a robust system
design, frequent preventive maintenance and early response to
warnings of deterioration. At the other end, strategies are driven
only by an aggressive production schedule. They rely on a less
robust (and often cheaper) system design and minimal inspection
and maintenance, in the hope of obtaining maximum production
at minimum initial cost with minimum interruptions in opera-
tions. Many risk management strategies are based on intermedi-
ate solutions such as having a robust system that would require
minimal maintenance. The difference, of course, lies in the long-
term costs, the actual frequency of operation interruptions and
the probability and costs of catastrophic failures [65]. As
described in section 2.2 the legislation requires focus on HOF,
but does not demand to which depth these considerations shall
be performed. One difficulty with organizational assessments is
that they usually rely on observations and interviews. For a
method to be reliable and valid, the results should not depend
on the assessor. This requirement is hard to fulfill, because signals
of deteriorating performance may be hard to detect and the
assessor may have certain prejudices. The methods have also to
be based on mutual trust between the assessor and those
assessed that recommendations will be to the point and fairly
treated. Assessors sometimes negotiate a kind of agreement with
those to be assessed as to how data will be collected, validated
and reported. Some of the difficulties can be solved by training
the assessors, but training alone cannot compensate for the need
of insight, tact and discretion [66]. Another difficulty is connected
to the fact that all organizational factors interact with each other.
It is therefore difficult to build models of organizational behavior
in the form of cause–consequence relationships. A theory of how
performance is related to various organizational factors could
help in this respect, but unfortunately no such theory currently
exists. In approaching organizational problems it is necessary to
identify key variables and to select a framework within which the
problem can be defined and solved. Sometimes it is necessary to
combine methods or even create new ones. Also, the use of
different approaches can sometimes provide additional validation
of the results that have been obtained [67].

This article has documented that although there has been a
requirement in the legislation for almost ten years, the considera-
tion of HOFs in the QRA studies is usually quite superficial. This is
one of the reasons why the revised NORSOK Z-013 [68] has
strengthened the requirements and states: ‘‘An evaluation of the
effect of human and organizational factors shall be performed. This
may range from a qualitative discussion to a detailed analysis of
human and organizational errors, depending on the criticality of such
aspects for the risk picture.’’ The analysis of HOF aspects in QRA
studies for Shuttle tanker—FPSO collision risk, and its success in
contributing to reducing the occurrence rate of incidents and
accidents, shows that it is possible to successfully account for the
HOFs. Another example is the ongoing research activity ‘Risk
OMT’, Risk Modeling—Integration of Organizational, Human and
Technical factors [4] that is expected to provide detailed modeling
for the analysis of hydrocarbon fire and explosion risk.

The Norwegian performance based regulations specify the
performance or function that is to be attained or maintained by
the party responsible. The regulatory role here involves defining
the safety standards and acceptance criteria, which companies
must meet. Norway authority’s intention of such a regulatory
regime is to have the operator focus on Health, Safety and
Environmental performance and to be ‘self-regulatory’ regarding
this matter [69]. We have earlier stated that it is not possible to
fulfill the requirements in the regulations without including HOF
in the QRAs. However, there is a large degree of responsibility and
freedom for the operator, to demonstrate how their safety
management system and performance comply with the regula-
tions. The regulatory authority has the opportunity to sanction
their view through use of safety audits. In October 2009 the PSA
conducted an audit of one main operator’s use of quantitative risk
analysis (TRA/QRA). The objective of the audit was to assess
whether the operator had established internal requirements and
work processes, which ensure that the assumptions, conditions,
limitations and recommendations of the risk analysis were
fulfilled. In the PSA notification letter, the PSA asked to be
presented with the operator’s requirements and guidelines,
including practical examples and experiences acquired from their
own facilities on the Norwegian Shelf. Several items with room
for improvement were identified, e.g., no competence require-
ments had been set relating to relevant positions offshore, which
require detailed knowledge of the risk analysis that had been
carried out (limitations, assumptions and results) [70]. The audit
was a clear message from the PSA that the QRA should be a part of
the safety management system. The audit revealed that the QRA
was not incorporated into the safety management systems, and
thereby the operational risk management where HOFs are essen-
tial. Even though the findings were serious, there have not been
any following audits conducted of the operator, or any other
operator. Several similar audits can reduce the gross variance in
the application of the QRAs.

This article documents the relationship between HOFs, legislation
requirements and the different levels of QRAs. The focus has been on
the Norwegian and UK Shelves and performance-based regulations.
Following the Macondo well blowout the U.S. has adopted partly the
performance-based regulation by making essential components of the
API RP 75 mandatory [71]. According to API RP 75 hazard analysis is
to be performed to identify, evaluate and, where unacceptable, reduce
the likelihood and/or minimize the consequences of uncontrolled
releases and other safety or environmental incidents. Human factors
should be considered in this analysis [72].
5. Conclusion

As clearly stated in the previous chapters, HOFs play an
important role in the Norwegian and UK legislation. HOFs must
be modeled and their role as safety barriers must be revealed to
fulfill the legislation requirements. The study of the QRAs shows
that there are large differences between the analyses and this is
also reflected in the four level classification system. The QRAs
differ largely depending on the extent to which they incorporate
HOFs, and none of the QRAs are fulfilling the requirements to
include HOFs such that they can be considered as Level 4 analysis.
Relevant research projects have been conducted to fulfill the
requirements of Level 3 analysis. Further research needs to be
carried out, and the different scientific disciplines need to be
further united to be considered as a Level 4 analysis. Further
safety audits by regulatory authorities focusing on QRAs are most
likely necessary to point out the direction and role for QRAs.
Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to the operators who contributed by
providing QRAs. A special thanks also to Jr. Specialist Jahon Khorsandi
at UC Berkeley for reviews and comments. We also appreciate the
comments and suggestions made by the referees, and the financial
support from the Norwegian Research Council and Statoil.



478 J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479
References

[1] Bea R. Risk assessment and management of offshore structures. Progress in
Structural Engineering and Materials 2001;3:180–7.

[2] Vinnem JE. Offshore Risk Assessment. 2nd ed.. London: Springer; 2007.
[3] Aven T. Foundations of Risk Analysis: A Knowledge and Decision-Oriented

Perspective. Chichester: Wiley; 2003.
[4] Vinnem JE, Seljelid J, Haugen S, Aven T. Generalized methodology for

operational risk analysis of offshore installations. Journal of Risk and
Reliability 2008;223:11.

[5] HSE. The Offshore Installations (Safety Case) Regulations, 2005. [cited: 20
September, 2010]. Available at: /http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2005/
20053117.htmS.

[6] Haukelid K. Theories of (safety) culture revisited - An anthropological
approach. Safety Science 2008;46:413–26.

[7] Næsheim T. NOU, The ‘‘Alexander L. Kielland’’ accident. Oslo, Norwegian;
1981.

[8] Norwegian Petroleum Directorate. Guidelines for safety evaluation of plat-
form conceptual design. Oslo; 1981.

[9] Vinnem JE. Evaluation of methodology for QRA in offshore operations.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1998;61:39–52.

[10] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 10418 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—basic surface pro-
cess safety systems. 2nd ed. Geneva; 2003.

[11] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 13702 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—control and mitigation of fires and explosions on
offshore production installations—requirements and guidelines. 1st ed.
Geneva; 1999.

[12] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 15544 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—Requirements and
guidelines for emergency response. 1st ed. Geneva; 2000.

[13] International Organization for Standardization. ISO 17776 Petroleum and
natural gas industries—offshore production installations—guidelines on
tools and techniques for hazard identification and risk assessment. 1st ed.
Geneva; 2000.

[14] Hale A, Kirwan B, Kjellén U. Safe by design: where are we now? Safety
Science 2007;45:305–27.

[15] Vinnem JE, Haugen S, Kongsvik T, Seljelid J, Steen S, Sklet S, et al. Operational
Safety Condition—Concept Development. Norway: Esrel Stavanger; 2007.

[16] Bea R. Human and Organizational factors in design and operation of deep-
water structures. Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, USA; 2002.

[17] Bea R. Human and organizational factors in reliability assessment and
management of offshore structures. Risk Analysis 2002;22:29–45.

[18] HSE. Organisational change and major hazards, HSE Books; 2003.
[19] Stranks J. The Manager’s Guide to Health and Safety at Work. London: Kogan

Page Ltd.; 2006.
[20] Goodwin S. Human Factors in QRA. Report for International Association of Oil

and Gas Producers. Rev.00: Det Norske Veritas Ltd.; 2007.
[21] Gordon RPE. The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore

oil industry. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 1998;61:95–108.
[22] Dempsey P, Wogalter M, Hancock P. Defining ergonomics/human factors.

International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors 2006:32.
[23] Schönbeck M, Rausand M, Rouvroye J. Human and organisational factors in

the operational phase of safety instrumented systems: A new approach.
Safety Science 2010;48:310–8.

[24] Jacobs R, Haber S. Organizational processes and nuclear power plant safety.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1994;45:75–83.

[25] Bellamy LJ, Geyer TAW, Wilkinson J. Development of a functional model
which integrates human factors, safety management systems and wider
organisational issues. Safety Science 2008;46:461–92.

[26] BIS. Basel II: Revised international capital framework. Bank for Internatinal
Settlements; 2010. Available at: /http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsca.htmS.

[27] Mosleh A, Chang YH. Model-based human reliability analysis: Prospects and
requirements. Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 2004;83:241–53.

[28] Embrey DE. Incorporating management and organisational factors into
probabilistic safety assessment. Reliability Engineering and System Safety.
1992;38:199–208.

[29] Davoudian K, Wu J-S, Apostolakis G. The work process analysis model
(WPAM). Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1994;45:107–25.

[30] Davoudian K, Wu J-S, Apostolakis G. Incorporating organizational factors into
risk assessment through the analysis of work processes. Reliability Engineer-
ing and System Safety. 1994;45:85–105.

[31] Elisabeth Paté-Cornell M, Murphy DM. Human and management factors
in probabilistic risk analysis: the SAM approach and observations from
recent applications. Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 1996;53:
115–126.

[32] Mosleh A, Golfeiz E. An approach for assessing the impact of organizational
factors on risk. Technical Research Report. Center for Technology Risk
Studies, University of Maryland at College Park, MD, USA; 1999.

[33] Papazoglou IA, Bellamy LJ, Hale AR, Aneziris ON, Ale BJM, Post JG, et al.
I-Risk: development of an integrated technical and management risk meth-
odology for chemical installations. Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process
Industries 2003;16:575–91.

[34] Oh J, Brouwer W, Bellamy L, Hale A, Ale B, Papazoglou I. The I-Risk project:
development of an integrated technical and management risk control and
monitoring methodology for managing and quantifying on-site and off-site
risks. Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management. London: Springer;
1998. p. 2485–91.

[35] Wreathall J, Schurman D, Modarres M, Anderson N, Roush M, Mosleh A. US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission: A framework and method for the amalga-
mation of performance indicators at nuclear power plants 1 and 2. US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington DC, USA; 1992.

[36] Ale BJM, Bellamy LJ, Cooke RM, Goossens LHJ, Hale AR, Roelen ALC, et al.
Towards a causal model for air transport safety - an ongoing research project.
Safety Science 2006;44:657–73.

[37] Øien K. A framework for the establishment of organizational risk indicators.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety. 2001;74:147–67.

[38] Aven T, Sklet S, Vinnem JE. Barrier and operational risk analysis of hydro-
carbon releases (BORA-Release) Part I. Method description. Journal of
Hazardous Materials 2006;137:681–91.

[39] Sklet S, Vinnem JE, Aven T. Barrier and operational risk analysis of hydro-
carbon releases (BORA-Release) Part II: results from a case study. Journal of
Hazardous Materials 2006;137:692–708.

[40] Mohaghegh Z, Mosleh A. Incorporating organizational factors into probabil-
istic risk assessment of complex socio-technical systems: Principles and
theoretical foundations. Safety Science 2009;47:1139–58.

[41] Sklet S. Safety barriers: definition, classification, and performance. Journal of
Loss Prevention in the Process Industries 2006;19:494–506.

[42] Sklet S. Safety Barriers on Oil and Gas Platforms. Trondheim: NTNU; 2005.
[43] Baker J, Bowman F, Erwin G, Gorton S, Hendershot D, Leveson N. The report of

the BP U.S. Refineries independent safety review panel; 2007.
[44] Dawson D, Brooks B. Esso Longford gas plant accident: report of the Longford

Royal Commission: Longford Royal Commission; 1999.
[45] Hopkins A. Lessons from Longford: the Esso gas plant explosion. Sydney: CCH

Australia Ltd.; 2000.
[46] Reason J. Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. Aldershot:

Ashgate; 1997.
[47] Brattbakk M, Østvold L, Zwaag C, Hiim H. Investigation of gas blowout on

Snorre A, Well 34/7-P31A, 28 November 2004. Petroleum Safety Authority,
Norway; 2005. p. 53.

[48] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. The Continental Shelf. Sta-
vanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://www.ptil.no/
regulations/the-continental-shelf-article4246-87.htmlS.

[49] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. Regulations relating to health,
enviroment and safety in the petroleum activities (The Facilities Regula-
tions). Stavanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://
www.ptil.no/regulations/S.

[50] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway [Internet]. Regulations relating to health,
enviroment and safety in the petroleum activities (The Managment Regula-
tions). Stavanger; 2010 [cited: 17 September 2010]. Available at: /http://
www.ptil.no/regulations/S.

[51] Aven T, Hauge S, Sklet S, Vinnem J. Methodology for incorporating
human and organizational factors in risk analyses for offshore installa-
tions. International Journal of Materials and Structural Reliability 2006;4:
1–14.

[52] Health and Safety Executive. A guide to the Offshore Installations (Safety
Case) Regulations 2005. HSE Books; 2006.

[53] Health and Safety Executive. Assessment Principles for Offshore Safety Cases
(APOSC); 2006. p. 30.

[54] Health and Safety Executive. Guidance on Risk Assessment for Offshore
Installations. HSE Information sheet; 2006. p. 25.

[55] Vinnem JE, Liyanage JP. Human-technical interface of collision risk
under dynamic conditions: an exploratory learning case from the North
Sea. International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction 2008;4:
34–47.

[56] Salazar K. Increased safety measures for energy development on the outer
Continental Shelf. Department of the Interior; 2010.

[57] BP Deepwater Horizon Accident Investigation Report; 2010. p. 192.
[58] Standards Norway. Norsok Standard: risk and emergency preparedness

analysis, Z-013. Norwegian Technology Centre. Oslo; 2001.
[59] Davis PM, Dubois J, Levi G, Uhlig F. Performance of European crosscountry oil

pipelines. Statistical summary of reported spillages in 2006 and since 1971.
CONCAWE, Oil Pipelines Management Group 2008:54.

[60] Khan FI, HEPI A. new tool for human error probability calculation for offshore
operation. Safety Science 2006;44:313.

[61] Seljelid J, Haugen S, Sklet S, Vinnem JE. Operational risk analysis—total
analysis of physical and non-physical barriers. BORA Handbook. Rev.00,
Bryne; June 2006. p. 60.

[62] Aven T. Risk analysis and science. International Journal of Reliability, Quality
and Safety Engineering 2004;11:1–15.

[63] Vinnem J. Risk indicators for major hazards on offshore installations. Safety
Science 2010;48:770–87.

[64] Aven T, Heide B. Reliability and validity of risk analysis. Reliability Engineer-
ing and System Safety. 2009;94:1862–8.

[65] Baron MM, Pate-Cornell ME. Designing risk-management strategies for
critical engineering systems. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
1999;46:87–99.

[66] Wahlström B. Organisational factors, their definition and influence on
nuclear safety. Technical Research Centre of Finland 2000:22.

[67] Wahlström B, Wilpert B, Cox S, Solá R, Rollenhagen C. Learning organizations
for nuclear safety 2002.



J.E. Skogdalen, J.E. Vinnem / Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96 (2011) 468–479 479
[68] Standards Norway. Norsok Standard: Risk and emergency preparedness analysis,
Z-013 Draft edition 3rd ed., Norwegian Technology Centre, Oslo; 2010.

[69] DNV. Report OLF/NOFO—summary of differences between offshore drilling
regulations in Norway and U.S. Gulf of Mexico; 2010. p. 100.

[70] Petroleum Safety Authority Norway. Report following the audit of Exxon
Mobil’s use of quantitative risk analyses. Stavanger; 2009. p. 4.
[71] Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. Fact
Sheet—The Workplace Safety Rule—On Safety and Environmental Manage-
ment Systems (SEMS); 2010. p. 2.

[72] American Petroleum Institute. Recommended Practice for Development of a
Safety and Environmental Management Program for Offshore Operations and
Facilities. API Recommended practice, vol. 75. 3rd ed; 2010.



Socializing the Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
System: Incorporating Social Psychological Phenomena 
Into a Human Factors Error Classification System
Susannah B. F. Paletz, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, Christopher Bearman, University 
of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, Judith Orasanu, NASA 
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Jon Holbrook, San Jose State 
University Research Foundation, Moffett Field, California

Objective: The presence of social psychological pressures on pilot decision making was 
assessed using qualitative analyses of critical incident interviews. Background: Social 
psychological phenomena have long been known to influence attitudes and behavior 
but have not been highlighted in accident investigation models. Method: Using a criti-
cal incident method, 28 pilots who flew in Alaska were interviewed. The participants 
were asked to describe a situation involving weather when they were pilot in command 
and found their skills challenged. They were asked to describe the incident in detail but 
were not explicitly asked to identify social pressures. Pressures were extracted from 
transcripts in a bottom-up manner and then clustered into themes. Results: Of the 28 
pilots, 16 described social psychological pressures on their decision making, specifically, 
informational social influence, the foot-in-the-door persuasion technique, normalization 
of deviance, and impression management and self-consistency motives. Conclusion: 
We believe accident and incident investigations can benefit from explicit inclusion of 
common social psychological pressures. Application: We recommend specific ways 
of incorporating these pressures into the Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
System.

INTRODUCTION human errors. However, HFACS currently does 
not specifically identify social psychological 

Accidents are usually caused not by a single- causes of human error.
point failure but by a combination of unsafe acts, Although pilot weather-related decision mak-
unfortunate coincidences, decision errors, and ing has been widely studied in general (e.g., 
inherent vulnerabilities (e.g., Orasanu, Martin, Hunter, Martinussen, & Wiggins, 2003), and 
& Davidson, 2002; Wiegmann & Shappell, human factors texts often discuss social psy-
2003). A variety of investigation models exist chological principles (e.g., Green, Muir, James, 
to determine the proximal, contributing, and Gradwell, & Green, 1991; Hawkins, 1993; 
root causes of accidents. One of the most thor- Hobbs, 1997, Wiener, Kanki, & Helmreich, 
ough of these, the Human Factors Analysis and 1993), empirical aviation research examining 
Classification System (HFACS), was devel- fundamental social psychological pressures is 
oped to identify and categorize the causes of rare (exceptions being Fischer & Orasanu, 1999; 
human error in accidents and aviation accidents Orasanu et al., 1998; Wiener et al., 1993).
in particular (Shappell & Wiegmann, 2001; The two goals of this study were (a) to iden-
Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003). As such, HFACS tify types of social psychological phenomena 
is a widely used guide that offers a multilevel that are described as pressures to take risks and 
understanding of the factors that contribute to (b) to suggest how HFACS could accommodate 

Address correspondence to Susannah Paletz, University of Pittsburgh, LRDC 816, 3939 O’Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15260; 
sbfpaletz@gmail.com. HUMAN FACTORS, Vol. 51, No. 4, August 2009, pp. 435-445. DOI: 10.1177/0018720809343588. 
Copyright © 2009, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



436	 August 2009 - Human Factors

these social psychological factors. The goal of HFACS has been shown to be an effective 
this study was not to determine rates of social framework for examining accidents, particu-
psychological phenomena but to identify some larly for the cognitive roots of errors and viola-
of the types of social psychological phenom- tions (e.g., Li & Harris, 2006; Shappell et al., 
ena that may lead to accidents. The methods 2007; Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003). However, 
involved examining self-reported critical inci- although HFACS includes aspects of teamwork 
dents of challenging weather situations from and coordination, it currently does not capture 
Alaska pilots. influences from the social environment that 

may lead to the erosion of safety.
Human Error and HFACS

Reason (1990) proposed that accidents are Latent Vulnerabilities and Field Theory
not caused simply by the proximal actions Reason’s (1990) concept of latent failures 
of a person (or persons) operating a complex draws on a medical metaphor of resident patho-
machine, such as an aircraft, but also by latent gens in which the system suffers a series of 
failures that are inherent in the organization breakdowns for a failure to occur. There are, 
surrounding that person. For the purposes of however, other equally valid metaphors. For 
this article, we examine specifically social and example, both Newtonian mechanics and elec-
psychological latent failures. tromagnetic field theory suggest ways in which 

Shappell and Wiegmann (2001; Wiegmann forces can act on objects. Kurt Lewin (1936, 
& Shappell, 2003) have specified the latent and 1938), in his groundbreaking work on field the-
active failures inspired by Reason’s (1990) the- ory, took these two physics models and applied 
ory at different levels to create a useful human them to psychological motivation and influ-
factors accident analysis tool (HFACS). Beyond ence. Forces in his theory may include any 
the immediate errors and violations of the per- factor that causes a “tendency to locomotion” 
son operating the equipment are preconditions (Lewin, 1948/1997, p. 197; see also Lewin, 1936, 
for unsafe acts (Shappell & Wiegmann, 2001; 1938), where locomotion is physical, social, or 
Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003). These precon- psychological movement. Forces may have 
ditions include environmental factors, substan- magnitude, direction, and a target who is influ-
dard conditions of operators, and substandard enced by the force (Lewin, 1938). Field theory, 
practices of operators. Environmental factors a seminal theory in social psychology, presumes 
include the technical and physical environment. that the forces that influence individuals act 
Substandard conditions of operators comprise through that individual’s perceptions (Lewin, 
adverse mental states, adverse physiological 1948/1997). Forces are dynamic, potentially 
states, and physical and/or mental limitations. changing in strength and direction, and may 
Substandard practices of operators can be related interact with each other. Furthermore, a ten-
to either crew resource management (teamwork, dency to locomotion does not guarantee that the 
coordination, and communication) or personal force will always result in movement.
readiness (fitness for duty). Beyond the actions Throughout this article, we use the more con-
and characteristics of the operator, unsafe temporary term pressure because in common 
supervision comprises inadequate supervision, usage, force implies a strong influence with 
planned inappropriate operations, failure to cor- probable coercion. Pressure can refer to influ-
rect a known problem, and supervisory viola- ences that are strong or weak, subtle or coer-
tions. At a still more distal level, organizational cive, direct or indirect. Conceptualized as such, 
influences can lead to errors based on resource pressures are subtly different from Reason’s 
management, organizational climate, and orga- (1990) latent pathogens.
nizational process. Organizational culture and 
climate are related to some social psychologi- Social Psychological Pressures
cal phenomena (e.g., conformity; Asch, 1951, The impact of the social environment on 
1956) but are addressed in more detail elsewhere an individual’s decision making and behavior 
(Bearman, Paletz, & Orasanu, 2008). has been well documented in the literature on 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Social Psychology and HFACS	 437

compliance, conformity, and cognitive disso- trained in the critical decision method devel-
nance. Social psychological concepts have been oped by Klein and colleagues (1989; Klein, 
applied to a range of domains (e.g., smoking; Militello, & Crandall, 1999). The participants 
Dubitzky & Schwartz, 1969; Johnson, 1968; were asked to describe a decision situation 
and HIV, e.g., Pryor & Reeder, 1993) and are involving weather when they were pilot in com-
directly related to crew resource management mand and found their skills as a pilot challenged. 
(e.g., Wiener et al., 1993). In addition to the fact Participants were asked to relate concrete situa-
that individuals may have direct, explicit power tions rather than comment on aviation decision 
over each other (Cartwright & Zander, 1968), as making in general. For each identified incident, 
in the supervisory role, concepts from the social participants were asked to identify decision 
psychology literature may illuminate the subtle points, critical cues that indicated a decision 
ways in which even highly trained, conscien- needed to be made, and goals and concerns at 
tious, and responsible pilots are led into situa- key points in the incident and to characterize the 
tions in which unsafe acts may occur. information that was used to make their deci-

sions (whether the information was ambiguous, 
Flight Operations in Alaska confusing, inaccurate, etc.). The semistructured 

Pilots flying in Alaska may be particularly interview script did not include explicit ques-
susceptible to the influence of social psycho- tions about pressures. 
logical pressures because they often fly in mar- Participants were recruited via phone calls 
ginal, ambiguous, and deteriorating weather and flyers distributed through the Aviation 
conditions; work within minimal infrastructure; Technology Department at the University of 
and fly missions that others rely on for basic Alaska-Anchorage. Participants were assured of 
necessities. Therefore, influences from the their confidentiality and were paid for their time. 
social environment may be more frequent and One or two interviewers were present at each 
more readily discernable in pilot reports of inci- 1- to 2-hr interview. In some cases, participants 
dents that occurred in Alaska compared with described multiple independent incidents during 
other flying situations. an interview session. Interviews were audio-

taped and then transcribed and deidentified.
METHOD Analysis

Participants
From the transcripts, the first and second 

In Alaska, 28 pilots were interviewed. No authors (who were not involved in interviewing) 
social, organizational, or psychological pres- identified and categorized different types of spon-
sures were identified in the incidents reported in taneously mentioned pressures based on Lewin’s 
four of the interviews. The remaining 24 inter- (1936, 1938) field theory concept of forces. Only 
views were with male pilots 31 to 69 years of pressures that were experienced or directly 
age (M = 48.6, SD = 10.0) who had a mean of observed by the interviewee were included. The 
7,321 flight hours (SD = 6441, ranging from initial identification of pressures to fly in unsafe 
250 to 25,000 hours) and 24 years of flying situations was conducted in a data-driven, 
experience (SD = 11, range 3.5 to 43 years). bottom-up fashion. The process was iterative and 
All but 3 pilots held a commercial pilot’s cer- transcripts were revisited multiple times as the 
tificate and/or an airline transport pilot license; low-level categories developed. At this stage, it 
the remaining 3 held private pilot licenses. was determined that four of the interviews con-

tained no psychological pressures. 
Procedure The detailed categories were then clustered 

Critical incident interviews address specific into themes based on HFACS and the social 
events in which participants were involved and psychological literature. The latter included 
include the use of standardized probes to elicit four themes: informational social influence 
information (Flanagan, 1954; Klein, Calderwood, (Deutsch & Gerard, 1955), the foot-in-the-door 
& MacGregor, 1989). Three interviewers were persuasion technique (Freedman & Fraser, 1966), 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



438	 August 2009 - Human Factors

normalization of deviance (Vaughan, 1996), and Informational Social Influence
the internal self-motives of impression manage- Informational social influence is defined as 
ment and self-consistency (e.g., Beauregard & “an influence to accept information obtained from 
Dunning, 1998; Higgins, 1987). On the basis another as evidence about reality” (Deutsch & 
of this clustering, 16 of the interviews specifi- Gerard, 1955, p. 629; italics in original). People 
cally revealed social psychological pressures observe others acting in some fashion, assume 
(see Table 1). The 8 pilot interviews that did not that these others have correct information about 
include social psychological pressures nonethe- a situation, and then act on those assumptions 
less included other types of psychological or accordingly. For example, if a person stands 
organizational pressures; those have been pre- in front of a building and looks up, others will 
sented in detail elsewhere (see Bearman et al., assume he or she must have noticed something 
2008, 2009). and will also look up. Baron, Vandello, and 

The initial coding was conducted by the Brunsman (1996) found that people are more 
first and second authors; disagreements were susceptible to informational social influence in 
discussed until consensus was reached. An ambiguous situations and situations in which the 
additional reliability check was conducted. accuracy of the information is especially impor-
The pressures from a random set of 7 of the tant. People are also more likely to conform to 
16 interviews (44%) were extracted, resulting informational social influence when confronted 
in 31 distinct segments of text. These 31 pres- with experts (Cialdini & Trost, 1998). Aviation 
sures were independently coded by the first and is a domain that includes all three of these fac-
fourth authors into five categories: informa- tors (ambiguous situations, need for accuracy, 
tional social influence, foot-in-the-door, nor- and others who are experts), particularly when 
malization of deviance, self-motives, and other. dynamic weather creates ambiguity.
Other was included to capture the pressures in Participants described situations in which 
the interviews that were not strictly social psy- they or someone else felt that it was safe to fly 
chological. The kappa reliability between the in an area because they had observed others fly-
two coders was .77 (with 84% direct agree- ing there (see Table 1 for quotes). In each of 
ment). Disagreements at this stage were resolved these instances, knowing that pilots were flying 
through consensus. at a specific location was not indicative of the 

weather conditions there or what the weather 
RESULTS conditions would be a few minutes later, when 

Participants described a range of weather- the participant’s airplane arrived at that location. 
related incidents in which their skills as a pilot The assumption of safety based on observa-
were challenged by factors such as rapidly dete- tion of others’ flying may be incorrect because 
riorating in-flight weather and spotty, unreliable weather can change rapidly, the other pilots 
weather reporting. The participants recounted could be taking great risks, and/or the other 
pressure from a range of individuals, includ- pilots may be more experienced, equipped, or 
ing management, other pilots, passengers, the knowledgeable than the observer (see Table 1).
pilots themselves, and even local villagers, who Pilot reports (PIREPs) were not coded as 
often were their customers. Of the 24 pilots, 16 informational social influence: PIREPs involve 
described pressures that were coded specifically actual communication between pilots rather than 
as social psychological (see Table 1). Seven assumptions that it is safe to fly because others 
interviews contained informational social influ- are doing so. In one of the incidents, the pilot 
ence, three contained foot-in-the-door, five entered an area after seeing a plane come out, 
contained normalization of deviance, and five only to find himself in poor weather conditions. 
contained self-motives. Because our data col- Soon after entering that area, however, a second 
lection method cannot establish rates of social plane emerged from where he was thinking of 
psychological phenomena, little weight should going. The pilot communicated directly with 
be given to the number or relative frequency of that second pilot and obtained explicit infor-
reported pressures. mation about the weather: “He said it’s clear 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Social Psychology and HFACS	 439

TABLE 1: Categories of Social Psychological Pressures 

Social Psychological  
Phenomena Representative Quotes

Informational Social Influence

Observing other pilots “He went through the pass and he got through it just fine, but the 
successfully flying 10 minutes it took me to get to where he was, the pass had closed.” 

“But it got hazy, misty, foggy-type weather. So we waited, and waited, 
waited, and waited, and finally somebody made it through so we 
thought, let’s go look-see, and here we go. We got up in there, almost to 
the other end and you could see a little—it was getting worse down there 
in the corner.”

Observing chief pilot “The chief pilot was flying in the [plane name removed] and he went. And I 
successfully flying figured if he can do it—I can do it.”

Foot in the Door/Normalization of Deviance

Inured to risk through “It could stay that way for weeks and weeks, foggy and wet, rainy, and you 
reinforcement/ get out there and fly and you get accustomed to it.” 
Normalization of “. . . and that’s when it gets scary. When you start getting used to it [flying 
deviance single engine in bad weather] . . . you always hear about pilots getting 

complacent as they get more experience and then they crash and die.” 
“If you get 2 months without anybody getting killed—everybody kinda 
relaxes a little bit. . . . You’ll see after somebody gets killed, everybody 
gets real cautious for a few weeks and then gradually everybody’s 
tolerances start to go back down lower and lower. And then they get 
back to that level we were at before.”

Foot in the door/Slippery “[A manager would say] ‘Why don’t you go take a look? See what it looks 
slope during the course like. It’s legal to leave—go look.’ You get out there and generally you 
of an incident don’t come back. You’re already out there.” 

“So you just keep skulking and skulking under this bad weather a little 
bit more, a little bit more, until all of a sudden you’re in over your 
head, and I think that’s what you see happen more often than not with 
weather-related accidents.”

Self-Motives

Not wanting to disappoint “It takes a lot to look at these four people and go, well, I know you see 
customers/Customer the lake [his passengers wanted to visit] but I don’t want to go in there 
service attitude because it’s dangerous.”

[In a case in which passengers were late and the pilot waited, necessitating 
flying later in the day] “I confused the process of taking care of the client 
with the process of taking care of the airplane, and as I said, today I’d 
leave the client standing in the middle of the runway wondering where I 
went before I put myself in [that] situation.”

Reluctance to admit “Ego plays a big role in pushing a pilot to do something that, you know, he 
defeat doesn’t want to come back and say I couldn’t make it or the wind was too 

high. . . . He’s got his reputation to live up to as far as, well, three other 
pilots made it; what’s wrong with you?”

Maintaining reputation/ “[He] says, ‘This guy’s flying and I really look like a [expletive] ’cause I don’t 
Not wanting to look bad want to fly.’”

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



440	 August 2009 - Human Factors

on the other side. No problem.  .  .  . So I went complacency (Table 1). Normalization of devi-
on through.” In this case, the pilot corrected his ance occurred when the same risky behavior led 
error of assuming the weather was good in that to no negative consequences, so pilots kept per-
location by requesting a PIREP. forming the same behavior during the course of 

several days or flights. We considered situations 
Foot in the Door to be illustrative of this category when informa-

The foot-in-the-door technique is a method tion about weather was ambiguous or clearly 
for obtaining compliance from another per- trustworthy rather than when weather reporting 
son: If a person has already agreed to a small was unreliable. If the weather information was 
request, that person is more likely to agree to known to be unreliable, pilots could reasonably 
a large one later, given a relatively short delay discount it without becoming inured to risk.
between requests (Freedman & Fraser, 1966). 
The mechanisms behind this technique include Self-Motives: Impression Management 
pressure from norms related to complying with and Self-Consistency
requests, a need for self-consistency, and a ten- People are often motivated to enhance or 
dency to infer one’s attitudes from one’s behav- maintain their self-esteem (e.g., self-affirmation 
ior (Burger, 1999; Cialdini, Trost, & Newsom, theory; Aronson, Cohen & Nail, 1999; Steele, 
1995; Guandagno, Asher, Demaine, & Cialdini, 1988; self-enhancement motives; Beauregard 
2001). If these mechanisms are working in & Dunning, 1998). Simply put, most people in 
tandem, the foot-in-the-door technique is even most situations do not like to look bad to them-
more likely to be successful. selves or to others. Many individuals are also 

Participants mentioned that managers asked motivated to act in ways consistent with their 
pilots to “go and take a look” to find out the state beliefs (e.g., self-discrepancy theory; Higgins, 
of the weather. In some cases, this was clearly 1987; self-verification theory; Swann, 1983). 
not a deliberate ploy to manipulate pilots: “You These two motives may be in conflict or act 
didn’t have the weather reporting in some of the together. Participants mentioned feeling pres-
passes, and with no pilot reports available, you’re sure to avoid social disapproval and failure 
going out there to take a look a lot of times,” one (e.g., reluctance to disappoint passengers). In 
participant said. In other cases, however, man- such cases, the passengers did not necessarily 
agers were attempting to get their pilots to take express disappointment; the pilot was simply 
a mission in dubious weather; after pilots had aware of the passengers’ desires and wanted 
started the trip, they were sometimes reluctant to to fulfill them (see Table 1). This reluctance to 
return, despite the conditions (see Table 1). face social disapproval was at times not very 

subtle, such as in situations in which the pilot 
Normalization of Deviance might “lose face” or admit defeat in front of his 

A phenomenon similar in its insidious reli- or her peers (see Table 1). This phenomenon is 
ance on small, progressive changes is the nor- distinct from having a “bush pilot” or “cowboy” 
malization of deviance. The normalization attitude, although that was mentioned by par-
of deviance is an incremental acceptance of a ticipants as well.
progressively lower level of safety by a group 
of people (Vaughan, 1996). Individuals are not DISCUSSION
necessarily aware that they are consistently Through our analysis of critical incident 
breaking rules or eroding a safety margin. It interviews with pilots in Alaska, it was possible 
is simply that safety is slowly compromised to to identify social psychological pressures that 
a point at which the end state is dramatically are likely to influence pilots’ behaviors. The 
different than initially intended.  Participants HFACS model includes some social psycholog-
become desensitized to the risks they are taking ical latent failures, such as team coordination 
(Hollnagel, Woods, & Leveson, 2006). and communication and the adverse mental state 

Pilots described becoming used to the risk category of “misplaced motivation” (Wiegmann 
of flying in bad weather and the dangers of & Shappell, 2003, p. 57). However, as they 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Social Psychology and HFACS	 441

originate from two slightly different models of 
Preconditions

influence on human behavior (latent pathogens for Unsafe

vs. field theory), the phenomena discussed in Acts 

this article do not fit precisely into the HFACS 
scheme. Therefore, some recommendations will Environmental

be made for reconciling the social psychologi- Factors 

cal phenomena identified in this study with the 
HFACS model.

Physical Social Technological
Placement of These Social Psychological Environment Environment Environment 

Phenomena Into HFACS
It is important for accident analysis frame-

Direct Pressure from Indirect Pressure from
works to adequately identify and describe the Others (e.g., Foot-in- Others (e.g.,
full range of human factors that contribute to the-Door) Informational Social

Influence) 
operational errors and the erosion of safety. 
When necessary, we have proposed new catego- Figure 1. Inclusion of the social environment in 
ries to extend the HFACS framework to capture the Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
the social pressures we identified. System. Suggested additions are shaded boxes. From 

Informational social influence can be adap- A Human Error Approach to Aviation Accident 
tive, as it enables individuals to act in accor- Analysis: The Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
dance with others via indirect acquisition of System (p. 54, Figure 3.4), by D. A. Wiegmann and 
knowledge. Flying in Alaska often involves S. A. Shappell, 2003, Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 
dealing with ambiguous or incomplete informa- Copyright 2003 by Ashgate. Adapted with permission.
tion about weather, and it makes sense for pilots 
to use others’ behavior to resolve that ambigu-
ity. However, in the context of observing oth- direction of possible mitigations: Informational 
ers flying in deteriorating weather, this social social influence is a basic psychological phe-
influence may have dangerous results, because nomenon, is not necessarily adverse, and is not 
the assumed knowledge may be based on faulty directly related to communication and coordina-
or changing information, or the other pilot may tion. Similarly, it is not simply a matter of inex-
have higher levels of skill or aircraft capability. perienced or unqualified operators: Experience 
When an individual makes a premature deci- itself could lead pilots to assume that it is safe to 
sion in the face of ambiguity and dynamically fly if they observe another pilot flying on their 
changing risks, inappropriate confidence and planned route. Informational social influence is 
the wrong action may result (Orasanu et al., more subtle than peer pressure (which, although 
2002). Informational social influence could also not addressed in this article, is another social 
partially explain the finding that pilots are more risk factor not easily captured in HFACS).
likely to fly into heavy weather when following We recommend that environmental factors 
another aircraft (Rhoda & Pawlak, 1999). as a precondition of unsafe acts be expanded to 

No elements in the current HFACS frame- include the social environment. Informational 
work capture informational social influence. social influence can then be included under that 
Lack of information search when necessary has new factor as a type of indirect social pressure 
been categorized as a failure of crew resource (see Figure 1).
management (Wiegmann & Shappell, 2003), When the foot-in-the-door technique is used 
but this attribution ignores why the information by a manager to persuade a pilot to fly into wors-
search was not conducted. Categorizing this ening weather, it should be categorized accord-
concept within “adverse mental states” or “crew ing to HFACS as a mechanism of supervisory 
resource management” would not teach acci- violations. However, the foot-in-the-door tech-
dent investigators to be alert to informational nique itself is a content-free means of persuasion 
social influence, nor would it point them in the that could potentially be used to increase safety 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



442	 August 2009 - Human Factors

behaviors (e.g., by implementing increasingly 
restrictive or cautious procedures). In our study, Preconditions

for Unsafe
the foot-in-the-door technique was a method by Acts 
which the supervisory latent vulnerability came 
into play. However, this and other persuasive 
techniques described in the social psychology Conditions of the
literature can be used by others in addition to Operator 

supervisors: Passengers and customers also 
pressured the pilots to fly in unsafe conditions. 

Direct attempts to persuade others to behave Mental States 
unsafely could be classified in a new HFACS 
category under social environment called “direct 
pressure from others” (see Figure 1). This cat-
egory could be further refined on the basis of 

Progressive Self Motives (e.g.,
the persuasive techniques attempted (e.g., foot 

Commitment Impression
in the door) and by the types of others (e.g., Management, Self-

supervisors, customers). The foot-in-the-door Consistency)

technique applied by a manager would then fall 
under both supervisory violations and as a direct Figure 2. Inclusion of self-motives and progresive 
pressure from others. commitment in the Human Factors Analysis and 

The normalization of deviance occurs at Classification System. Suggested additions and 
a more distal level than the foot-in-the-door alterations are shaded boxes; assumed to include 
technique and thus could be encompassed by current Adverse Mental States categories. From A 
the organizational culture subcategory of orga- Human Error Approach to Aviation Accident Analysis: 
nizational climate in HFACS. From a cultural The Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
psychology perspective, culture is defined as System  (p. 54, Figure 3.4), by D. A. Wiegmann and 
a set of learned, shared meanings, norms, and S. A. Shappell, 2003, Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 
expectations (Rohner, 1984) that can occur at Copyright 2003 by Ashgate. Adapted with permission.
the level of teams, locations, subgroups, organi-
zations, regions, and nations. If organizational choices” (McCoy & Mickunas, 2000, p. 27). 
culture is seen as covering only the highest lev- This type of pressure does not truly fit within 
els of the organization within the HFACS model either the foot-in-the-door persuasion technique 
(Shappell & Wiegmann, 2003), then normaliza- or normalization of deviance as they have been 
tion of deviance at any other level would not fit conceptualized by the literature, although this 
within the organizational culture category. new pressure retains the flavor of the basic psy-

We recommend that the organizational cul- chological mechanisms from both. Instead, we 
ture category be expanded to include widespread suggest that progressive commitment would fit 
cultural norms, even if they take place within a under the mental states category of HFACS (see 
subculture of the organization. Additionally, the Figure 2).
developmental nature of the erosion of safety Some instances of impression management 
is subtly different from a static culture of non- and self-consistency can fit into the HFACS 
safety: It suggests both pressure originating category of conditions of the operator, under 
from organizational culture and progressive adverse mental states (Wiegmann & Shappell, 
deterioration of safety culture over time. 2003) as a new category called “self-motives,” 

An additional type of pressure identified in but only if the underlying psychological mecha-
our interviews was initially categorized as the nism is preserved. Impression management and 
foot-in-the-door technique, but the pressure self-consistency are considered fundamental 
was applied to oneself (see Table 1). We iden- psychological processes, putting them on a dif-
tify this as progressive commitment, defined ferent conceptual level from the HFACS catego-
as an “increasing bodily/psychological invest- ries. They are not precisely attitudes, cognitive 
ment of a pilot through narrowing fields of states, or traits. Both context and content are 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Social Psychology and HFACS	 443

important in determining whether these motives the Federal Aviation Administration) to focus 
lead to safety vulnerabilities (i.e., are adverse). on specific pressures that are known to lead to 

In fact, self-consistency and self-enhancement unsafe behavior. Hence, this research can also 
may exert opposing pressures on a pilot, mak- be used to enhance both safety management 
ing it difficult to predict how he or she would systems and regulatory tools to improve opera-
respond in a given situation. It is the conflu- tional oversight.
ence of the specific issue and the surrounding Because these phenomena are generally over-
situation that sets off a process that can lead looked in accident investigations and are diffi-
to pressure and, ultimately, a vulnerability to cult to ascertain when the actors are deceased, 
error. An understanding of the psychological prevalence studies that include existing accident 
pressures that result from these self-motives, reports are not yet an appropriate way to study 
including how normal they are, could also help the role of these social psychological phenomena 
to deepen the explanatory power of the category in accidents. It is therefore important to include 
of adverse mental states, perhaps reconceptual- even rare pressures in HFACS to highlight the 
izing it simply as mental states (see Figure 2). possible role of these social psychological fac-

Social pressures can lead pilots to underes- tors in accidents, to provide a suitable place for 
timate potential dangers, contributing to poor categorization, and to make the taxonomy more 
decision making in the face of potentially com- complete. Although it may be a challenge for 
plicating factors, such as deteriorating weather. investigators to uncover pressures on decision 
These proposed revisions to HFACS take into making and self-motives, evidence may still be 
account some of these social pressures. found. For example, other pilots may recall the 

investigated pilot’s reaction to observing other 
CONCLUSION pilots’ flying or whether a manager told him or 

Participants in this study were not asked her to “go up and take a look.”
specifically about social psychological pres- It should be noted that this article addresses 
sures but were asked to speak about their own only a small fraction of potentially relevant 
impressions of their aviation decision-making social psychological phenomena. Other per-
experiences. Thus, although the findings from suasion techniques and influence mechanisms 
this study derive from a small sample of self- (e.g., normative social influence) could also be 
reports, our analysis benefitted from richly at work, and other social psychological phe-
detailed descriptions of situations. This study nomena could be relevant (e.g., competition, 
provides suggestive evidence for the impor- social comparison processes, and aggression). 
tance of social psychological phenomena in real Future work should continue the evolution of 
flight operations and can be extended to pilots HFACS by taking advantage of social psycho-
flying outside of Alaska. logical theories.

The next step of practical application would 
be to address a broader array of social psycho- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
logical pressures in the context of actual inci- This research was supported by the National 
dents and accidents to ascertain how common Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
these phenomena are within a broader, rep- Aviation Safety Program, by the Federal Aviation 
resentative population of pilots. The research Administration Office of Human Factors, and 
reported here supports training to enhance the by a postdoctoral appointment to the second 
human factors knowledge of flight person- author at NASA Ames Research Center admin-
nel, both pilots and managers. For example, istered by Oak Ridge Associated Universities. 
pilots can be warned that rather than assuming The authors are indebted to C. Elaine McCoy, 
a way is safe because they see another pilot in Karen Wegienek, Wayne Daniels, Steve Farlow, 
an area, they should contact that pilot for an LaQuisha Beckum, and Michael de los Reyes 
explicit PIREP. The social psychological per- for their assistance on this project. The authors 
spective also introduces a slightly different way are grateful to Scott Shappell, Alan Hobbs, 
of thinking about concepts such as operational Jessica Nowinski, Mary Connors, the editor and 
risk, allowing operators and regulators (i.e., an associate editor, and the anonymous reviewers 

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



444	 August 2009 - Human Factors

for suggestions on previous drafts. Please note Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. 

that the authors of this article were U.S. govern- Psychological Bulletin, 51, 327–358.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance without pres-

ment employees and government contractors at sure: The foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of Personality 
the time of writing and created the article within and Social Psychology, 4, 195–202.
the scope of their employment. As a work of the Green, R. G., Muir, H., James, M., Gradwell, D., & Green, R. L. 

U.S. federal government, the content of the (1991). Human factors for pilots. Aldershot, UK: Avebury 
Technical.

article is in the public domain. Guadagno, R. E., Asher, T., Demaine, L. J., & Cialdini, R. B. 
(2001). When saying yes leads to saying no: Preference for 

REFERENCES consistency and the reverse foot-in-the-door effect. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 859–867.

Aronson, E., Cohen, G., & Nail, P. R. (1999). Self-affirmation the- Hawkins, F. H. (1993). Human factors in flight (H. W. Orlady, Ed.; 
ory: An update and appraisal. In E. Harmon-Jones & J. S. Mills 2nd ed.). Brookfield, VT: Ashgate.
(Eds.), Cognitive dissonance: Progress on a pivotal theory in Higgins, E. T. (1987). Self-discrepancy: A theory relating self and 
social psychology (pp. 127–147). Washington, DC: American affect. Psychological Review, 94, 319–340.
Psychological Association. Hobbs, A. (1997). Decision making for helicopter pilots. Asia 

Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of group pressure upon the modification Pacific Air Safety, 15, 8–12.
and distortion of judgments. In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, Holbrook, J. B., Orasanu, J., and McCoy, C. E. (2003). Weather-
leadership, and men (pp. 177–190). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie. related decision making by aviators in Alaska. In R. Jensen (Ed.), 

Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: 1. A Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Aviation 
minority of one against a unanimous majority. Psychological Psychology (pp. 576–581). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Monographs, 70(416). Hollnagel, E., Woods, D. D., & Leveson, N. (Eds.) (2006). 

Baron, R. S., Vandello, J. A., & Brunsman, B. (1996). The forgotten Resilience engineering: Concepts and precepts. Aldershot, UK: 
variable in conformity research: Impact of task importance on Ashgate.
social influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Hunter, D. R., Martinussen, M., & Wiggins, M. (2003). 
71, 915–927. Understanding how pilots make weather-related decisions. 

Bearman, C. R., Paletz, S. B. F., & Orasanu, J. (2008, April). International Journal of Aviation, 13, 73–87.
Organizational pressures and mitigating strategies in Alaska Johnson, R. E. (1968). Smoking and the reduction of cognitive 
aviation. Paper presented at the 8th International Symposium of the dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 
Australian Aviation Psychology Association, Sydney, Australia. 260–265.

Bearman, C. R., Paletz, S. B. F., & Orasanu, J. (2009). Situational Klein, G. A., Calderwood, R., & MacGregor, D. (1989). Critical 
pressures on aviation decision making: Goal seduction and sit- decision method for eliciting knowledge. IEEE Transactions 
uation aversion. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19, 462–472.
80, 556–560. Klein, G. A., Militello, L., & Crandall, B. (1999). Critical incident/

Beauregard, K. S., & Dunning, D. (1998). Turning up the con- critical decision method. In D. H. Jonassen, M. Tessmer, & W. 
trast: Self-enhancement motives prompt egocentric contrast H. Hannum (Eds.), Task analysis methods for instructional 
effects in social judgments. Journal of Personality and Social design (pp. 181–192). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Psychology, 74, 606–621. Lewin, K. (1936). Principles of topological psychology. New York: 

Burger, J. M. (1999). The foot-in-the-door compliance procedure: McGraw-Hill. 
A multiple-process analysis and review. Personality and Social Lewin, K. (1938). The conceptual representation and the measure-
Psychology Review, 3, 303–325. ment of psychological forces. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Cartwright, D., & Zander, A. (1968). Power and influence in groups: Lewin, K. (1997). Resolving social conflicts and field theory in 
Introduction. In D. Cartwright & A. Zander (Eds.), Group social science. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
dynamics: Research and theory (pp. 215–235). New York: Association. (Originally published 1948)
Harper and Row. Li, W.-C., & Harris, D. (2006). Pilot error and its relationship 

Cialdini, R. B., & Trost, M. R. (1998). Social influence: Social with higher organizational levels: HFACS analysis of 523 
norms, conformity, and compliance. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, accidents. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 77, 
& G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology 1056–1061.
(Vol. 2, pp. 151–192). Boston: McGraw-Hill. McCoy, E., & Mickunas, A. (2000). The role of context and pro-

Cialdini, R. B., Trost, M. R., & Newsom, J. T. (1995). Preference gressive commitment in plan continuation error. In Proceedings 
for consistency: The development of a valid measure and the of the IEA 2000 and HFES 2000 Congress (pp. 26–29). Santa 
discovery of surprising behavioral implications. Journal of Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 318–328. Orasanu, J., Fischer, U., McDonnell, L., Davison, J., Haars, K. E., 

Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. B. (1955). A study of normative and Villeda, E., & VanAken, C. (1998). How do flight crews detect 
informational social influences upon individual judgment. and prevent errors? Findings from a flight simulation study. In 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 629–636. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 

Dubitzky, M., & Schwartz, J. L. (1969). Cognitive dissonance and 42nd Annual Meeting (pp. 191–195). Santa Monica, CA: 
changes in cigarette smoking in an organized control program. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 
Journal of Social Psychology, 79, 219–225. Orasanu, J., Martin, L., & Davison, J. (2002). Cognitive and con-

Fischer, U., & Orasanu, J. (1999). Say it again, Sam! Effective com- textual factors in aviation accidents: Decision errors. In E. Salas 
munication strategies to mitigate pilot error. In R. S. Jensen & & G. Klein (Eds.), Linking expertise and naturalistic decision 
L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International making (pp. 209–226). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 362–366). Columbus: Pryor, J. B., & Reeder G. D. (Eds.). (1993). The social psychology 
Ohio State University. of HIV infection. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Social Psychology and HFACS	 445

Reason, J. (1990). Human error. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Susannah B. F. Paletz is a postdoctoral research 
University. associate at the Learning Research and Development 

Rhoda, D. A., & Pawlak, M. L. (1999). An assessment of thun- Center at the University of Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania. 
derstorm penetrations and deviations by commercial aircraft 
in the terminal area (Project Rep. NASA/A-2). Lexington: While conducting this research, she was a research 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory. psychologist in the Human Systems Integration 

Rohner, R. P. (1984). Toward a conception of culture for cross- Division at NASA Ames Research Center. She 
cultural psychology. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, received her PhD in psychology from the University 
15, 111–138. of California, Berkeley, in 2003.

Shappell, S., Detwiler, C., Holcomb, K., Hackworth, C., Boquet, A., 
& Wiegmann, D. (2007). Human error and commercial avia-
tion accidents: An analysis using the Human Factors Analysis Christopher Bearman is a postdoctoral research fel-
and Classification System. Human Factors, 49, 227–242. low in the Centre for Applied Behaviour Science 

Shappell, S. A., & Wiegmann, D. A. (2001). Applying Reason: The and the Psychology Department at the University of 
Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS). South Australia in Adelaide. He received his PhD in 
Human Factors and Aerospace Safety, 1, 59–86. psychology from Lancaster University in Lancaster, 

Shappell, S. A., & Wiegmann, D. A. (2003). A human error analy- United Kingdom, in 2004.
sis of general aviation controlled flight into terrain accidents 
occurring between 1990–1998 (Rep. No. DOT/FAA/AM-03/4). 
Washington, DC: Office of Aerospace Medicine. Judith Orasanu is a principal investigator in the 

Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining Human Systems Integration Division at the National 
the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Aeronautics and Space Administration Ames Research 
experimental social psychology (Vol.  21, pp. 261–302). New Center in Moffett Field, California. She received 
York: Academic Press. her PhD in experimental psychology from Adelphi 

Swann, W. B. (1983). Self-verification: Bringing social reality into University in Garden City, New York, in 1975.
harmony with the self. In J. Suls & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), 
Social psychological perspectives on the self (Vol. 2, pp. 33–66). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Jon Holbrook is a senior research associate with 

Vaughan, D. (1996). The Challenger launch decision: Risky tech- the San Jose State University Research Foundation 
nology, culture, and deviance at NASA. Chicago: University of in Moffett Field, California. He received his PhD 
Chicago Press. in cognitive science from Vanderbilt University in 

Wiegmann, D. A., & Shappell, S. A. (2003). A human error Nashville, Tennessee, in 2000.
approach to aviation accident analysis: The Human Factors 
Analysis and Classification System. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

Wiener, E. L., Kanki, B. G., & Helmreich, R. L. (Eds.) (1993). Cockpit Date received: October 22, 2008
resource management. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Date accepted: June 18, 2009

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



Offshore crew supply - Modern
marine options challenge helicopters
D Brittan, Reflex Marine Ltd; S Douglas, Seacor Marine LLC
Copyright 2009, Society of Petroleum Engineers

This paper was prepared for presentation at the 2009 SPE Offshore Europe Oil & Gas Conference & Exhibition held in Aberdeen, UK, 
8-11 September 2009.

This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by
the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s).
The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction,
distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to
reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous
acknowledgment of SPE copyright.

Abstract utilizes a custom designed 9-passenger advanced transfer
capsule. The entire system is expected to provide one of the

The helicopter has long been regarded as the default choice safest crew transfer solutions in the industry. This integrated
for crew supply due to its speed, flexibility and passenger solution provides the following additional benefits:-
comfort. Marine crew transportation has until recently being  An ideal emergency evacuation tool (e.g. hurricanes),
regarded as slow and more hazardous. Three specific capable of the rapid evacuation of large crews. This allows
technological advancements, high speed hull design, DP2 operators to delay evacuation decisions, possibly avoiding
automatic vessel station keeping and advances in transfer unnecessary shut downs, without compromise to safety.
capsule design, now offers high speed marine crew supply,  A high speed vessel suitable for making early response to
with levels of passenger safety and comfort that exceed an offshore fire, equipped with two large fire monitors.
helicopter transfers. Utilizing the 'state of the art' CrewZer  150 ton of deck load optimized for fast track logistic
Class vessel, this new crew supply solution is leading many support. 
operators to re-evaluate their crew supply options.  Enhanced vessel stability which increases the operational

weather window for transit and loading operations.
A good crew supply solution should provide high levels of
safety, speed and reliability, as well as operational flexibility. Following a year in operation and tens of thousands of
As offshore development cost rise and other assets mature, successful transfers, the system has been thoroughly field
there is increased pressure to reduce operating costs, whilst proven. This paper describes the system in full, the
attending to crew welfare and morale. The CrewZer access experiences of the first year in operation and goes on to
solution can deliver up to 30% savings on logistical costs, explore likely future developments in crew supply operations.
whilst enhancing safety or passenger welfare. 

Introduction
The first CrewZer Class vessel, the Seacor Cheetah (the
fastest offshore support vessel ever built) was introduced to The offshore oil and gas industry has from its outset used
the market in February 2008. Voted 'American Ship of the both air and sea transportation to move its workforce. Both
Year', it has an aluminum catamaran hull, capacity for 149 transport alternatives carry risks, whilst sharing the same
passengers and a cruising speed in excess of 40 knots. It's purpose - to transport personnel offshore in a safe and
DP2 station-keeping and wide stable hull provide an ideal efficient manner. The aviation industry, exposed to the
platform for personnel transfer operations. The vessel also potential of catastrophic failure and multiple fatalities has

Figure 1. Seacor Cheetah - Advanced crew supply with a top Figure 2. Frog 9 High Capacity Transfer Capsule
speed over 40 knots

September 2009 1



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

invested heavily to try to minimize the risks and Marine crew supply utilising crane transfer is well established,
consequences of airborne failures. Helicopters are fast, however, there had been very limited development in this area
relatively comfortable and are therefore widely favored during the last 50 years. The traditional collapsible 4 person
despite the inherently high costs associated with aviation basket provides an inexpensive and some would say 'proven'
services. method of crane transfer. However, although the number of

fatalities associated with such transfers has been relatively
Until recently, moving personnel by sea would involve the use small, injuries are much more common place and as a result
of vessels, principally designed for heavy logistics support, created the perception that marine transfer was a risky
and the use of personnel baskets (based on a design method of crew supply. Operators are now taking a more
established over 50 years ago). The marine option was careful look at the data, which indicates that marine transfers
unlikely to employ the sort of routine procedures associated carry a lower risk of fatal incident than helicopters, although
with air travel, such as heliport check ins, boarding using established methods there is greater risk of sustaining
procedures, passenger safety training, pre-flight briefings and injury. Analysis of industry safety data shows that the
incident reporting, to name a few. The marine alternative by traditional basket transfer incur high rates of injury, either from
contrast appeared casual and did not present itself as a side impact or vessel deck impact. Such injury is in large part
'credible alternative' to air travel. a result of the minimal protection afforded by the traditional

basket. The external riding position, lack of restraint and
In 2006, Seacor Marine and Reflex Marine set out to work collapsible nature of a rope basket creates a very high
together to develop a truly competitive alternative to exposure to falls and impact injuries. Furthermore, there has
helicopter transfer. The new CrewZer Class of vessel, been little industry focus on raising the level of risk
complemented by a purposed designed transfer solution awareness, improving operational controls and establishing
(utilizing the 9-passenger Frog-9 transfer capsules), with the best practice.
objective of providing a superior service, in terms of speed,
passenger comfort and the safest crew supply option Traditional baskets and early capsule designs were sized for
available to the industry. transferring 3 to 4 persons simultaneously. This lower

capacity was suitable for non-routine operations and small
One year of incident free operation in West Africa, and around crew transfers. However, when managing large transfers of up
30 000 passenger transfers, has now confirmed the to 50-60 personnel per installation, the number of crane lifts
performance expectations. becomes an important factor in determining the time the

vessel must hold station at each installation. Minimising this
Concept Definition loading period is important to avoid; tiring of the vessel

captain, unproductive use of the vessel, unproductive use of
For the first time a major vessel operator and a transfer the workforce and tying up the installations cranes. 
specialist collaborated to develop an optimized transfer
solution with both companies sharing expertise in their To provide a competitive and flexible crew supply service for
respective fields to develop a state-of-the-art crew supply up to 150 people, with the highest safety standards, it was
system. recognised that a radically different crane transfer solution

was required. The aim was also to allow operators with
multiple offshore installations, or logistics club members, to
save 40% on current air transportation costs whilst improving
the overall safety performance.

Enhanced crew supply concept

An objective was established to develop a transportation
system capable of carrying up to 150 passengers, 150 tons of
deck cargo plus fluids, with emergency response capabilities
(which included rapid evacuation and fire fighting). The
service was aimed at the following market applications:

 Routine crew support operations. - A service offering
speed, comfort and high levels of safety, which also provides

Figure 3. Schematic of the CrewZer concept vessel with a Frog significant operating cost saving over aviation alternatives.
capsule The option would be particularly attractive for routine crew

changes across a number of field assets.
High speed catamaran passenger ferries are well established
competitors for local air carriers. Such vessels would typically  Balanced logistical support - As part of a mixed marine
have capacity for 400 passengers, with cruising at speeds of logistics support strategy, the CrewZer provides 150 tons of
40+ knots. Adapting this vessel type for offshore crew and deck capacity and this could be a vital component in the
materials supply was the basis of the CrewZer Class concept. overall logistics support strategy.
However, unlike a passenger ferry, this service would not have
the luxury of a quayside mooring at the point of destination. A  Emergency evacuation and fire fighting - Hurricane
key feature would therefore be the ability to hold station and threats put tremendous short term pressure on available
conduct personnel transfers safely and quickly, thereby helicopter services and inevitably leads to defensive and early
minimising the risk exposure of passengers, installations and decisions to evacuate installations. Such decisions have
vessel. major commercial implications and are therefore best delayed

September 2009 2



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

The review initially focused on identifying the root causes of
recorded incidents, which indicated that the vast majority of
transfer incidents fell into clear categories. This was followed
by a detailed evaluation that indicated that a new generation
of rigid transfer devices (in operation for over a decade) had
out-performed all other systems on the market, in terms of
passenger protection and performance (in particular weather
capability). The study concluded that the risks could be
managed in three ways:

1. Vessel specification - An improved transfer platform could
be created by focusing on the vessel's stability, station-
keeping and landing area. The aim was to ensure that the
vessel had the necessary mobility, control, all weather
capability and safety systems to provide a safe platform for
personnel transfers. 

Figure 4. Normal deck load on passenger run 2. Engineered passenger transfer protection - Just as a
modern car provides a secure environment protecting
passengers from impacts (frequently caused by driver errors),
a well engineered transfer device should protect passengers
from the human factors that appear to contribute to the most
transfer incidents. A new generation of rigid transfer capsules
offering comprehensive passenger protection has established
an excellent track record in the industry. They provide
passengers with four main categories of protection:

a. An rigid external shell protects the passengers from any
side impact
b. A central suspension feature protects the passengers from
landing shocks and whiplash injuries.
c. A seat harness restrains passengers preventing falls.
d. Buoyancy and self righting features protect passengers in
the event of immersion.

Figure 5. With 150 ton deck load capacity, providing substantial
logistical flexibility

as far as the practicality of safe evaluation logistics permit.
CrewZer provides a powerful tool for rapid large scale
evacuation, potentially allowing the final decision to evacuate
to be deferred or avoided altogether, should the threat abate.

 Remote Logistical support - Offshore oil and gas activities
are now taking place in remote waters outside the range of
normal helicopter support. The ability to have fast a reliable
crew transfer by marine vessel is the only option. 

Managing risks and transfer efficiency

In 2006, to support the development of an enhanced crew
supply solution, a detailed risk assessment was performed to
assess the requirements to support safe and efficient
operations. The scope of the evaluation included:

Figure 6. The first production model Frog 9 - clearly showing
seat restraint

 The safety track record of crane transfer operations and
analysis of incidents.
 Identification of areas with scope for improvement. The unit has a low centre of gravity providing a stable platform
 The assessment of new, and emerging, crane transfer on a heaving vessel deck with an angle of stability of 35°. 
technologies (the project team recognised crane transfer as
the 'Achilles Heel' of existing marine crew supply). However, the requirement to transfer up to 150 personnel
 Vessel specification to provide a safer platform for crane suggested higher transfer rates were required so a transfer
transfer operations. specialist was commissioned to develop a new high capacity
 Improved operational controls and training provisions to unit. Having evaluated a range of concepts, the project
further reduce the risks. selected a 9 passenger unit with an enhanced suspension

system. This has allowed significant increases in transfer

September 2009 3



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

rates, whilst providing operational integrity, manageable deck and efficient transfer operations. The ship is equipped with
operations and retaining an excellent weather envelope. state-of-the-art electronics, communications and navigation

systems. Image intensified night vision and day color camera
3. Improved operational control - Procedures, pre-lift equipment helps the vessel move around the rigs and
planning, communications and training can all play a platforms at night where unlit buoys are not detected on radar. 
significant role in reducing risk and improving transfer rates.
New procedures and training provisions were developed to The 10 person crew is accommodated on the mid deck level
increase risk awareness, operational control and the overall and on the upper deck is a large fully equipped wheelhouse
efficiency of transfer operations. offering full 360 degree vision, with excellent visibility onto the

aft deck. The vessel can carry 150 tonnes of cargo on a 2,700
CrewZer Class Vessel Description sq ft deck, as well as 13,150 gallons of cargo fuel. By

combining a powerful crew supply capability with flexible and
The new CrewZer Class vessel was designed by Incat rapid cargo transit, provides operators with a very attractive
Crowther of Newport, New South Wales, Australia and economic package. In the event of a fire on the host
constructed at the Gulf Craft shipyard in Louisiana, US. The installation, the vessels speed allows rapid deployment for
vessel is 50m long and has a very wide beam of 11.6m due to emergency support. It made sense that the vessel
its catamaran design. Its spacious main deck (27.8m by specification included a pair of remote-controlled fire
9.14m) provides an excellent area for landing and loading the monitors with a capacity of 5,300 gallons per minute. 
transfer capsules, with landing areas provided at amidships or
toward the aft, providing flexibility to manage location specific
variables, such as weather direction, crane reach, vessel
motions etc. 

Figure 8. Fast response to offshore emergencies, the Cheetah
is equipped with fire fighting capability

Figure 7. Seacor Cheetah is equipped with state-of-the-art Passenger Comfort
navigation equipment and steered with joystick control

Passenger comfort was viewed as a top priority, to gain
Each of the two hulls is powered by 2 MTU 16V 4000 engines, increased industry acceptance for marine crew supply
developing 3,305 HP to each of the Hamiltons HM811 solutions. The passenger lounge on the main deck is laid out
waterjets and the vessel achieved an impressive 42 knots and equipped similarly to a wide bodied airliner, with a 3-6-3
during trials. The CrewZer is the fast workboat ever build and format. The lounge features a pair of 42-inch LCD televisions,
even at economy speed is some 10-15 knots faster than most wireless internet and a beverage and snack area, helping to
crew supply vessels - at economy speed of 31 knots its fuel
consumption is 265 gph. The vessel is highly manoeuvrable
with its 4 main water jets and each hull is fitted with a 200HP
azimuthing bow thruster. 

With a 149 passenger capacity and under 100 tons gross
weight, the CrewZer Class meets the US coastguard
subchapter T/L requirements and ABS has certified the vessel
as +A1 HSC Crewboat, +AMS and DP-2. It is one of very few
crew/supply boats with a DP-2 rating. On arrival at the
installation, the Kongsberg SDP21 dynamic positioning
system takes over the navigation of the ship. This system
includes a pair of windbirds, two gyrocompasses, two
position reference systems, two Garmin 2106 GPSs and two
motion sensors. This allows CrewZer to provide close position
holding support for even deepwater floating rigs where
movement of up to 100ft can be expected. Keeping manual
control to hold station during crew transfer activities would be Figure 9. The passenger lounge has reclining seats, satellite TV
very tiring, but with full DP-2 rating the vessel is ideal for safe and internet access. Aircraft level comfort

September 2009 4



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

ensure that passengers are fresh and ready to work on arrival High Capacity Capsule Development 
at the offshore platform. For travelling at speed, the vessel is
fitted with a wave dampening system by VT Maritime To fulfil the need for
Dynamics. The vessel automatically smoothes out the effect increased transfer rates,
of any wave action and minimizes the likelihood of travel the project team assessed
sickness. a range of capsule

designs and
Vessel Features for Performing Safe Transfers configurations. Eventually

a 9-passenger version of
Although the Frog-9 provides a high degree of passenger the well established 3-
protection, the role of the vessel as a safe landing platform is passenger Frog capsule
also a key consideration for the overall transfer safety. The was selected. 
aspects of vessel design that affect the safe operating limits
and operator procedures of transfer activities are as follows: The principle design

challenges were to:-
 Deck Stability - The transfer capsule's low centre of gravity
and high angle of stability circa 35° minimises the risk of  Maintain a compact Figure 11. Frog 9 Suspension
toppling the capsule on a pitching and rolling deck. However, footprint to ease handling Design
a more stable deck will make transfer operations easier for the
crane operator and provides assurance for the passengers.  Limit the unit weight
The vessel´s wide beam, twin hulls and DP-2 station keeping (thereby reducing the
equipment provides an ideal platform for safe transfer energy dissipated in the
operations. event of a collision)

 Deck Visibility -  Develop a configuration
Whilst holding station that supported rapid
and performing passenger flow
transfer activities the
vessel master should  Develop a suspension
enjoy clear visibility. system for an increased
The vessel has passenger mass that
excellent, 360° maintained acceptable
visibility, from the decelerations on
wheelhouse, with a passengers for the
c l o s e d - c i r c u i t defined weather operating Figure 12. Frog 9 undergoing drop
television system envelope. testing
covering the rear of the
main deck, the engine With safety as a top
room and thruster priority new capsules
room. There are 10 were designed with ABS
deck lights, totalling type approval. Full details
6,500 watts, plus two of the design specification
forward searchlights are provided in Appendix
and one 12-inch A. Like all transfer devices

Figure 10. View from the wheelhouse searchlight aft, with a in the same product family
providing excellent visibility for deck
operations and station keeping remote control. the new unit was

subjected to a rigorous
 Free Deck Size - The transfer specialist recommended a test regime, to verify the
minimum clear landing area of 7.0m by 7.0m based on the defined safe operating
station keeping tolerances, the size of the capsule (+/- 1m for envelope for the device.
the landing inaccuracy) and clearance for passenger access These testing and
(+/- 1m). This specified landing area is suitable for operations verification programme
up to 4.0m significant wave height, but this area may be are unique in the industry
reduced for set weather criteria, subject to a case specific risk and setting the Frog
assessment. As the CrewZer class provides ample deck area, completely apart from any

Figure 13. Frog 9 undergoing
with over 9.0m of working width and even with a half deck full other transfer devices. immersion testing
of cargo, a safe landing zone is assured.

The capsule was designed and tested to withstand very high
 Deck Condition - The CrewZer deck has no obstructions impact loads:-
that pose either trip hazards or causes of potential impact
with the transfer capsule. The deck has a non slip finish and  Vertical impact speed: 10.5 ft/sec (3.25m/sec).
is clearly marked with a landing zone to aid the crane driver in  Lateral impact speed: 6.5 ft/sec (2m/sec).
aligning the lift. A review of collision hazards was performed  Max. significant wave height: 16 ft (5m).
with no major hazards identified in the vicinity of the deck.  Angle of stability (loaded) 35°

September 2009 5



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

Model FROG-9
Sig. wave Max. wave Fixed Semi-sub FPSO to Vessel to

height. height. platform to Vessel Vessel Vessel 
(m/ft) (m/ft) to Vessel

≤ 1.0m/3' ≤ 1.9m/ 6'    
≤ 1.5m/5' ≤ 2.8m/ 9'    
≤ 2.0m/7' ≤ 3.7m/12'    
≤ 2.5m/8' ≤ 4.6m/15'    
≤ 3.0m/10' ≤ 5.6m/18'    
≤ 3.5m/11' ≤ 6.5m/21'    
≤ 4.0m/13' ≤ 7.5m/24'    
≤ 4.5m/15' ≤ 8.4m/28'    
≤ 5.0m/16' ≤ 9.3m/30'    
≤ 5.5m/18' ≤ 10.2m/33'    

Key
 Low risk of high landing or take-off velocity, and exceeding 

Frog-9 personnel damping.
 Increasing risk of high landing or take-off velocity. 

Consideration of hook speed and consideration of all other factors 
is recommended to ensure controlled landing and take-off. Dry run
to assess risk (without personnel) also recommended.

 High risk of high landing or take-off velocity. Not recommended
for routine operations unless a specific hazard analysis can 
demonstrate otherwise.

Figure 14. Recommended Operating Envelope for Frog 9

Operating Procedures and Control

Safely achieving high rates of transfer safely requires more
than just well designed vessels and transfer equipment. There Figure 15. Frog 9 Loading Pattern and Passenger Flow Control
are many opportunities to further enhance the safety and Design
transfer rates by increasing risk awareness, development high
quality procedures, communications tools and training the transfer rates. The greatest potential time saving (or loss)
routines. Pre-transfer planning and preparation are also is aligned to the experience and drill of the crews embarking
essential. and disembarking. 

Training - When new routines or equipment are introduced, it Launch and Early Service
is essential to ensure that an appropriate training is
performed. Passenger need to be instructed on how to Two years after the developing the initial concept, the Seacor
approach, strap themselves in and disembark from the Cheetah, complete with enhanced transfer system was
transfer capsule. Operators of the equipment, vessel officially launched in February 2008. The vessel was
captains, deck crews, crane operators and platform crews, demonstrated in Gulf of Mexico, Trinidad, Mexico, Brazil,
need to be clear about best practices including risk before setting sail for Angola to begin its first long term
awareness, knowledge of procedures and the safe operation contract. On 17th May 2008, the vessel began a 3 year
the equipment and its operating limits. They also need to contract providing marine and crew transfer services to
establish clear protocols for communication. Sonangol, the National oil Company of Angola.

High quality user manuals were developed which detail all Passengers are processed on the departure lounge on Sonils
aspects of the transfer equipment operation, inspection and jetty close to where the vessel berths. Procedures are very
maintenance. Maintaining the integrity of personnel lifting similar to those found at an airport. The passengers are
equipment requires the implementation of rigorous checked-in against a booking list and issued with a boarding
inspection, certification and maintenance regimes. card. Next the passengers are security screened and then

wait in a secure area until boarding starts. Luggage is X-rayed
A key aspect of the operation was to organise the efficient and stowed in a sealed luggage bag; the passenger is re-
flow of passenger's board and disembark, to prevent united with his baggage when he reaches his destination.
confusion and delays during transfer activity. Transfer briefing
videos were developed, similar to those used for helicopter 15 minutes before the vessel is due to depart the passengers
operations. These are shown to crews prior to commencing are escorted to the vessel, their boarding cards are collected
operations. The video explains the passenger boarding at the bottom of the gangway as a further security check.
process and this information is also repeated in seat back Onboard the passengers are lead to the passenger cabin
safety cards. where they will stay for the duration of the transfer.

Passenger Boarding Procedure - When using a 9- Service Description 
passenger transfer device, there are potentially up to 20
persons on deck at any one time, including 9 departures, 9 The Seacor Cheetah supports all the installations in Block 3
arrivals and 2 deck crew. This level of traffic requires close for 5 days of the week with passenger runs to the
management, to both minimise the safety risks and optimise accommodation Barge Kissama on Monday, Tuesday

September 2009 6



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

15 knots the predominant swell has a long period and is from
the Southwest at 2 metres, currents are generally strong, the
Benguala current follows the coast from the south, during the
rainy season there is a strong out flow from the Congo River
to the Northeast of the field which affect operations.

All passengers for block 3 are disembarked on the Barge
Kissama which is moored by 8 anchors (see Figure 17). The
barge is moored head to swell and has only one crane on the
starboard quarter. With this configuration the Cheetah has
very few options to set up for the passenger transfer, the
vessels high engine and thruster power together with the DP2
installation allows the Captain to find a balance between the
swell and current to produce a stable platform for passenger
transfers. 

Service Performance Record 
Figure 16. Frog 9 Transfers underway at the FPSO Gimboa So far the Cheetah has performed 364 service days, with

utilization level of 40%. The vessel is proving a robust and
reliable workhorse.

The Seacor Cheetah has transferred approximately 21,000
personnel in the first year of service with zero incidents. The
average number of passengers per week is 400; however a
typical crew change day will transport 42 persons from
Luanda.

Personnel transfers are conducted at an impressive rate of
108 passengers per hour (both up and down transfers). This
rate of transfer has been achieved by adopting good
procedural control and establishing experienced crews. 

Transfer Rate Performance

It is desirable to try to maximize the transfer rate, without
jeopardizing the safety or control of the activity, for the

Figure 17. Accommodation barge Kissama following reasons:

 The exposure of vessels operating in close proximity to the
installation is reduced.
 Vessel utilization is increased, enabling more transfers and
extending routing options.
 Passenger transit time is reduced, benefiting productivity
and morale.
 The risk of fatigue for vessel captains and crane operators
is reduced.

Figure 18. The Cheetah on crew change duties at semi Sub
Aleutian Key

Wednesday and Friday and a food run to all Sonangol
installations in Block 2, 3 &4 on Friday evening/Saturday
morning. Thursday is a mixed passenger/ cargo run to the
FPSO Gimboa in Block 4 (see Figure 16). Sunday is set aside
for maintenance. The main port facility is in Luanda to the
North of Angola, with the oil installations laying some 180 kms
offshore. Typical wind and weather conditions for offshore Figure 19. Using dual Frog 9's achieved a maximum transfer
Angola are; winds are generally light to moderate typically 10- rate of 125 pax/hr

September 2009 7



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

FROG-3 Rope Basket FROG-9 (Benchmark) FROG-9 (Dual)
Transfer times (seconds) 3 Person 4 Person 9 Person 9 Person
Passengers board 50 20 120 120
Prepare for Lifting 30 30 30 30
Lift Vertical 30 40 30 30
Slew Sideways 30 40 30 30
Lift Vertical 120 150 120 120
Slew Sideways 30 40 30 30
Lower onto Deck 50 70 50 50
Passengers exit 30 20 60 60
Passengers board 50 20 120 120
Prepare for Lifting 30 30 30 30
Lift Vertical 30 40 30 30
Slew Sideways 30 40 30 30
Lift Vertical 120 150 120 120
Slew Sideways 30 40 30 30
Lower onto Deck 50 70 50 50
Passengers exit 30 20 60 60
Total (secs) 740 820 940 580
Total Cycle Time (min) 12.3 13.7 15.7 9.7
(Up and Down) Transfers / hour 9.7 8.8 7.7 12.4
Pax / transfer 3 4 9 9
Passenger transferred / hr 29 35 69 112
Variation -17% 0% 96% 218%

Figure 20. Table of Transfer Time Comparison Activity off critical path

Service & Safety Performance
Transfer Rates pax/hour

120 With over, 60,000 miles travelled and 21,000 transfers now
100 completed in Angola, the new transfer solution has delivered

an impressive safety performance with zero incidents. The
80 vessel has also demonstrated its capability for station keeping
60 in adverse sea conditions and is routinely required to maintain

station some 5 meters from the installations. 
40

20 Passengers find the journey comfortable and often sleep
0 during the transit. 

FROG 3 Rope Basket FROG 9 FROG 9
(Benchmark) (Dual)

Figure 21. Chart of Passenger Transfer Rate Comparison 

A traditional collapsible basket provides a benchmark transfer
rate of approximately 35 passengers per hour. 

In good weather this rate may be marginally better than the
Frog-3 device, due to its larger passenger capacity and also
the time taken to fasten harnesses. The Frog-9, when used by
crews familiar with loading and unloading procedure can
achieve in excess of 69 passengers per hour. 

In Sonangol's operations, where passenger lists of 120 were
routine, the transfer activity was further optimized by using
two Frog-9 capsules in tandem. One capsule was positioned Figure 22. Passengers relaxed during transit

on the installation, whilst the other capsule is landed on the Lessons Learnt
vessel. The vessel crew would then unhook the capsule on
the vessel, allowing the crane to pick up the unit on the  After a period of building familiarity and refining the new
installation. Meanwhile, the capsule on the vessel would be arrangements, the vessel crew and passengers now perform
unloaded and another batch of passengers loaded, ready for these operations with ease and comfort. 
transfer to the installation. This cycle of tandem lifts would
continue until all passengers' transfers were complete. In  Detailed supervision and planning of the passenger flow
effect, this approach removes all loading and unloading (loading / unloading operations) is essential achieving high
activity from the critical path, which allowed the operator, transfer rates.
Sonangol, to routinely achieve transfer rates of 108 pax/hr.

 Having a plan for the handover of the work vests and
The highest transfer rate achieved to date is 125 pax/hr when maintaining control of deck access paid dividends in
a total of 253 people movements took place in two hours. enhanced transfer time. 

September 2009 8

Passenger Transfer Rates per hour Down Lift Up Lift



Offshore crew supply - Modern marine options challenge helicopters

Conclusions Appendix A
Seacor Cheetah Outline Vessel Specifications

1. After a year of excellent service, the Seacor Cheetah, has
met the key performance objectives of speed, comfort and Length overall 50.29 m
safety. The potential value of the CrewZer Class concept for Length waterline 43.89 m
the offshore industry has been clearly demonstrated. Beam 11.58 m

Draft hull 2.13 m
2. Over 21,000 passengers have been transferred to and from
installations at an average rate of 108 passengers per hour. Fuel capacity 53,314 Litres

Fresh water capacity 14,000 Litres
3. The vessel has been utilised 40% of the time and has Service speed 41.5 knots
operated at an average transit speed of 33 knots. Transfer Deadweight 50.0 tonnes (max 152 t)
time for passengers has  been an average of 4 hours from Installed power 4 x 3300 BHP
check in to arrival at rig site. Main engines 4 x 16V4000 M71

Propulsion system 4 x Hamilton HM811's
4. The system has been shown to offer a highly competitive
alternative to helicopter crew supply, including achieving an Passenger capacity 149
estimated cost saving of around 30%. Survey USCG Sub ChapterT / ABS +A1 HSC 

Crewboat + AMS + DPS-2
5. In addition to providing the crew supply service, the Construction material Aluminium
CrewZer solution has also provided high quality and flexible
logistical support to the operations. The service also provides
important contingencies for fire fighting, emergency
evacuations and medevac.

6. As well as the proven capability of the equipment, the
hearts and minds of the passengers and operators have also
shifted. All have embraced this mode of transportation.

7. The collaboration of a vessel operator and transfer
specialist has proven to be highly beneficial to all parties and
it is envisaged that this collaboration will continue in order to
enhance the capability, safety and transfer rate of vessels yet
to be commissioned.

Authors

Seacor Marine: Steve Douglas General Manager, Seabulk de
Angola LDA

Reflex Marine: David Brittan, Bus Dev. Director.

References

1. SPE 106794-PP “Reducing incidents in marine personnel
transfer” Philip.A.Strong SPE, Reflex Marine Ltd

2. Reflex Marine, Frog 9 User Manual Rev 01

3. Seacor Marine - Risk Assessment of Crew Transfer
Operations in the US Gulf of Mexico , Sept 07

4. American Ship Review 2008/ 2009 Issue No 119

September 2009 9






Construção de Taxonomia SIPAER  
de Fatores Humanos 

 
1

Rodolfo dos Santos Sampaio – MsC  
Instituto de Pesquisas e Ensaios em Voo 

 
Palavras Chave: Fatores Humanos. Investigação Aeronáutica. Taxonomia. Teoria da Classificação Facetada.  
 

BIOGRAFIA  

 Somente após essa etapa do processo sistêmico da 

1 - Capitão Aviador da Força Aérea Brasileira, piloto de investigação, são emitidas medidas preventivas, chamadas de 

prova, piloto de asas rotativas. Mestre em Segurança de Recomendações de Segurança Operacional (RSO). Com a 

Aviação e Aeronavegabilidade Continuada, pelo ITA. intenção de evitar a recorrência de acidentes, estas 

Especialista em investigação e prevenção de acidentes Recomendações fornecem informações claras para tomada de 

aeronáuticos. Atualmente, é chefe da seção de coordenação decisão, visando à eliminação e ao controle de uma condição 

de operações aéreas e da seção de investigação e prevenção de risco. 

de acidentes aeronáuticos do IPEV.  

 Os ensinamentos do acidente, para cumprir sua finalidade de 

RESUMO  prevenção, devem ser transformados em linguagem apropriada. 
Nesse sentido, os especialistas de segurança de aviação fazem 

 
uso da taxonomia de fatores contribuintes de acidentes para 

O presente estudo tem o objetivo de analisar o impacto do 
auxiliar a organização e o compartilhamento da informação 

emprego do conhecimento científico direcionado à 
com uma linguagem comum. 

elaboração de taxonomias de fatores humanos no âmbito do 
 

Sistema de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes 
A taxonomia, acompanhada de um glossário padrão, torna-se 

Aeronáuticos (SIPAER), com fins à construção de 
uma significativa representação do conhecimento. Ainda que 

Recomendações de Segurança Operacional (RSO). A 
ela não explique o erro humano presente no acidente, essa 

pesquisa exploratória adota procedimentos metodológicos 
classificação provê um meio de rastrear os erros e o contexto 

estruturados por meio da dialética, com base nos princípios 
em que se inserem. 

normativos da Teoria da Classificação Facetada (TCF), do 
 

autor Ranganathan. A interpretação analítica de conteúdo 
Além de classificar, uma taxonomia facilita o acesso à 

da taxonomia SIPAER, atualmente em uso, indica os 
informação, já que possui o intuito de representar conceitos 

seguintes resultados: construção de classes com pouca 
através de termos, agilizar a comunicação entre especialistas e 

presença de subcategorias e poucos níveis hierárquicos; 
outros públicos, encontrar o consenso, propor formas de 

presença de fatores com significado semelhante; termos 
controle da diversidade de significação e oferecer um mapa de 

com possibilidade de classificação em diferentes aspectos; 
área que servirá como guia em processo de conhecimento 

fatores contribuintes com foco na função e não no fato/erro; 
(Terra et al., 2005). 

naturezas distintas sob a mesma característica de divisão; e 
 

fatores mal dispostos nas categorias. Adicionalmente, é 
Sob esta ótica, surgiu a inquietação quanto à estrutura da 

sugerida a inclusão de dezoito subcategorias intermediando 
taxonomia de fatores contribuintes em acidentes aeronáuticos, 

as nomenclaturas mais gerais e as mais particulares. A 
sendo, portanto, abordado um assunto relacionado à Gestão do 

conclusão indica um impacto positivo da aplicação da TCF 
Conhecimento e aplicado à Segurança de Voo.  

na elaboração de taxonomias no âmbito do SIPAER, por 
 

evidenciar a possibilidade de aperfeiçoar esta classificação. 
A delimitação conceitual do tema foi realizada com base nos 

Por fim, é verificado que a introdução de diferentes 
fatores contribuintes ligados ao erro humano, também 

camadas da hierarquia tem o valor de prover um meio de 
chamados de fatores humanos. Os fatores materiais foram 

rastrear não apenas quais erros ocorrem, mas também qual 
suprimidos em razão da grande disparidade de métodos para 

o contexto em que se inserem, propiciando condições de 
investigação (raízes causais significativamente distintas) e da 

elaborar RSO mais específicas, claras e objetivas. 
pequena representatividade em relação à totalidade dos fatores 

 
contribuintes de acidentes aeronáuticos. 

INTRODUÇÃO 
 

 
Logo, diante da inquietação mencionada, a presente pesquisa 

As investigações de acidentes aeronáuticos têm como 
tem o propósito de investigar o seguinte problema: 

“única finalidade a prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos” 
a taxonomia de fatores humanos relacionados às ocorrências 

(BRASIL, 2008a, p. 8). Essa meta, em conformidade com 
aeronáuticas contempla orientações científicas para a 

regulamentos internacionais, é cumprida por meio do 
construção de um modelo de representação do conhecimento 

levantamento dos fatores contribuintes presentes nos 
apto à construção de medidas preventivas? 

acidentes.  

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1042 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Diante do exposto, define-se como oportuno obter respostas REFERENCIAL TEÓRICO: TEORIA DA 
que atendam, com critérios científicos, o problema CLASSIFICAÇÃO FACETADA 
apresentado. Para tanto, são consideradas as seguintes 

 
questões norteadoras (QN): 

Dado que o ato de classificar é intrínseco aos processos 
 

intelectuais humanos, torna-se natural a criação e o 
QN1) Como são caracterizados os princípios teóricos para 

aperfeiçoamento de ferramentas de organização do 
construção de taxonomias aplicadas à gestão do 

conhecimento. Pela ordenação de ideias afins, emerge o 
conhecimento? 

conceito de taxonomia como resultado de um longo processo 
QN2) Como é definida a taxonomia de fatores humanos 

histórico, por meio de estudos e investigações, que culminaram 
aplicada à investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos? 

em uma construção teórica (AGANETTE et al., 2010). 
QN3) Que aspectos indicam a aplicabilidade da taxonomia 

 
de fatores humanos em acidentes aeronáuticos para a 

No papel de marco teórico do artigo, a TCF tem sua origem 
emissão de medidas mitigadoras?  

nos métodos científicos de classificação do matemático indiano 
 

Shialy Ranganathan. A TCF baseia-se na idéia de dividir os 
Este estudo tem o objetivo geral de analisar o impacto do 

assuntos em categorias ou facetas, isto é, em grupos de classes 
emprego de conhecimento científico direcionado à 

reunidos por um mesmo princípio de divisão (SALES; 
elaboração de taxonomias para a classificação de acidentes 

MOTTA, 2010).  
no âmbito do Sistema de Investigação e Prevenção de 

 
Acidentes Aeronáuticos (SIPAER), com fins à construção 

As facetas podem ser vistas como “a totalidade das subdivisões 
de estratégias mitigadoras. 

resultantes da aplicação de uma única característica” 
 

(PIEDADE, 1977, p. 22). Para se representar uma taxonomia 
A pesquisa é pretende visualizar cientificamente um 

de fato, é preciso que cada termo dentro da hierarquia seja algo 
elemento básico para a atividade aérea e, por conseguinte, 

da relação gênero/espécie (VOGEL, 2012). 
para a Força Aérea Brasileira: o tratamento da informação 

 
aplicada à investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos. No 

Com o desenvolvimento deste novo sistema de classificação, 
aprimoramento dos níveis de segurança operacional, os 

Ranganathan buscava maior flexibilidade que “permitisse a 
ensinamentos colhidos nas investigações são aplicados no 

síntese, o agrupamento de vários componentes para a 
modo de operação das aeronaves. Os relatórios finais, 

especificação do assunto” (ARAÚJO, 2006, p. 126). 
frutos de investigações dessa natureza, corroboram essa 

 
relevância, já que assumem papel destacado no 

A perspectiva da teoria de Ranganathan permite classificar o 
direcionamento do comportamento humano da atividade 

domínio por meio de várias categorias, possibilitando a 
aérea, em vista de evitar a ocorrência de novos acidentes.  

organização dos conceitos (NOVO, 2010). Para o autor da 
 

Teoria, a taxonomia é um sistema de conceitos relacionados 
Ao abordar a análise técnico-científica de um acidente, 

que necessita de princípios classificatórios para ser organizado 
inserida no processo de investigação, a presente pesquisa 

(SALES; MOTTA, 2010). A TCF pressupõe a organização das 
busca examinar como a presente taxonomia de fatores 

facetas, ordem fundamental para a apresentação de taxonomias 
contribuintes de acidentes aeronáuticos pode afetar a 

e da formulação de relações.  
construção das RSO, em função da literatura científica 

 
selecionada.   

Da TCF, têm-se usado, como orientação metodológica para 
 

construção de taxonomias, três princípios de Ranganathan: 
Nesse contexto, essa classificação torna-se uma ferramenta 

categorização; cânones para a construção das classes; e 
de representação voltada à codificação, à coordenação e à 

princípios para ordenação de classes e seus elementos. 
transferência do conhecimento aeronáutico. No entanto, em 
termos práticos, a taxonomia transcende esse conceito. Não  

é apenas um vocabulário controlado de termos, mas uma Categorização 
 

classificação sistemática, a qual segue “certos princípios 
Consiste na escolha de categorias para a posterior 

estruturais que ultrapassam em complexidade as normas de 
sistematização dos conceitos de uma área. Segundo Campos e 

um sistema de classificação” (BLOOM, 1972 apud 
Gomes (2008 apud SALES; MOTTA, 2010), categorização é 

AGANETTE, 2010, p. 52). 
um processo que visa determinar as classes de maior 

 
abrangência dentro da temática escolhida. 

O embasamento teórico utilizado como referencial para a 
 

adoção de critérios de análise é fruto do estudo do autor 
Ranganathan, chamado Teoria da Classificação Facetada Cânones para Construção das Classes 

 
(TCF), a qual é abordada em seção específica do artigo. Na 

A taxonomia é formada por grupos de facetas reunidos por um 
sequência, são estabelecidos os procedimentos 

mesmo princípio de divisão. Cada categoria se subdivide em 
metodológicos e a classificação da pesquisa, 

classes e esta divisão deve estar apoiada em princípios 
proporcionando meios de discutir o assunto proposto. Por 

normativos (cânones), os quais minimizam a subjetividade 
fim, após a análise, são observadas conclusões acerca da 

inerente a qualquer processo classificatório e permitem o 
influência das teorias científicas na elaboração de 

estabelecimento de uma conduta uniforme na formação dos 
taxonomias voltadas à classificação de acidentes no âmbito 

renques e cadeias.  
do SIPAER.  

 
 

O Quadro 01 apresenta a descrição dos cânones, em função das 
classes de conceitos descritas por Gomes et al. (2006). 
 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1043 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro 01 – Tipos de Cânones por Classe de Conceito. 

Classe de Conceito Tipo de Cânone Descrição 
Extensão decrescente Maior número de características específicas. 

Ordem de uma classe de conceitos deve ter uma sequência 
Cadeia 

Modulação  explícita que respeite cada elo da cadeia por meio de um 
conceito único. 

Exaustividade As classes devem esgotar todos os conceitos daquela classe. 
Exclusividade Os elementos de uma classe não devem constituir outra classe. 

A sequência dos elementos em uma classe deve ser útil ao 
Renques Sequência útil propósito daqueles a quem ela se destina, antes mesmo de ser 

lógica. 
Sempre que existirem classes semelhantes, a sequência de seus 

Sequência consistente 
elementos deve ser paralela em todas aquelas classes.  

Diferenciação Uma característica deve dar origem a pelo menos duas classes. 
A característica deve ser relevante para o propósito da 

Relevância 
Característica de classificação. 
divisão Verificabilidade Determina que a característica deve ser definitiva e verificável. 

A característica deve ser mantida enquanto não houver mudança 
Permanência 

no propósito da classificação. 
Duas características não devem dar origem ao mesmo renque de 

Concomitância 
conceitos. 

Sucessão das 
A sucessão de características deve ser relevante para o propósito 

características de Sucessão Relevante 
da classificação. 

divisão 
A sucessão de características deve ser seguida de forma 

Sucessão Consistente 
consistente, enquanto não mudar o propósito da classificação. 

Fonte: Gomes et al., 2006. 
 
Neste item, estão evidenciadas as relações hierárquicas e f) ordem convencional ou da sequência canônica; 
partitivas dos fatores humanos constituintes da taxonomia g) ordem da categoria favorecida ou da garantia literária;  
SIPAER. A conceituação das classes compreende as h) ordem alfabética.  
seguintes definições:   

a) cadeias - são séries verticais de conceitos, em que A Teoria apresentada, além de responder à QN1, torna-se 
cada conceito tem uma característica a mais ou a aplicável ao contexto da presente pesquisa por permitir uma 
menos; análise ampla do problema, tornando possível a 

b) renques - são séries horizontais de conceito, com “simultaneidade dos critérios classificatórios” (ARAÚJO, 
classes formadas a partir de uma única 2006, p. 127), o que representa uma característica própria da 
característica de divisão; e taxonomia estudada. 

c) características de divisão – atributos que têm a  
função de agrupar os conceitos existentes na Ranganathan, cujo papel na evolução das classificações do 
natureza, de acordo com a semelhança de conhecimento tornou-se evidente (GOMES et al., 2006), 
determinadas características. possibilita analisar a taxonomia SIPAER ao propor bases 

 teóricas que estabelecem conceitos construídos com critérios 
Princípios para Ordenação de Classes e seus Elementos firmemente estabelecidos e princípios científicos de 
 classificação reconhecidos.  
Formada por princípios de divisão, ou seja, normas que  
orientam a divisão dos conceitos em uma mesma faceta, METODOLOGIA 
segundo determinadas características.  

 
 

São apresentados a seguir a classificação da pesquisa e os 
Estes princípios se referem à ordenação dos vários 

procedimentos metodológicos utilizados, em vista à validação 
elementos nas classes e subclasses. A sequência em que os 

científica deste trabalho. 
elementos de um assunto são citados é comumente 

 
chamada de ordem de citação das características de divisão.  

Classificação 
 

 
Embora estas sequências sejam estabelecidas, não existe 

Para atingir os objetivos propostos, foi realizada pesquisa 
uma ordem padrão estabelecida ou um princípio primário. 

exploratória, no intuito de ampliar o conhecimento sobre a 
Entretanto, a TCF indica ser importante manter a coerência 

estrutura, as definições e as orientações científicas de 
na aplicação das ordens eleitas para cada caso.  

construção de taxonomias para análise deste item no contexto 
 

da Força Aérea Brasileira. Como tal, proporciona “maior 
Os oito princípios listados por Ranganathan para ordenação 

familiaridade com o problema, com vistas a torná-lo mais 
são:  

explícito” (GIL, 2007, p. 41).  
a) ordem crescente ou da medida quantitativa;  

 
b) ordem cronológica ou posterior no tempo; 

A metodologia é classificada ainda, quanto aos procedimentos 
c) ordem evolucionária ou posterior na evolução; 

técnicos, como pesquisa bibliográfica, com fontes do estudo 
d) proximidade de espaço ou contiguidade espacial; 

desenvolvidas a partir de material já elaborado, principalmente 
e) ordem de complexidade crescente; 

aquelas publicadas em livros, teses, revistas, relatórios e 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1044 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



artigos científicos. A pesquisa se dedica à compreensão dos Para o alcance dessa proposta, é empregada uma sequência de 
significados e conceitos existentes na literatura acerca da análises qualitativas de conteúdo. Esse tipo de exame consiste 
construção de taxonomia aplicada à investigação de na verificação do material com controle metodológico, na 
acidentes, com o objetivo de realizar inferências e sem a divisão do contexto em unidades e no desenvolvimento em 
necessidade de apoiar-se em informações estatísticas. Tais sistema de categorias guiadas por teoria. Essa categorização 
características revelam o cunho qualitativo do estudo. determina os aspectos que devem ser filtrados do material. A 
 análise qualitativa de conteúdo é apropriada ainda para 
Procedimentos Metodológicos tratamento de texto de maneira sistemática, mesmo lidando 
 com grande quantidade de texto. 
As bases metodológicas do estudo estão estruturadas por  
meio da dialética, a qual se caracteriza como método de Seguindo as definições de Mayring (2000), são utilizadas duas 
interpretação dinâmica e totalizante da realidade, formas básicas de análise qualitativa de conteúdo, explicativa e 
considerando os fatos dentro de um contexto determinado estruturativa, as quais estão especificadas no Quadro 02, 
(LAKATOS; MARCONI, 1993). juntamente com os tópicos relevantes da pesquisa que serão 
 objeto dessas análises.  
O método permite compreender a realidade como processo  
racional, desenvolvido com base na contradição. Da união Dentro da lógica da análise de conteúdo, define-se, de 
incessante de contrários (tese e antítese), surge uma antemão, as dimensões de categorização. São, portanto, fixados 
categoria superior: a síntese. Logo, o processo dialético critérios de seleção para a criação de categorias, em função do 
consta desses três momentos: tese, antítese e síntese. Uma objeto da análise e da literatura especializada. 
antítese opõe-se a uma tese e o conflito destas vai organizar  
uma síntese. Inicialmente, é analisada a taxonomia de fatores contribuintes 
 ligados aos fatores humanos em uso no SIPAER. Visando à 
A tese é representada pelas definições da taxonomia compreensão do assunto, a base da literatura é formada pelo 
SIPAER atualmente em uso. A antítese é formulada a partir Manual de Comando da Aeronáutica (MCA 3-6) e pela Norma 
da interpretação analítica dos pontos negativos da tese, de Sistema do Comando da Aeronáutica (NSCA 3-6) que 
evidenciando sua contradição: princípios da construção de tratam da investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos. 
taxonomias não aplicados ou fracamente aplicados, de  
acordo com os critérios observados no referencial teórico. A seguir, são apontados os critérios para discussão da 
 construção de taxonomias, com fins à indicação dos princípios 
A síntese é uma proposição superior que, em princípio, não observados na atual taxonomia SIPAER à luz da Teoria da 
consiste na fusão dos pontos positivos da tese e das Classificação Facetada (TCF). 
propostas de melhoria dos pontos negativos apontados na   
antítese. Nesse sentido, é elaborada uma nova taxonomia, Por fim, para fornecer consistência à análise, empregam-se os 
utilizando etapas definidas e preestabelecidas para critérios estabelecidos na construção de uma nova taxonomia 
construção de taxonomia em consonância com os princípios de fatores humanos, resultando em uma estrutura classificatória 
da TCF.  hierárquica por facetas, em conformidade com o referencial 
 teórico. Nesse intuito, são utilizadas as cinco etapas para 
A síntese, portando, atende ao objetivo da pesquisa, construção de modelos de representação do conhecimento 
definido como a análise da influência da variável A em B, indicadas no estudo de Vital e Café (2007), respeitando os 
onde A é caracterizado pelo conhecimento científico critérios anteriormente estabelecidos.  
baseado na Teoria da Classificação Facetada e B é  
identificado como a taxonomia SIPAER de fatores A literatura base das análises e a descrição dos critérios para 
humanos contribuintes para ocorrência de acidentes. seleção e criação de categorias estão indicadas no Quadro 03. 
 

Quadro 02 - Tipos de Análise. 

Dialética 
Tipo de Análise Descrição da Análise Objeto de análise 

analisada 

Aspectos ligados à atual 

Objetiva acrescentar material a Tese taxonomia SIPAER de fatores 

determinados segmentos do texto, humanos. 

Explicativa para aumentar a compreensão, para Princípios da construção de 
esclarecer, explicar e interpretar um taxonomias não observados ou 
determinado segmento. Antítese 

fracamente aplicados pelo objeto 
da Tese. 

Objetiva filtrar determinados Construção de taxonomia de 
aspectos do material; estabelecer fatores humanos seguindo 
um recorte do material na base de modelos de representação do 

Estruturativa Síntese 
critérios preestabelecidos; ou de conhecimento, combinando 
avaliar o material na base de aspectos analisados pelos objetos 
determinados critérios. da tese e antítese. 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1045 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro 03 – Literatura Base e Descrição dos Critérios. 

Objeto de análise Literatura Base Critérios/ Descrição 

MCA 3-6 (BRASIL, Taxonomia de fatores contribuintes ligados aos fatores 
Taxonomia SIPAER de 

2011) e NSCA 3-6 humanos. 
fatores humanos 

(BRASIL, 2008a). 

1. Categorização; 
Teoria da Classificação 2. Cânones para a construção das classes: 

Princípios da Facetada – TCF  cadeia e renque; 
construção de 
taxonomias (RANGANATHAN,  característica de divisão; 

1967)  sucessão das características de divisão; 
3. Princípios para ordenação de classes e seus elementos. 

1. Estabelecimento das categorias gerais;  

Construção de Práticas de elaboração de 2. Coleta dos termos; 

taxonomia de fatores taxonomia 3. Análise dos termos selecionados; 
humanos  (VITAL; CAFÉ, 2007). 4. Controle da diversidade de significação; e 

5. Construção dos relacionamentos semânticos. 

 
DISCUSSÕES E ANÁLISES De acordo com a área de abordagem, os fatores são divididos 

 em materiais e humanos. Os últimos constituem o erro mais 
comum na aviação. Segundo o National Transportation Safety 

Em seguida à apresentação das metodologias e critérios da Board (2010), a falha humana foi citada como fator 
pesquisa, são realizadas discussões e análises, organizadas contribuinte em 70 a 80% das ocorrências pesquisadas. Outra 
nas fases da dialética.  pesquisa, da Federal Aviation Administration, indica que três 
 em cada quatro acidentes resultam do erro humano (ESTADOS 
Tese - Taxonomia SIPAER de Fatores Humanos UNIDOS, 2009). 
  
Poderia ser questionado: se o acidente já ocorreu, por que Os fatores humanos da taxonomia SIPAER estão divididos em 
classificar os erros? Segundo Dekker (2001), a classificação Aspecto Médico, Psicológico e Operacional (BRASIL, 2011). 
dos fenômenos observados é fundamental para a ciência. Desses, apenas o Aspecto Psicológico tem subdivisões 
Ela serve para ordenar a realidade empírica e cria uma intermediárias (variáveis individuais, psicossociais e 
estrutura causal que apoia a compreensão.  Assim também organizacionais) em relação às categorias mais específicas. No 
ocorre com a dinâmica de um acidente aeronáutico, cujo caso do Aspecto Operacional, há um agrupamento segundo 
entendimento é realizado pelo levantamento dos fatores uma condição: estar ou não relacionado ao Sistema de Tráfego 
contribuintes para o evento e determinado por meio de um Aéreo (ATS). Na MCA 3-6, um glossário padrão acompanha a 
processo investigativo. taxonomia SIPAER para a codificação textual dos dados, 
 incluindo setenta e sete fatores que formam as classes mais 
Para responder à QN2, essa parte do trabalho aborda a específicas.  
taxonomia aplicada à investigação aeronáutica. Esta é uma  
atividade, no Brasil, de responsabilidade do Estado e Em seguida à apresentação do escopo da Tese e, por 
delegada ao Comando da Aeronáutica, conforme conseguinte, da resposta à QN2, delimitada pela taxonomia 
preceituam os artigos 12, 25 e 86 do Código Brasileiro de SIPAER de fatores humanos, é realizada a análise explicativa 
Aeronáutica e o Anexo 13 à Convenção de Chicago, este da Antítese.  
último intitulado Investigação de Acidentes e Incidentes  
Aeronáuticos (SOUZA, 2009). Antítese – Crítica à Taxonomia SIPAER de Fatores 
 Humanos 
O Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes  
Aeronáuticos (CENIPA) é órgão central do SIPAER, o qual O exame da taxonomia SIPAER, por meio dos critérios 
representa um modelo sistêmico único no mundo, por estabelecidos na TCF, requer que sejam especificados os 
abranger a investigação de acidentes, tanto no âmbito da aspectos que indicam a aplicabilidade da taxonomia de fatores 
aviação civil como da aviação militar. humanos para a emissão de medidas mitigadoras. Esse tópico é 
 o teor da QN3, a qual é atendida pelas informações contidas na 
O aprendizado da análise de um acidente é traduzido em NSCA 3-9.  
ações de segurança específicas e objetivas, por meio da  
emissão das RSO. Estas são redigidas após o Segundo essa Norma (BRASIL, 2008b), são emitidas RSO no 
estabelecimento dos fatores presentes no acidente, ou seja, intuito de possibilitar a ação direta ou a tomada de decisões 
da correlação dos acontecimentos do evento catastrófico para eliminar os fatores contribuintes ou a minimizar as suas 
com a taxonomia de fatores contribuintes, contida no consequências. Para a elaboração dessas recomendações, as 
Manual de Investigação do SIPAER (MCA 3-6) e descrita taxonomias devem observar alguns aspectos (BRASIL, 2008b), 
em Anexo nesse artigo.  tais como: 
 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1046 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



a) texto claro e objetivo na forma e no conteúdo, de Cânones para a Construção das Classes - Cadeia e Renque 
modo que a interpretação conduza ao seu  
cumprimento eficaz;  Entre os princípios para a construção de classes relacionados 

b) direcionamento a um perigo específico; ao conceito de cadeia e renque, indicados no Quadro 04, é 
c) possibilidade de indicar uma ação que aponte verificado que o cânone da Modulação é fracamente 

mecanismos capazes de eliminar ou diminuir a observado. Esse princípio prescreve que as seguidas divisões 
potencialidade do desvio identificado;  devem ficar explícitas por meio de um conceito único 

d) emissão de uma recomendação para cada fator (GOMES et al., 2006). Constata-se que a cadeia de classes da 
contribuinte indicado;  taxonomia SIPAER, por vezes, não compreende uma classe em 

e) indicação dos fatores sem quantificação do grau de cada etapa de subdivisão. Nesse caso, o estabelecimento da 
contribuição. cadeia é realizado por subdivisão tácita.  

  
Depois de evidenciadas quais características são relevantes Os fatores não ligados aos órgãos ATS, relacionados ao 
à emissão de RSO, inicia-se a apresentação da Antítese. Aspecto Operacional, por exemplo, estabelecem conceitos com 
Nessa fase do método dialético, são expostas as críticas à poucos níveis hierárquicos e com categorias moderadamente 
classificação sistemática de fatores humanos, com foco nos afins. Indicar com clareza as relações hierárquicas é de suma 
princípios da construção de taxonomias não observados ou importância, pois a base da taxonomia é a ordenação de 
fracamente aplicados.  conceitos interligados em uma sucessão lógica (NOVO, 2010). 
 Estes devem, no entanto, apresentar texto claro e objetivo 
A apresentação dos dados está disposta em Quadros, sendo (BRASIL, 2008b), em contrapartida às divisões implícitas 
mencionados no texto à medida que são analisados.  verificadas.  
  
Categorização Cânones para a construção das classes - característica de 
 divisão 
Aplicar a categorização é analisar o domínio por meio das  
categorias de maior abrangência (CAMPOS; GOMES, Entre os cânones para a construção de classes relacionados ao 
2008), indicados dentro da temática escolhida, observa-se conceito de característica de divisão, apresentados nos 
que os Aspectos Médico e Operacional compreendem uma Quadros 05 a 08, verifica-se que os preceitos de Relevância, 
estrutura de suporte com apenas uma subdivisão. A pouca Verificabilidade e Permanência não são atendidos.  
presença de subcategorias restringe a rastreabilidade dos  
erros por não evidenciar o contexto em que se inserem. Para exercer o cânone da Relevância, a taxonomia deve ser 
Logo, a emissão de RSO torna-se muito pouco indutiva, relevante e servir ao propósito da classificação (GOMES et al., 
dado que fatores com poucas semelhanças compartilham 2006) e direcionar a um perigo específico (BRASIL, 2008b), 
mesma categoria. para possibilitar a classificação do erro e permitir a emissão de 

RSO. Todavia, há fatores com significado semelhante, cuja 
classificação poderia gerar recomendações iguais, tal como 
“Ressaca” e “Álcool”.  
 
 

Quadro 04 – Análise dos Cânones Ligados às Cadeias e aos Renques. 

Cumprimento da 
Tipo de Cânone Taxonomia Observação/ Justificativa 

SIPAER 
As categorias mais gerais (denominados aspectos) são compostas por 

Extensão 
Cumpre poucas características, sendo assim bastante abrangente. À medida 

decrescente 
que as características aumentam, o conceito se torna mais específico. 
A sequência de cadeia de classes da taxonomia SIPAER, por vezes, 
não compreende uma classe em cada passo da subdivisão. 
Estabelecimento da cadeia de classes é realizado por subdivisão 

Modulação  Cumpre em Parte 
tácita. Exemplo: o Aspecto Operacional, nos fatores não ligados aos 
órgãos ATS compreende apenas dois níveis, ou seja, os conceitos são 
pouco hierarquizados e as categorias são moderadamente afins.  
A taxonomia SIPAER mapeia o universo de fatores mais recorrentes 
na base de dados de acidentes aeronáuticos. O número de fatores 

Exaustividade Não aplicável 
ligados ao Aspecto Médico, por exemplo, é demasiadamente grande, 
por isso, somente os mais significativos são listados e não todos. 
As classes dos renques são mutuamente exclusivas, ou seja, nenhuma 

Exclusividade Cumpre entidade pertence a mais de uma classe. Não há repetição de termos, 
por isso o cânone é cumprido.  
A sequência das classes nos renques pode ser considerada útil aos 

Sequência útil Cumpre propósitos da classificação, dado que a ordenação dos elementos não 
implica em sequência horizontal compatível.  

Sequência Não é aplicável por não haver classes semelhantes em diferentes 
Não aplicável 

consistente renques, o que justificaria a existência de sequências paralelas. 
 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1047 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro 05 – Análise dos Cânones Ligados à Característica de Divisão. 

Cumprimento da 
Tipo de Cânone Taxonomia Observação/ Justificativa 

SIPAER 
Como a característica usada como base para classificação da 

Diferenciação Cumpre taxonomia SIPAER diferencia suas entidades, isto é, dá origem a 
mais de uma classe, este cânone é cumprido. 
Torna-se irrelevante informar, no estabelecimento da taxonomia, 
que a contribuição de um fator está ligada à função do agente da 

Relevância Não Cumpre ação, sob pena de condicionar aquele fator a apenas uma 
atividade. Os fatores contribuintes devem ter foco no fato (erro) e 
não na pessoa que concorreu para a ação. Ver Quadro 06. 
A análise das definições indica fatores genéricos, os quais 
poderiam ser classificados em diferentes aspectos ou variáveis. 

Verificabilidade Não Cumpre Além disso, um fator indica causa imediata e aparente do erro. 
Nestes casos, é dificultada a emissão de ação corretiva. Ver 
Quadro 07. 
As classes derivadas de seu universo imediato possuem bases 

Permanência Não Cumpre com características distintas, sendo indicadas diferentes 
recomendações para cada caso. Ver Quadro 08. 

 
Torna-se também irrelevante informar, no estabelecimento (BRASIL, 2008b, p. 11). A análise das definições, no entanto, 
da taxonomia, que a contribuição de um fator é específica indica três fatores genéricos. Os itens “Atitude” e 
de uma função, pois o agente de uma falha pode ser o “Característica da Tarefa” poderiam ser classificados em 
piloto, o mecânico, o despachante, o controlador de voo ou diferentes aspectos ou variáveis. Já o fator “Substituição na 
inúmeros outros contribuintes da aviação. A etapa de Posição” refere-se a um local ou uma oportunidade, mas não 
indicar a função do atuante de determinado fator humano é indica causa imediata e aparente do erro. Em todos estes casos, 
posterior à elaboração da taxonomia. Caso contrário, o a emissão de ação corretiva é dificultada pelos argumentos 
número de fatores contribuintes seria muito extenso. apontados.  
  
Condicionar um fato à função do agente pode gerar ainda Para cumprir o princípio da Permanência, uma característica 
uma limitação de classificar aquele fator em apenas uma deve permanecer imutável enquanto não houver mudança na 
atividade. Os fatores contribuintes, portanto, devem ter foco finalidade da classificação (CAMPOS; GOMES, 2008). É 
no fato (erro) e não na pessoa que concorreu para a ação. O ainda necessário que as classes devam ser derivadas de "seu 
fator “Manutenção da Aeronave”, por exemplo, informa o universo imediato, com base em uma e única característica"  
local de trabalho ou a atividade (manutenção), mas não o (GOMES et al., 2006, p. 3). O termo “Sobrecarga de Tarefas”, 
tipo de erro, como supervisão, falha cognitiva, erros de no entanto, pode se referir à saturação física de atividades 
execução, erros de julgamento ou tomada de decisão (Aspecto Médico) ou ainda à elevada carga cognitiva imposta a 
equivocada. um indivíduo (Aspecto Psicológico). Nesses casos, diferentes 
 recomendações acerca do acúmulo de tarefas seriam indicadas.  
Atender ao cânone da Verificabilidade consiste em  
observar se a taxonomia é definitiva (GOMES et al., 2006), Alguns termos são derivados de bases únicas, porém são tão 
ainda que não possa ser verificada. Para tanto, a abrangentes que poderiam gerar outros, como é o caso de 
nomenclatura da taxonomia deve se referir a um perigo “Indisciplina de Voo” e “Julgamento de Pilotagem”. Com 
específico e possibilitar uma proposta de ação (BRASIL, efeito, este último foi indicado como o fator contribuinte mais 
2008b).  presente nos acidentes da aviação civil no período de 2000 a 
 2009, com taxa de incidência de 64,9% das ocorrências 
Logo, o fator deve ser passível de definições precisas. Ou (BRASIL, 2010). A presença recorrente deste fator poderia 
seja, a seleção de características deve ser útil à construção corroborar a necessidade de detalhar o fator em outros termos 
de RSO, cujo texto “deve ser claro e objetivo, de modo que relacionados, facilitando o direcionamento e a personalização 
a interpretação conduza ao seu cumprimento eficaz” da redação das RSO. 
 

 

Quadro 06 – Análise quanto ao Cânone da Relevância. 

Fator Contribuinte Motivo da Irrelevância Sugestão 
- Ressaca Repetido: mesmo emprego do fator Suprimir 

contribuinte Álcool. 
- Fraseologia da Tripulação e Repetido: muda-se apenas a função, é Criar apenas um fator 
Fraseologia do Órgão ATS desnecessário informar a função.  contribuinte sem função 
- Carga de trabalho (ATS) Já existe “Sobrecarga de Tarefas”, é Suprimir 

desnecessário informar a função. 
- Esquecimento do Piloto É desnecessário informar a função. Mudar a nomenclatura 
- Manutenção da aeronave É desnecessário informar a função.  Suprimir 

 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1048 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro 07 – Análise quanto ao Cânone da Verificabilidade. 

Fator Contribuinte Motivo da Não Verificabilidade Sugestão 
- Atitude Fator Genérico: pode se referir a cognições ou Suprimir 

psicocomportamentos. Dificulta a emissão de 
ação corretiva. 

- Característica da Tarefa Fator Genérico: pode se referir a desempenho, Suprimir 
carga de trabalho, fatores ambientais, etc. 
Dificulta a emissão de ação corretiva, pois 
toda tarefa tem uma característica. 

- Substituição na posição (ATS) Refere-se a local ou momento, mas sem causa Suprimir 
imediata aparente (não indica qual a falha ou o 
erro durante a substituição).  

Quadro 08 – Análise quanto ao Cânone da Permanência. 

Fator Contribuinte Motivo da Não Permanência Sugestão 
- Sobrecarga de Tarefas Pode ser gerado de diferentes causas (físicas Criar dois fatores a partir 

ou cognitivas). do original. 
- Motivação Pode ser gerado de diferentes causas Criar dois fatores 

(motivação excessiva ou motivação contribuintes a partir do 
inadequada). original. 

- Julgamento de pilotagem Pode dar origem a outros fatores mais Criar outros dois fatores 
específicos: ações necessárias não realizadas e contribuintes. 
priorização de tarefas. 

- Indisciplina de voo Pode dar origem a outros fatores mais Criar outros dois fatores 
específicos: violação rotineira e desrespeito a contribuintes. 
avaliação de riscos. 

 
Cânones para a Construção das Classes - Sucessão das capazes de eliminar ou diminuir a potencialidade do risco 
Características de Divisão (BRASIL, 2008b). 

  
Entre os cânones para a construção de classes relacionados Para apreciação ao cânone da Sucessão Consistente, é 
ao conceito de sucessão das características de divisão, nota- examinada a constância das sucessivas categorias em relação à 
se que os princípios de Sucessão Relevante e Sucessão finalidade das características de divisão da taxonomia e a 
Consistente, apontados nos Quadros 09 a 11, não são existência de termos com variabilidade do propósito das 
atendidos.   hierarquias (CAMPOS; GOMES, 2008). O Aspecto Médico 
 aborda fatores com pelo menos duas características distintas: 
Para cumprir o cânone da Sucessão Relevante, é ponderado práticas impróprias do próprio agente do erro (consumo de 
se a sucessão de características é relevante para o propósito álcool, dieta inadequada, etc.) e reações adversas do organismo 
da classificação (GOMES et al., 2006). Alguns fatores humano (disbarismo, hipóxia, etc.).  
contribuintes possuem respectivas definições que  
direcionam estes termos a outras posições, ou seja, estão Pela análise dos termos do Aspecto Operacional, as 
mal dispostos. É o caso de “Ansiedade”, “Desorientação” e características e a origem do erro poderiam originar o 
“Ilusões Visuais”, os quais, apesar de posicionados nos agrupamento harmônico de fatores com quatro categorias 
Aspectos Médicos, têm estreita afinidade com fatores afins: fatores ambientais (meteorológicos, físicos, tecnológicos 
cognitivos ou perceptivos, ou seja, com Variáveis e meios para desenvolver a atividade aérea); supervisão e 
Individuais dos Aspectos Psicológicos.  planejamento; falhas (erros de execução e de julgamento); e 
 violação. Mesmo o Aspecto Psicológico, com três subdivisões, 
O fator “Vestimenta Inadequada” está hierarquizado aos poderia reunir termos com propósitos consistentes mais 
Aspectos Médicos, porém não reúne características para específicos. Por exemplo, é significativamente diferente o erro 
essa sucessão. Este termo, se associado a uma subclasse provocado por percepção equivocada e do comportamento 
relacionada a fatores ambientais ou tecnológicos, forneceria inadequado intencional motivado por alterações psicológicas.  
a rastreabilidade necessária para apontar mecanismos  

Quadro 09 – Análise dos Cânones Ligados à Sucessão das Características de Divisão. 

Cumprimento da 
Tipo de Cânone Taxonomia Observação 

SIPAER 
Como a taxonomia SIPAER não menciona características que 

Concomitância Cumpre produzam o mesmo renque, o princípio da concomitância é 
atendido. 
Alguns fatores contribuintes estão distribuídos em determinados 

Sucessão Relevante Não Cumpre aspectos, mas as respectivas definições direcionam estes termos a 
outras posições, ou seja, estão mal dispostos. Ver Quadro 10. 
Há termos com inconstância do propósito das hierarquias ou 

Sucessão Consistente Não Cumpre fatores com pelo menos duas características distintas reunidos em 
um mesmo aspecto.  Ver Quadro 11. 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1049 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



 
Quadro 10 - Análise quanto ao Cânone da Sucessão Relevante. 

Fatores Contribuintes Motivo da Sucessão Irrelevante Sugestão 
- Ansiedade Estão hierarquizados aos Aspectos Médicos, Modificar posição para 
- Desorientação porém tem maior relação com fatores Aspecto Psicológico. 
- Ilusões visuais cognitivos e/ou perceptivos, ou seja, com 

Variáveis Individuais dos Aspectos 
Psicológicos. 

- Vestimenta inadequada Está hierarquizado aos Aspectos Médicos, Associar este fator a uma 
 porém não reúne características para essa subclasse relacionada a 

sucessão.  fatores ambientais ou 
tecnológicos. 

- Influências externas Está hierarquizado às Variáveis Psicossociais, Modificar posição para 
porém sua definição indica indícios de Aspecto Psicológico - 
estresse por acontecimentos na vida pessoal, Variáveis Individuais. 
caracterizando um fator ligado às Variáveis 
Individuais. 

- Processo decisório À semelhança de outras falhas de Modificar posição para 
gerenciamento de recursos (Liderança, Aspecto Psicológico - 
Dinâmica da Equipe, etc.), está relacionado às Variáveis Psicossociais. 
Variáveis Psicossociais e não às Variáveis 
Individuais. 

 
Quadro 11 - Análise quanto ao Cânone da Sucessão Consistente. 

Aspecto Características Distintas Sugestão 
- Agentes estressores autoimpostos: práticas impróprias do 
operador. 

Médico 
- Estados fisiológicos adversos: reações do organismo 
humano. 
- Cognitivos/ perceptivos: percepção equivocada. 

Psicológico - Variáveis 
- Psicocomportamental: comportamento intencional 

Individuais 
motivado por alterações psicológicas.  
- Falha no gerenciamento de recursos. 

Psicológico - Variáveis Criar subclasses 
- Características do Grupo de Trabalho: dificuldade em 

Psicossociais para organizar 
gerenciar problemas conhecidos. 

características 
- Características da Organização: Clima e Cultura 

Psicológico – Variáveis afins. 
organizacional. 

Organizacionais 
- Processos organizacionais, gestão e alocação de recursos. 
- Fatores ambientais, meteorológicos, físicos e 
tecnológicos. 
- Meios e apoios para desenvolver a atividade aérea. 

Operacional 
- Supervisão e planejamento. 
- Erros de execução e de julgamento. 
- Violação: indisciplina pontual ou rotineira. 

 

Princípios para Ordenação de Classes e seus Elementos  Com base em critérios preestabelecidos e propostos por Vital e 
 Café (2007), o emprego da análise estruturativa tem objetivo 
Os Aspectos Médico e Operacional estão organizados em de estabelecer um recorte do material para elaboração da nova 
ordem alfabética. Aparentemente, o Aspecto Psicológico taxonomia, incluída nos Quadros 12 a 14. 
não apresenta padrão de ordenação dos vários elementos  
nas classes e subclasses. Segundo a TCF, quando não for As primeiras duas etapas, estabelecimento das categorias gerais 
encontrada outra ordem que melhor satisfaça um e coleta dos termos, foram observadas na Tese, visto que foi 
agrupamento, poderá ser usada a ordem alfabética (SALES; respeitada a estrutura e as nomenclaturas da MCA 3-6. Dessa 
MOTTA, 2010). maneira, a indicação de nova taxonomia terá apenas mudanças 
 pontuais resultantes das críticas. Os próximos dois passos, 
Síntese – Taxonomia SIPAER de Fatores Humanos análise dos termos selecionados e controle da diversidade de 
Resultante significação, estão incluídas na Antítese, por meio das 

 verificações dos critérios da TCF.   
Combinando aspectos analisados pelos objetos da Tese e da  
Antítese, obtém-se a Síntese, representada pela elaboração A construção dos relacionamentos semânticos, última etapa, é 
de nova taxonomia de fatores humanos e resultante das o resultado das recomendações para aperfeiçoamento dos 
considerações abordadas nas fases anteriores.  aspectos negativos verificados na análise da taxonomia 
 SIPAER. Estas indicações de melhoramentos estão incluídas 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1050 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



nas colunas intituladas “Sugestão” dos Quadros 06 a 11.  aplicação de conhecimento científico direcionado à elaboração 
 de taxonomias de acidentes no âmbito do SIPAER. Além de 
O resultado dessa etapa é uma nova taxonomia de fatores responder ao problema de pesquisa proposto, a apresentação da 
humanos com praticamente o mesmo número de classes taxonomia, resultante da análise, possibilita uma comparação 
mais específicas: setenta e seis. Foram sete fatores conceitual e imediata com o status atual.  
incluídos e oito excluídos, como indica o Quadro A15.  
Outros quatorze termos foram levemente modificados Por fim, as mudanças resultantes da Síntese evidenciam a 
quanto ao título para aumentar a clareza. concepção de taxonomia como processo e não como um 
 produto final estático. Na visão de Santos e Corrêa (2011, 
A alteração mais significativa é a inserção de dezoito p. 11), este é um instrumento de organização da informação, o 
subcategorias intermediando as nomenclaturas mais gerais qual pode sofrer atualização para “acompanhar o 
e as mais particulares (Quadro A16). As diferentes camadas desenvolvimento terminológico da área”. A taxonomia, 
da hierarquia têm o valor de prover um meio de rastrear não entendida como representação do conhecimento, torna-se 
apenas quais erros ocorrem, mas também qual o contexto também fruto de um “processo de análise de domínio para 
em que se inserem. Esta constatação corrobora a validade refletir uma visão consensual sobre a realidade que se pretende 
da análise do estudo, por indicar impacto positivo da representar” (NOVO, 2010, p. 138). 

 

Quadro 12 - Síntese: Produto da Análise da Taxonomia SIPAER - Aspecto Operacional. 

Condições físicas do trabalho 
Condições meteorológicas adversas 

Fatores Físicos e 
Equipamento – características ergonômicas 

Tecnológicos 
Influência do meio-ambiente 
Vestimenta inadequada 

Fatores Ambientais 
Emprego de meios (ATS) 
Equipamento de apoio (ATS) 

Meios e Apoios Infraestrutura aeroportuária 
Pessoal de apoio 
Sistemas de apoio 

Operações 
Inapropriadamente Conhecimento de normas ATS 

Supervisão Planejadas Planejamento gerencial 

Supervisão ATS 
Supervisão Inadequada 

Supervisão gerencial 
Aplicação dos comandos 

Aspecto Desvio de navegação 
Operacional Erro de procedimento durante execução 

(inclui esquecimento) 
Erros de Execução 

Fraseologia do Órgão ATS 
Habilidade de controle ATS 
Instrução 
Limite de autorização (ATS) 

Erros 
Ação necessária não realizada 
Coordenação de cabine 
Julgamento de pilotagem e percepção das 

Erros de Julgamento e condições operacionais  
Tomada de Decisão Planejamento de tráfego 

Planejamento de voo 
Pouca experiência do piloto 
Priorização de tarefas 
Desrespeito à avaliação de riscos 

Violação -- Indisciplina de voo 
Violação rotineira/ generalizada 

 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1051 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro 13 - Síntese: Produto da Análise da Taxonomia SIPAER - Aspecto Médico. 

Álcool 
Agentes Autoimpostos Dieta inadequada 

Uso ilícito de drogas 
Disbarismo 
Dor 
Enfermidade 
Enjoo aéreo 
Fadiga 
Gravidez  

Aspecto Hiperventilação 
-- 

Médico Hipóxia 
Estados Fisiológicos 

Inconsciência 
Adversos 

Insônia 
Intoxicação alimentar 
Intoxicação por CO 
Medicamento (prescrito) 
Obesidade 
Próteses  
Saturação física de tarefas 
Vertigem 

 

 

Quadro 14 - Síntese: Produto da Análise da Taxonomia SIPAER - Aspecto Psicológico. 

Atenção (Desatenção, atenção canalizada 
ou distração) 
Desorientação (percepção) 

Cognitivos e Ilusões visuais, sinestésicas e vestibulares 
Perceptivos Memória 

Percepção (Confusão e transferência 
negativa) 

Variáveis Saturação de tarefas cognitivas 
Individuais Ansiedade e/ou expectativa 

Estado emocional e/ou estilo de 
personalidade 

Psico Indícios de Estresse e/ou pressão 
Comportamentais Influências externas  

Motivação excessiva e/ou excesso de 
confiança 
Motivação inadequada ou deslocada 

Aspecto 
Características do Cultura do grupo de trabalho 

Psicológico 
Grupo de Trabalho Gestão de pessoas e de operações 

Comunicação: assertividade, comunicar 
informações críticas, fraseologia, feedback 
(inclui ATS) 

Variáveis 
Coordenação de tráfego 

Psicossociais Gerenciamento de 
Dinâmica da equipe e monitoramento do 

Recursos 
desempenho 
Liderança e/ou delegação de tarefas 
Relações interpessoais e/ou diferença de 
autoridade/ patente 

Características da Clima organizacional 
Organização Cultura organizacional 

Variáveis Processos Formação, Capacitação e Treinamento 
Organizacionais Organizacionais, Organização do trabalho 

Gestão e Alocação de Processos Organizacionais 
Recursos Publicações ATS 

 

 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1052 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



CONCLUSÃO ______. Investigação de acidente aeronáutico, incidente 

 aeronáutico e ocorrência de solo. NSCA 3-6. Brasília, DF, 

O problema de pesquisa investigado aborda a aplicação do 2008a. 

conhecimento científico, representado pelos princípios 
normativos da TCF, na taxonomia SIPAER de fatores ______. Recomendações de Segurança Operacional. NSCA 
humanos, respeitando a finalidade de permitir a emissão de 3-9. Brasília, DF, 2008b. 
RSO. 
 CAMPOS, M.L.A; GOMES; H.E. O Princípio da 
Como resposta ao problema mencionado, o estudo indicou Categorização. Revista de Ciência da Informação e 
o impacto positivo no emprego de conhecimento científico Documentação. Ribeirão Preto, v. 9, n. 4, art. 01, ago. 2008. 
direcionado à elaboração de taxonomias no âmbito do Disponível em <www.dgz.org.br/ago08/Art_01.htm>. Acesso 
SIPAER, dado que a introdução de diferentes camadas da em: 09 mar. 2012. 
hierarquia tem o valor de prover um meio de rastrear não 
apenas quais erros ocorrem, mas também qual o contexto DEKKER, S. Illusions of explanation: A critical essay on 
em que se inserem. Nesse sentido, os resultados apontam error classification. International Journal of Aviation 
para a inclusão de dezoito subcategorias intermediando as Psychology, Sidney Centre for Human Factors in Aviation. 
nomenclaturas mais gerais e as mais particulares. Linköping Institute of Technology. Linköping, v. 13, n. 2, p. 
 95-106, 2001.  
Como implicação direta dos resultados da pesquisa para a 
Força Aérea Brasileira e, indiretamente, para o campo ESTADOS UNIDOS. Federal Aviation Administration. Risk 
acadêmico, há a apresentação de uma nova taxonomia, management handbook. (FAA-H-8083-2). Washington, DC, 
resultante da análise, que possibilita uma comparação 2009. 
conceitual e imediata com o status atual.  
 GIL, A.C. Métodos e técnicas de pesquisa social. 5. ed. São 
As significativas contribuições do artigo sugerem a Paulo: Atlas, 2007. 
possibilidade de redigir RSO mais específicas, claras e 
objetivas, de modo que a interpretação conduza ao seu GOMES, H.E.; MOTTA, D.F.; CAMPOS, M.L. Revisitando 
cumprimento eficaz. Futuras pesquisas devem focar o Ranganathan: a classificação na rede. Dep. Ciência da 
levantamento estatístico de RSO, no intuito de indicar o Informação, ago, 2006. Disponível em: 
estabelecimento novas categorias e aprimorar a taxonomia <www.conexaorio.com/biti/revisitando/revisitando.htm>. 
como instrumento de organização da informação do Acesso em: 09 mar. 2012. 
SIPAER. 
 LAKATOS, E. M.; MARCONI, M. A. Fundamentos de 
 Metodologia Científica. São Paulo: Atlas, 1993.   

REFERÊNCIAS 
 MAYRING, P. Qualitative Content Analysis. Forum 

AGANETTE, E.C. Taxonomias corporativas qualitative social research, v. 1, n. 2, p. 1-10, jun. 2000.  

[manuscrito]: um estudo sobre definições e etapas de 
construção fundamentado na literatura publicada.  NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD. 

2010. 104 f. Dissertação (Mestrado) – Programa de Pós- Annual review of aircraft accident data. Report Number 

Graduação em Ciência da Informação, Universidade NTSB/ARC-10/01. U.S. air carrier operations, calendar year 

Federal de Minas Gerais. Belo Horizonte, 2010.  2006. Washington, DC, 2010. 

______; ALVARENGA, L.; SOUZA, R. Elementos NOVO, H.F. A taxonomia enquanto estrutura classificatória: 

constitutivos do Conceito de taxonomia. Informação & uma aplicação em domínio de conhecimento interdisciplinar. 

Sociedade: Estudos, João Pessoa, v. 20, n. 3, p. 77-93, set.- Ponto de Acesso, Salvador, v. 4, n. 2, p. 131-156, set. 2010. 

dez. 2010. 
PIEDADE, M.A.R. Introdução à teoria da classificação. Rio 

ARAÚJO, C.A.A. Fundamentos teóricos da classificação. de Janeiro: Interciência, 1977. 

Enc. Bibli, Florianópolis, n. 22, p. 117-140, 2 sem. 2006. 
Disponível em:<http://www.periodicos.ufsc.br/index. RANGANATHAN, S.R. Prolegomena to library 

php/eb/article/view/1518-2924.2006v11n22p117/368>. classification. Bombay: Asia Publishing House, 1967. 
Acesso em: 09 mar. 2012. 

SALES, L.F.; MOTTA, D.F. Base teórica da Ciência da 

BLOOM, B.S. Taxonomia de objetivos educacionais. Informação para construção de taxonomias consistentes. 
Porto Alegre: Globo, 1972. 204 p. 2010. Disponível em: <www.casaruibarbosa.gov.br/dados/ 

DOC/palestras/memo_info/mi_2010/FCRB_MI_Construcao_d

BRASIL. Comando da Aeronáutica. Estado-Maior da e_taxonomias_consistentes_-_Luana_Farias_e_Dilza_ 

Aeronáutica. Manual de Investigação de Acidentes Fonseca.pdf> Acesso em: 09 mar. 2012. 

Aeronáuticos. MCA 3-6. Brasília, DF, 2011. 
SANTOS, M.T.; CORRÊA, R.F. Estudo da Construção da 

______. Programa de Prevenção de Acidentes Taxonomia do Programa De Pós-Graduação em Letras. 

Aeronáuticos – Aviação Civil. ICA 3-2. Brasília, DF, XIV Encontro Regional de Estudantes de Biblioteconomia, 

2010. Documentação, Ciência da Informação e Gestão da 
informação. Universidade Federal do Maranhão. São Luís, jan. 

 2011. 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1053 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



SOUZA, C.A.M. A Gestão do Sistema de Investigação e Ciência da Informação, Univ. Federal de Santa Catarina, 
Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos no Atual Florianópolis, 2007. 
Contexto da Aviação Civil Brasileira. Escola de 
Comando e Estado-Maior da Aeronáutica. Curso de ______; CAFÉ, L.M.A. Práticas de elaboração de 
Comando do Estado Maior. Rio de Janeiro, set. 2009. taxonomias: análise e recomendações. In: Encontro Nacional 

de Pesquisa em Ciência da Informação, n. 8, 2007, Salvador: 
TERRA, J.C.C.; et al. Taxonomia: elemento fundamental UFBA/PPGCI; Ancib, 2007. 16 p. Disponível em: 
para a gestão do conhecimento. São Paulo, 2005. <http://www. enancib.ppgci.ufba.br/artigos/GT2--141.pdf>. 
Disponível em : <http://biblioteca.terraforum.com. br/ Acesso em: 08 mar. 2012. 
Paginas/Taxonomia-elementofundamentalparaaGC.aspx>  
Acesso em: 10 mar. 2012. VOGEL, M.J.M. Alguns conceitos e Algumas Confusões. 

Biblioteca Terra Fórum. Disponível em 
VITAL, L.P. Recomendações para construção de <http://biblioteca.terraforum.com.br/Paginas/TaxonomiaAlgun
taxonomia em portais corporativos. 2007. 113f. s ConceitoseAlgumasConfus%C3%B5es.aspx>. Acesso em: 09 
Dissertação (Mestrado) – Programa de Pós-Graduação em mar. 2012. 

 
 

APÊNDICE - Produto da Análise da Taxonomia SIPAER 

Quadro A15 - Fatores Contribuintes da MCA 3-6 Incluídos, Excluídos e Modificados. 

Aspectos da  Fatores Contribuintes 
MCA 3-6 Incluídos Excluídos Modificados 

(1) (2) 
Médico (-) - Ressaca - Medicamento (prescrito) 

 - Saturação física de tarefas 
(12) 
- Atenção (Desatenção, atenção 
canalizada ou distração) 
- Desorientação (percepção) 
- Ilusões visuais, sinestésicas e 
vestibulares 
- Percepção (Confusão e 
transferência negativa) 

(3) - Ansiedade e/ou expectativa 
- Saturação de tarefas - Estado emocional e/ou estilo de 

(2) 
cognitivas personalidade 

- Atitude 
Psicológico  - Motivação inadequada ou - Indícios de Estresse e/ou pressão 

- Característica da Tarefa 
deslocada - Motivação excessiva e/ou excesso 

 
- Gestão de pessoas e de de confiança 
operações - Comunicação: assertividade, 

comunicar informações críticas, 
fraseologia, feedback (inclui ATS) 
- Dinâmica da equipe e 
monitoramento do desempenho 
- Liderança e/ou delegação de 
tarefas  
- Relações interpessoais e/ou 
diferença de autoridade/ patente 

(4) 
- Erro de procedimento (5) 
durante execução - Carga de trabalho (ATS) 
(esquecimento incluído) - Manutenção da aeronave 

(1) 
- Ação necessária não - Substituição na posição 

- Julgamento de pilotagem e 
Operacional realizada (ATS) 

percepção das condições 
- Priorização de tarefas - Fraseologia da 

operacionais 
- Desrespeito à avaliação Tripulação  
de riscos - Fraseologia do Órgão 
- Violação rotineira/ ATS 
generalizada 

 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1054 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro A16 - Subclasses Criadas na Nova Taxonomia SIPAER. 

Aspectos da Subclasses Criadas 
MCA 3-6 1ª Ordem 2ª Ordem 

(2)  
Médico - Agentes Autoimpostos (-) 

- Estados Fisiológicos Adversos 
(6) 
- Cognitivos/ Perceptivos 
- Psico Comportamentais 
- Características do Grupo de Trabalho 

Psicológico  (-) 
- Gerenciamento de Recursos 
- Características da Organização 
- Processos Organizacionais, Gestão/ 
Alocação de Recursos 

(4) (6) 
- Fatores Ambientais - Fatores Físicos e Tecnológicos 
- Supervisão - Meios e Apoios 

Operacional - Erros - Operações Inapropriadamente Planejadas 
- Violação - Supervisão Inadequada 

- Erros de Execução 
- Erros de Julgamento e Tomada de Decisão 

 
ANEXO - Fatores Humanos Contribuintes da MCA 3-6 

 Quadro A17 - Aspecto Médico. 

A3.1Álcool 
A3.2 Ansiedade 
A3.3 Desorientação 
A3.4 Dieta inadequada 
A3.5 Disbarismo 
A3.6 Dor 
A3.7 Enfermidade 
A3.8 Enjoo aéreo 
A3.9 Fadiga 
A3.10 Gravidez 
A3.11 Hiperventilação 
A3.12 Hipóxia 

Aspecto Médico -- A3.13 Ilusões visuais 
A3.14 Inconsciência 
A3.15 Insônia 
A3.16 Intoxicação alimentar 
A3.17 Intoxicação por CO 
A3.18 Medicamento 
A3.19 Obesidade 
A3.20 Próteses 
A3.21 Ressaca 
A3.22 Sobrecarga de tarefas 
A3.23 Uso ilícito de drogas 
A3.24 Vertigem 
A3.25 Vestimenta inadequada 

 Fonte: Brasil, 2011. 

 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1055 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



Quadro A18 - Aspecto Psicológico. 

A3.26 Atitude 
A3.27 Estado emocional 
A3.28 Motivação 
A3.29 Atenção 

Variáveis Individuais 
A3.30 Percepção 
A3.31 Memória 
A3.32 Processo decisório 
A3.33 Indícios de Estresse 
A3.34 Comunicação 

Aspecto 
A3.35 Liderança 

psicológico 
A3.36 Relações interpessoais 

 Variáveis Psicossociais 
A3.37 Dinâmica da equipe 

 
A3.38 Influências externas 

 
A3.39 Cultura do grupo de trabalho 

 
A3.40 Características da tarefa 
A3.41 Organização do trabalho 
A3.42 Formação, Capacitação e Treinamento 
A3.43 Condições físicas do trabalho 

Variáveis Organizacionais A3.44 Equipamento – características ergonômicas 
A3.45 Sistemas de apoio 
A3.46 Processos Organizacionais 
A3.47 Clima organizacional - 
A3.48 Cultura organizacional - 

Fonte: Brasil, 2011. 
 

Quadro A19 - Aspecto Operacional. 

A3.49 Aplicação dos comandos 
A3.50 Condições meteorológicas adversas 
A3.51 Coordenação de cabine 
A3.52 Desvio de navegação 
A3.53 Esquecimento do piloto 
A3.54 Indisciplina de voo 
A3.55 Influência do meio-ambiente 
A3.56 Infraestrutura aeroportuária 

-- 
A3.57 Instrução 
A3.58 Julgamento de pilotagem 
A3.59 Manutenção da aeronave 
A3.60 Pessoal de apoio 
A3.61 Planejamento gerencial 
A3.62 Planejamento de voo 

Aspecto 
A3.63 Pouca experiência do piloto 

Operacional 
A3.64 Supervisão gerencial 
A3.65 Carga de trabalho 
A3.66 Conhecimento de normas ATS 
A3.67 Coordenação de tráfego 
A3.68 Emprego de meios (ATS) 
A3.69 Equipamento de apoio 
A3.70 Fraseologia da tripulação 

Fatores Concernentes aos Órgãos 
A3.71 Fraseologia do Órgão ATS 

ATS 
A3.72 Habilidade de controle 
A3.73 Limite de autorização 
A3.74 Planejamento de tráfego 
A3.75 Publicações ATS 
A3.76 Substituição na posição 
A3.77 Supervisão ATS 

Fonte: Brasil, 2011. 
 

 - - - - - - - - - - Anais do 5º Simpósio de Segurança de Voo (SSV 2012) – Direitos Reservados - Página 1056 de 1112 - - - - - - - - - - 



HFACS - Human Factor Analysis and Classification System / Gerência de Fatores Humanos na Aviação e Medicina de Aviação – GFHM 

Atos Inseguros Pré-condições para Atos Inseguros Supervisão Insegura Influências Organizacionais 

Planejamento 
Condições dos operadores Práticas dos operadores abaixo Falha na correção de Violação de Gerenciamento de Clima Processos 

Erros Violações Supervisão inadequada impróprio das 
abaixo dos padrões dos padrões problema conhecido supervisão recursos organizacional organizacionais 

operações 

• Deixar de atuar de acordo Má gestão de recursos de • Deixar de orientar, • Deixar de •Deixar de corrigir • Autorizar risco 
Baseados em habilidades com o briefing Estados mentais adversos Recursos Humanos Estrutura Operações 

tripulação doutrina operacional, proporcionar dados documento com erros desnecessário 
 acompanhamento ou corretos ou tempo  • Deixar de reforçar 

• Falha no “scan” visual • Deixar de utilizar o altímetro • Atenção canalizada • Falha na coordenação / • Seleção, Staffing, • Cadeia de comando • Tempo operacional 
 comunicação treinamento adequado para o •Não identificar um regras e regulamentos 

do radar treinamento   
• Deixar de priorizar a atenção  • Complacência  briefing piloto em situação de  • Delegação de • Pressão do tempo 

 • Deixar de conduzir um briefing • Deixar de verificar 
• Realizar uma aproximação  risco • Autorizar tripulação autoridade  

• Acionamento acidental de não autorizada • Distração adequado  qualificações e • Escalação  não qualificada a voar Recursos  • Cotas de produção 
controle de voo     desempenho inadequada de pessoal •Não iniciar ação Orçamentários • Comunicação  

• Violar regras de treinamento • Fadiga mental • Deixar de utilizar todos os recursos • Cortes excessivos  • Incentivos 
 corretiva 

• Omissão de uma etapa do   disponíveis  • Responsabilidade  
procedimento • Missão em desacordo  

• Realizar manobras de • Motivação excessiva para   • Falta de verbas formal por atos • Avaliação 
maneira excessivamente voltar ao lar • Falha de liderança com regras / •Deixar de revelar  

• Omissão de item de check-list agressiva   regulamentação tendências inseguras • Programação 
 • Pressa • Má interpretação das chamadas de   

• Técnica inadequada • Deixar de se preparar  tráfego • Deixar de • Planejamento  
adequadamente para o vôo • Perda da consciência situacional proporcionar repouso deficiente 

• Controle em excesso da 
   

aeronave adequado para a 
• Realizar briefing de voo não • Motivação deslocada 

 tripulação 
autorizado Recursos Facilidades 

Políticas Procedimentos 
 • Saturação da tarefa / Equipamentos 
•Não qualificação para a  

missão • Projeto inadequado • Admissão e • Padrões  
Decisão  Estados fisiológicos adversos Prontidão pessoal  Demissão  

•Exceder intencionalmente os • Compra de  • Objetivos claramente 
• Procedimento impróprio limites da aeronave • Deterioração do estado fisiológico • Treinamento físico excessivo 

equipamentos • Promoção definidos 
    
• Emergência mal diagnosticada • Doença • Automedicação inadequados   

•Continuar voo em baixa 
 altitude em condições VMC   • Drogas e Álcool • Documentação 
• Resposta à emergência • Incapacitação fisiológica • Violação de requisitos de repouso • Instruções 
incorreta  da tripulação 
 • Fadiga física 
• Exceder a habilidade 
 
• Manobra imprópria 
 
• Decisão inadequada 
 

Percepção Limitações físicas e mentais Cultura Inspeção 

• Julgamento deficiente  • Tempo de reação insuficiente • Normas e Regras • Gerenciamento de 
distância /altitude/velocidade   risco 
 • Limitação visual • Valores e Crenças  
• Desorientação espacial   • Programas de 
 • Incompatibilidade de • Justiça segurança 
• Ilusão visual inteligência/aptidão Organizacional / 

 Cultura Justa 
• Capacidade física incompatível 

Anotações: 
Fonte: Shappell, S.A.; Wiegmann, D.A.(2000).The Human Factors Analysis and Classification System - HFACS.DOT/FAA/AM-00/7 
Disponível em: http://www.nifc.gov/safety/reports/humanfactors_class&anly.pdf 

Abstract 
Human error has been implicated in 70 to 80% of all civil and military aviation accidents. Yet, most accident reporting systems are not 
designed around any theoretical framework of human error. As a result, most accident databases are not conducive to a traditional 
human error analysis, making the identification of intervention strategies onerous. What is required is a general human error framework 
around which new investigative methods can be designed and existing accident databases restructured. Indeed, a comprehensive 
human factors analysis and classification system (HFACS) has recently been developed to meet those needs. Specifically, the HFACS 
framework has been used within the military, commercial, and general aviation sectors to systematically examine underlying human 
causal factors and to improve aviation accident investigations. 

 



Revista Técnica sobre Segurança de Vôo • Ano V • nº 10 • Verão 2005/2006

AS AERONAVES 
EVOLUÍRAM.
E O HOMEM?



Dedicamos esta edição a todas as PESSOAS que amam e contribuem 
com suas habilidades para o desenvolvimento da aviação, avançando na 
tecnologia e na transformação das máquinas, superando seus próprios 

limites...

Equipe TAM Flight Safety

“This issue is dedicated to all PERSONS who love and contribute with their 
abilities to the development of aviation, advancing in technology and in the 

transformation of machines, overcoming their own limits...”

TAM Flight Safety Staff

Abertura

Flight Safety

2



ÍNDICE 
A PALAVRA
DO  PRESIDENTE 4 EXPEDIENTE

A WORD FROM Cmte. Rolim Adolfo Amaro
THE PRESIDENT (in memorian)

Patrono

CONVERSANDO  SOBRE Marco Antonio Bologna

SEGURANÇA  DE  VÔO 5 TALKING ABOUT Presidente da TAM
FLIGHT SAFETY

Marco Aurélio dos Santos 
de Miranda e Castro

FATOR Cmte. Castro
Flight Safety Officer

HUMANO 6 HUMAN
FACTORS Fator Humano Safety TAM

Déborah Cristina Santos

FATORES  HUMANOS  OU Comunicação Safety TAM
Guilherme Noro

HUMANOS  FATORES? 7 HUMANS THAT 
ARE FACTORS 
OR FACTORS 
THAT ARE Fotos
HUMAN? Luis Rodriguez (ASA) e Banco 

de Imagens da TAM

O  FATOR Projeto Gráfico e

HUMANO Editoração Eletrônica 
ASA Assessoria e
Comunicação

na manutenção
de aeronaves 11 HUMAN FACTOR 

IN AIRCRAFT Direção de Arte e Ilustrações
MAINTENANCE Rogério Augusto

Tradução/Revisão Texto 

RITMOS CIRCADIANOS, Inglês
Adriana Lage

SONO  E  ALERTA 13 CIRCADIAN 
RHYTHMS, SLEEP 

Revisão Texto Português
AND ALERTNESS Maria Eugênia Rocha 

Nogueira

O  ERRO  HUMANO Impressão
Multiformas

E  O  CONTEXTO DA AVIAÇÃO 18 HUMAN 
ERROR AND 
THE AVIATION 
CONTEXT

TAM Safety Magazine é uma 
publicação realizada pelo 

ADMINISTRAÇÃO Flight Safety TAM
Rua Gal. Pantaleão Teles, 210  

DE  PILOTOS 24 São Paulo - SP - 
PILOT Cep 04355-040
ADMINISTRATION Tel. 55 11 5582 8866

Fax: 55 11 5034 5404
E-mail: safety@tam.com.br 

A CONTRIBUIÇÃO DO
PLANTÃO PSICOLÓGICO
PARA A SEGURANÇA DE VÔO 26 THE CONTRIBUTION 

OF PSYCHOLOGICAL 
DUTY FOR FLIGHT 
SAFETY

TRANSTORNO Envie seu Relatório 

DE  ESTRESSE de Perigo pelo
relper@tam.com.br

PÓS-TRAUMA
e  Fatores Humanos 32 POST-TRAUMATIC 

STRESS DISORDER 
AND HUMAN 
FACTORS

3



EDITORIAL | PRESIDENTE

A PALAVRA Ruy Amparo, nosso vice-presidente 
Técnico-Operacional. E ele acrescenta: 
“o treinamento é a base para que tudo 

DO  PRESIDENTE funcione de maneira normatizada e 
com qualidade”.

A WORD FROM
THE PRESIDENT

MARCO ANTONIO BOLOGNA
Presidente da TAM

“Safety is more important than the 
client”, states the third commandment 
instituted at TAM  by Captain Rolim Adolfo 
Amaro. 

In fact, we are all, in the company, 
“Mais importante que o Cliente é a De maneira especial, essa área permanently involved and committed with 
segurança”, celebra o 3º mandamento desenvolve, com freqüência, extensos flight safety.
instituído na TAM pelo Comandante programas de investimento em The Human Resources area also shares 
Rolim Adolfo Amaro. treinamento para pilotos e comissários. everyone’s concern with safety.

De fato, estamos todos, Até o momento, realizamos nada In a special way, this area usually 
na companhia, envolvidos e menos que 12.600 participações em develops extensive programs of investment in 
compromissados, permanentemente, cursos que visam o aprimoramento da training for pilots and fl ight attendants. Up 
com a segurança de vôo. qualidade de nossos profi ssionais. to now, we have accomplished more than 

A área de Gestão de Pessoas Vale ressaltar que o Departamento 12.600 attendances in courses that aim to 
da empresa participa, também, de Aviação Civil (DAC) acaba de improve the quality of our professionals.
das preocupações de todos com a certifi car a Academia de Serviços da It is worth highlighting that the Civil 
segurança. TAM, criada em 2001 em uma área de Aviation Department (DAC) has just 

12 mil metros quadrados e que é hoje certified the Academia de Serviços TAM, 
o maior e mais moderno Centro de created in 2001 in an area of 12 000 m2, 
Treinamento da Aviação na América which is, nowadays, the largest and the most 
Latina. modern Aviation Training Center in Latin 

A empresa recebeu o certifi cado America.
de acordo com o RBHA - Centros The company has been awarded with 
de Treinamento de Aviação the certification in accordance with RBHA 
Civil (Regulamento Brasileiro de – Civil Aviation Training Centers (Brazilian 
Homologação Aeronáutica). Além Regulation Aeronautical Certification). The 
de atestar a qualidade, o RBHA 142 RBHA not only attests quality, it also allows 
permite à TAM comercializar produtos TAM to commercialize training products 
e serviços de treinamento no mercado and service in the civil aviation market for 
de aviação civil para empresas no Brasil companies within Brazil and abroad.
e no exterior. The RBHA 142 states that TAM 

O RBHA 142 atesta que a provides training to its staff within 
TAM ministra treinamento a seus the strictest standard of excellence and 
colaboradores dentro dos mais commercializes training products and service 
severos padrões de excelência e within the same level of quality. “TAM 
comercializa produtos e serviços already conforms with the world standards 
de ensino no mesmo patamar of quality, in respect to both safety and 
de qualidade. “A TAM já está operational efficiency”, explains Ruy Amparo, 
enquadrada nos níveis mundiais our Technical-Operational vice president. 
de qualidade tanto no que diz And he adds: “training is the base so that 
respeito à segurança quanto à everything works in a standardized way and 
efi ciência operacional”, explica with quality”.

4



EDITORIAL | FLIGHT 
ESDAIFTEOTRYIAOLF | FCIOCMERANDANTE

CONVERSANDO  SOBRE
SEGURANÇA  DE  VÔO
MARCO AURÉLIO DOS SANTOS DE MIRANDA E CASTRO
CMTE. CASTRO
Chefe de Segurança de Vôo da TAM
TAM Flight Safety Officer 

Meus amigos, avaliando os primeiros 
meses de minha gestão à frente da TALKING ABOUT 
Segurança de Vôo da TAM, quero 
compartilhar a minha satisfação FLIGHT SAFETY
com o grupo de vôo, por estarmos 
progredindo em direção ao objetivo Dear friends, looking back at always been characterized for the 

my fi rst months at the head of TAM high dosage of infl uences, confl icts, 
maior, a prevenção. 

Estamos avançando não apenas Flight Safety, I’ d like to share my desires, anxiety and expectations…
satisfaction with all fl ight staff, for In this Safety Digest issue, 

na área técnica, mas também na área 
being improving aiming a higher we are very pleased to publish 

de Fatores Humanos, área esta sempre 
target: prevention. the contribution of dedicated 

caracterizada pela alta dosagem 
de infl uências, confl itos, desejos We’ve been advancing not only professionals of several areas, 

in the technical area, but also in engaged in the same target: fl ight 
ansiedades e expectativas... 

the Human Factors area, which has safety.
Nesta edição da Safety Magazine, 

temos a grata satisfação de publicar 
a contribuição de profi ssionais 
dedicados de diversas áreas, engajados 
em um mesmo objetivo, a segurança 
de vôo. 

“Trabalhe na causa, e 
não no efeito...”

Cmte. Rolim

“Work on the cause, not on the effect…”
Captain Rolim

5



EDITORIAL | PCROENSVIDIDEANDTEA

FATOR 
HUMANO
DÉBORAH CRISTINA SANTOS
Psicóloga - Fator Humano Safety TAM
Psychologist - TAM Flight Safety - Human Factors

Entender, compreender, selecionar e 
treinar pessoas para a atividade aérea HUMAN FACTORS task to decode individual and group 
faz parte de uma difícil tarefa de expectations, needs and motivations; so 
gestores preocupados com o bem- Understanding, comprehending, as to favor conscientiousness.
estar, desempenho e segurança de choosing and training people for the Conscientiousness is the most 
seus colaboradores. aviation activity is part of a hard task important word and attitude for Flight 

Com os textos desta edição, of managers concerned with their Safety – it is the professional’s awareness 
entenderemos por que o SER personnel’s well-being, performance to the benefit of all.
HUMANO é o elo mais importante and safety.
na segurança de vôo. Mesmo The articles in this issue will 
os equipamentos modernos, a make us understand why HUMAN 
tecnologia avançada, nada substitui a BEINGS are the most important 
interpretação e decisão do homem, o element in fl ight safety.  Even 
principal responsável pela avaliação de modern equipment, advanced 
variáveis não previstas. technology, nothing substitutes man’s 

Conseguir melhor desempenho interpretation and decision, which is 
profi ssional depende do equilíbrio the key responsible for the evaluation 
entre fatores fi siológicos, psicológicos, of unpredicted variables.
comportamentais e organizacionais. Improving professional 
Uma auto-avaliação é necessária, performance depends on the 
como processo de autoconhecimento, balance among physiological, 
para compreender a profi ssão em psychological, behavioral, and 
uma visão macro e assim distinguir os organizational factors. Self-
limites da atividade, de modo a não evaluation is necessary, as 
interferir na atuação do próximo. a self-learning process, 

Cabe também aos gestores a tarefa to understand the 
de decifrar expectativas, necessidades profession as a macro 
e motivações individuais e também perspective and 
do grupo; só assim se favorece a therefore make out 
conscientização. the limits of the 

Conscientização é a palavra e activity, so that it 
a atitude mais importante para a doesn’t interfere 
Segurança de Vôo – é a consciência with the other’s 
do profi ssional posta a serviço do performance.
coletivo. It is also 

the managers’ 

6



ARTIGO | FATOR HUMANO

FATORES  HUMANOS  OU 
HUMANOS  FATORES?

MARIA DA CONCEIÇÃO PEREIRA
Psicóloga
Departamento De Aviação Civil
Segundo Serviço Regional de Aviação Civil

AAcompanhando o desenvolvimento Em paralelo está o homem que e psicanalista francês, que se faz 
da aviação no mundo, o que se tem atua com essa tecnologia. Aquele que presente no meio da comunidade 
observado é o avanço, especialmente hoje tem a incumbência de gerenciar aeronáutica mundial. Ele analisa 
no contexto da tecnologia esses aparatos artifi ciais ultramodernos o conceito de fatores humanos 
aeronáutica, que oferece condições mostra-se, em sua condição humana dimensionados no meio das ciências 
cada vez mais efi cientes para os de ser fi nito, falível e sensível, como técnicas e tecnológicas. 
aparatos artifi ciais que voam. Rapidez o componente crítico do sistema O conceito de Fatores Humanos 
e precisão são dimensionadas na busca aeronáutico; por isso, sobre ele recai na aviação emana dessas ciências 
do aperfeiçoamento dessa tecnologia toda uma preocupação diante de e, segundo Dejours, carrega um 
e do atendimento às demandas questões que envolvem a segurança reducionismo e um cientifi cismo, 
específi cas de um mundo regido, de um vôo. em nome dos quais se têm 
essencialmente, pela economia de um Nesse contexto, é pertinente  esquecido aspectos éticos e políticos 
mercado globalizado e com exigências reportar-se a uma análise crítica efetivamente relacionados à 
rápidas. proposta por Dejours, psiquiatra complexidade humana e que 

concretamente também dimensionam 
suas ações e desempenho.

Talvez seja o momento de rever 
esse conceito,  aproveitando um 
pouco mais do que as ciências 
humanas e as ciências do trabalho têm 
oferecido para ampliar a compreensão 
das questões humanas na aviação.

Onde se dá o reducionismo dos 
fatores humanos?

Ele ocorre na medida em que essa 
noção fi ca estreitamente associada à 
idéia de erro, falha, falta cometida por 
operadores dos sistemas. Os aspectos 

7



conceituais que tornam essencial o Entender os erros capacidade humana de interpretação, 
respeito pela própria condição humana humanos como um difi cultando a tomada de decisões 
são percebidos de maneira dissociada  participativas. A aviação de hoje tem 
das  questões de sua subjetividade, fenômeno humano é um padrão de sofi sticação que vem 
singularidade, e promoção da saúde mais que minimizar exigindo daqueles que atuam nela 
e segurança  dos seres humanos em uma permanente disponibilidade para 
situação de trabalho na aviação. possibilidades de lidar cotidianamente com imprevistos e 

As máquinas voadoras  tornaram– incertezas e superá-los.
se cada vez mais sofi sticadas e errar, é ir além dos Avançar tecnologicamente é 
automatizadas; às vezes, percebe- Fatores Humanos importante e faz parte da evolução da 
se nesses avanços tecnológicos a para buscar os humanidade, porém não se pode perder 
tentativa de minimizar o erro humano, de vista que cada progresso tecnológico 
com a idéia  de que, afastando Humanos Fatores na gera no homem novas formas de 
ou controlando tecnologicamente aviação. comportamento, novas formas de 
o homem diante de ações mais subjetivação e novas respostas em suas 
operacionais/técnicas junto a  sua ações.
máquina,  garante-se a  possibilidade tão lentamente no que diz respeito à Diante das questões humanas na 
de evitar seus erros. administração dos recursos humanos aviação, as ações pró-ativas necessárias 

Existe essa busca, no contexto desse sistema? devem-se concentrar especialmente 
aeronáutico, de controlar o erro Volta-se, então, a questionar, em cuidar dos seres humanos, no 
presente nas ações humanas em como Dejours: Fatores Humanos ou sentido de salvaguardar suas condições 
operações aéreas. Os estudos Humanos Fatores na aviação? psicofísicas, socioeconômicas e 
disponíveis focam a preocupação com A compreensão dos fenômenos culturais, para que possam assumir 
a contribuição dos fatores humanos humanos em sua essência, no contexto sua vulnerabilidade, dando atenção 
nos processos em que se acredita aeronáutico, signifi ca também o a sua complexidade humana diante 
desenvolver o chamado “erro humano”.  entendimento da subjetividade dos das próprias atividades  – seja como 
A solução apresentada, quase sempre, sujeitos componentes da aviação, gerentes, pilotos, controladores, 
centra-se na capacidade de minimizar inseridos numa dimensão cultural que mecânicos, comissários ou tantos 
e/ou controlar os efeitos dessas pode gerar atitudes e comportamentos outros seres humanos que fazem 
ocorrências por meio da tecnologia, incompatíveis com a Segurança de Vôo. a aviação. É preciso também que a 
esquecendo-se a dimensão do humano. Nessa perspectiva, o erro é um sintoma indústria aeronáutica, em todos os 

Acredita-se que seja preciso ir além do sistema como um todo. aspectos, se comprometa efetivamente 
de simplesmente dimensionar desvios, Entender os erros humanos como com a segurança de vôo, e que as 
falhas, lapsos, faltas e violações no um fenômeno humano é mais que organizações tenham uma postura 
contexto da confi abilidade humana. minimizar possibilidades de errar, é ir ética e uma política solidária que 

Até o momento, o homem, além dos Fatores Humanos para buscar proporcione condições efetivas para 
enquanto operador, é visto como os Humanos Fatores na aviação. esse resultado. A segurança de vôo deve 
o menos confi ável. Avançando nos No que se refere à tecnologia, a tornar-se uma prática social em prol do 
conceitos relativos ao humano na aviação tem mudado de forma tão desenvolvimento da humanidade.
aviação, é necessário deter-se mais veloz quanto seus próprios aviões O caminho se faz avançando dos 
na perspectiva do homem como se modifi cam. A estrutura básica do Fatores Humanos para os Humanos 
agente de ação não programável, de homem, porém, fi siologicamente, Fatores presentes nas atividades 
fl exibilidade com criatividade, aquele permanece a mesma. A evolução aeronáuticas.
que, potencialmente, é capaz de psicossocial do ser humano não ocorre Este  trecho de Saint-Exupéry,  do 
atenuar falhas iminentes e assumir o com a mesma rapidez que suas próprias livro “Terra dos Homens”, fornece uma 
controle diante de possíveis situações criações tecnológicas. bela refl exão sobre o avião e sobre a 
imprevistas dos sistemas. Edith Seligmann Silva, cientista aviação como atividade humana:  

Ora, se hoje a idéia é de um “pensar brasileira estudiosa da condição “Sem dúvida, o avião é uma 
sistêmico” no mundo aeronáutico, por humana no trabalho, diz, com muita máquina. Mas que instrumento de 
que, na prática do desenvolvimento propriedade, que as confi gurações análise! 
de ações pró-ativas, progride-se tanto inesperadas do mundo do trabalho Esse instrumento nos permitiu 
nos aspectos tecnológicos e se caminha dos tempos de hoje desafi am a descobrir a verdadeira fi sionomia 

8



da terra.  ...Libertados, desde logo, 
das servidões queridas, libertados da HUMANS THAT 
necessidade das fontes, apontamos a ARE FACTORS OR 
proa para o alvo longínquo. Só então, 
do alto de nossas trajetórias retilíneas, FACTORS THAT ARE 
descobrimos o embasamento essencial, HUMAN?
o fundo de rocha, de areia, de sal em 
que, uma vez ou outra, como um 
pouco de musgo entre ruínas, a vida MARIA DA CONCEIÇÃO PEREIRA

Psychologist
ousa fl orescer. Civil Aviation Department

Então,  somos transformados em Second Civil Aviation Regional Service 
físicos, em biologistas, examinando 
essas civilizações que enfeitam o 

By following the development of 
fundo dos vales e, às vezes, por performance concretely.

aviation in the world, advance is 
milagre, estendem-se como parques Perhaps it’s about time that 

being observed, especially in the 
onde o clima as favorece. Então,  this concept was revised, benefiting 

aeronautical technology context, as the 
podemos julgar o homem por uma from what both human and work 

one that has been progressively offering 
escala cósmica, observando-o através sciences have offered to augment the 

more efficient conditions to artificial 
de nossas vigias como se fora através understanding of human subjects in 

devices that fl y. Speed and precision 
de instrumentos de estudo. Então aviation.

are sized up in search of the perfecting 
relemos a nossa história.” Where does the human factors 

of this technology and the compliance 
É preciso pensar como Exupéry: o reductionism take place?

with specific demands of a world 
avião é um instrumento, nada mais It takes place as this notion becomes 

ruled, essentially, by the economy of a 
que um instrumento, e só o homem strictly associated with the concept 

globalized market with fast demands.
que o criou pode transformá-lo num of error, failure and fault by systems 

Man is parallel to it, who deals 
sábio instrumento! operators; the conceptual aspects that 

with this technology. One who cause the respect for human condition 
nowadays is in charge of managing itself to be essential are noticed in a 
these ultramodern artificial devices way dissociated from the matters of 
is presented, in his human condition subjectivity, singularity, and promotion 
of being finite, fallible and sensitive, of aviation human beings’ safety and 
as the critical component of the health.
aeronautical system; therefore, it is on The fl ying machines have 
him that falls the whole concern of progressively become sophisticated and 
subjects involving the fl ight safety. automated. The attempt to minimize 

Within this context, it is pertinent human error is sometimes noticed 
to report oneself to a critical analysis in these technological advances, 
proposed by Dejours, a French believing that keeping man away or 
psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, who technologically controlling him before 
takes an active part in the international more operational / technical actions, 
aeronautical community environment. along with the machine, will guarantee 
He analyzes the human factors the possibility of preventing his errors.
concept sized up within technical and In the aviation context, the search 
technological sciences. of controlling error present in human 

The Human Factors concept in actions in aeronautical operations 
aviation emanates from these sciences actually exists. The research available 
and, according to Dejours, carries a focuses the concern with human factors 
reductionism and scientificism, in the contribution to the processes in which 
name of which ethical and political the so-called “human error” is believed 
aspects effectively related to human to develop. The solution presented is 
complexity have been forgotten, which usually centered in the capability of 
also size up human actions and mitigating and/or controlling the 

9



effects of these occurrences by means the human complexity before their 
of technology, the human magnitude Understanding own activities - as managers, pilots, 
being forgotten. human errors controllers, technicians, fl ight 

It is believed that it is necessary to attendants or many others who make 
go beyond the act of simply sizing up as a human aviation.
deviations, failures, lapses, faults and phenomenon is more It is also necessary that the 
violations in the context of human than mitigating aeronautical industry, in all aspects, 
reliability. be effectively committed to fl ight safety, 

Up to the present moment, man, as possibilities of erring, and that organizations have ethical 
operator, is seen as the least reliable. By it is going beyond posture and a supportive policy to 
going further on the concepts related to provide effective conditions for these 
human being in aviation, it is necessary the humans that are results. Flight safety must become 
to be more engaged in the perspective of  to a social practice in the name of the 
man as the agent of a non-programmed factors in order development of mankind.
action, of fl exibility with creativity, search for the factors The path is made by advancing 
one who, potentially, is able to mitigate that are human in from humans that are factors to factors 
impending failures and take over the that are human existing in aeronautical 
control before possible unpredicted aviation. activities. 
situations of the systems. This excerpt by Saint-Exupéry, 

Well, if nowadays there is the from “Wind, sand and stars” provides a 
concept of a “systemic thought” in the beautiful refl ection on the airplane and 
aeronautical world, why, in practicing human beings does not occur as fast as on aviation as a human activity: 
the development of proactive actions, their own technological creations. “A plane may be just a machine, 
there is great progress in technological Edith Seligmann Silva, a Brazilian but what an analytical instrument 
aspects and slow pace regarding human scientist who studies human conditions it is! It has revealed to us the true 
resources management of this system? at work, says, with propriety, that face of the earth... Set free now from 

Then, just as Dejours, the question unexpected configurations in the beloved servitudes, released from our 
is arisen again: factors that are human workplace today challenge the human dependence on natural springs, we head 
or humans that are factors in aviation? capacity of interpretation and hamper for our distant goals. It is only then, 

In the aeronautical context, the participative decision-making. Current from high on our rectilinear course, 
understanding of human phenomenon aviation has a standard of sophistication that we discover the essential bedrock, 
in its essence also means the that has demanded from those who the stratum of stone and sand and salt 
understanding of the subjectivity of the work with it a permanent availability where life, like a patch of moss deep 
persons that compound aviation, placed to deal with unpredicted situations and in hollow ruins, fl owers here and there 
in a cultural dimension that may uncertainties and overcome them. where it dares.
generate attitudes and behaviors which To advance technologically is Thus are we changed into physicists 
are incompatible to Flight Safety. From important and part of the evolution of and biologists, scrutinizing civilizations 
this perspective, error is a symptom of mankind; however, we cannot lose sight that adorn valley fl oors and sometimes 
the system as a whole. that each technological progress brings up open out miraculously like great gardens 

Understanding human errors as men new patterns of behavior, new ways where the climate is favourable. Thus 
a human phenomenon is more than of subjectivity and new responses in their do we now assess man on a cosmic 
mitigating possibilities of erring, it actions. scale, observing him through our 
is going beyond the humans that are Before human matters in aviation, cabin windows as if through scientific 
factors in order to search for the factors the necessary proactive actions shall be instruments. Thus are we reading our 
that are human in aviation. concentrated especially in taking care of history anew”.

With regard to technology, aviation human beings, which means that they It is necessary to think like Exupéry: 
has been changing as fast as its own must safeguard their psychophysical, the aircraft is an instrument, nothing 
aircraft change. The basic structure of socioeconomic and cultural conditions, more than an instrument, and only 
man, however, physiologically, remains so that they are able to admit their men who created it can transform it 
the same. The psychosocial evolution of vulnerability, paying attention to into a wise instrument!

10



ARTIGO | MANUTENÇÃO

O  FATOR
CComo toda atividade intensa de mão- HUMANO de manutenção para promover 

de-obra, a manutenção de aeronaves 
está sujeita aos erros humanos, que, na manutenção segurança de vôo vem sendo focado 

na conscientização para o uso 
na realidade, podem ser classifi cados 
como erros ou falhas de procedimento. 
Falhas de procedimento porque a de aeronaves correto dos manuais e procedimentos 

publicados. Tenta-se mostrar que é 
preciso seguir o que está escrito e não 

grande maioria das aeronaves de ENGº. SÉRGIO NOVATO a própria intuição, da mesma forma 
médio e grande porte dispõe de Diretor Técnico que os pilotos são treinados a seguir 
manuais de manutenção bastante TAM os instrumentos e não suas sensações, 
pormenorizados, que servem de guia quando em vôo por instrumentos, sob 
para a maior parte das tarefas de visibilidade zero.
manutenção.                        O treinamento O treinamento dos técnicos de 

A crescente evolução tecnológica dos técnicos de manutenção se centra não apenas 
nos projetos de aeronaves de terceira nos sistemas das aeronaves, mas 
geração tem possibilitado ao pessoal manutenção se também nos processos de consulta e 
de manutenção o uso de poderosas centra não apenas interpretação das publicações técnicas, 
ferramentas de análise e solução de como o Manual de Manutenção, 
panes (troubleshooting). Hoje em dia, nos sistemas das o Catálogo de Peças, o Diagrama 
os aviões se comunicam, por meio aeronaves, mas de Sistemas Elétricos e outros; 
de computadores, não só com os porque, atualmente, os fabricantes 
pilotos, mas também com os técnicos também nos disponibilizam os manuais integrados 
de manutenção, avisando quais os processos de consulta eletronicamente entre si e também 
sistemas com falhas e, literalmente, com as mensagens geradas pela 
informando que tarefa do manual de e interpretação das própria aeronave; como citamos 
manutenção deve ser executada. acima, os aviões praticamente ‘falam’ 

O trabalho dos gestores do pessoal publicações técnicas. com os técnicos.

11



managers to promote fl ight safety is 
being focused on the awareness of the 
correct use of manuals and published 
procedures. They show that it is necessary 
to follow what is written and not 
their own intuition, just as pilots are 
trained to follow instruments and not 
their sensations, when fl ying through 
instruments, under zero visibility.

Maintenance staff training 
concentrates not only on aircraft systems, 
but also on the consultation and 
interpretation processes of the technical 
publications, such as the Maintenance 
Manual, the Spare Parts Catalogue, the 
Electrical Systems Diagrams and others, 
because, nowadays, manufacturers 
make manuals available electronically, 
integrated with one another and 
with the messages generated by the 

Outro fator importante na aircraft itself; as we cited above, 
gestão da manutenção é o preparo 
e conscientização dos inspetores e HUMAN FACTOR the airplanes practically ‘talk’ to the 

technicians. Another important factor 
supervisores, que devem, além de IN AIRCRAFT in maintenance management is the 
constantemente incentivar o uso dos 
manuais adequados, acompanhar a MAINTENANCE preparation and conscientiousness of 

inspectors and supervisors, who must, 
execução das tarefas, verifi cando se os not only constantly encourage the use 
técnicos estão usando corretamente ENG.º SÉRGIO NOVATO
as ferramentas recomendadas e os Techinical Director of adequate manuals, but also follow 

TAM the execution of tasks, checking that 
procedimentos publicados. technicians are properly using the 

A análise de acidentes e Just as in every intense hand labor recommended tools and published 
incidentes causados por erros de activity, aircraft maintenance is subject procedures.
manutenção mostra claramente to human error which, in fact, can be The analysis of accidents and 
que, em algum ponto do processo, classified as errors or faulty procedures.   incidents caused by maintenance errors 
deixou-se de cumprir corretamente Faulty procedures because most of all clearly shows that, at some point of 
um procedimento escrito ou alguma medium and large size aircraft have the process, a written procedure or 
prática considerada padrão mínimo very detailed manuals, which are used some practice considered minimum 
de segurança de manutenção – as as guides for most part of maintenance maintenance safety standard – the 
chamadas “melhores práticas” (best tasks. so-called best practices – has not been 
practices) –, por não terem sido The growing technological evolution accomplished, because manuals, 
usados os manuais, componentes ou of projects of third generation aircraft components or adequate tools have not 
ferramentas adequadas. has allowed maintenance staff to been used.

Podemos afi rmar que hoje se handle powerful tools to analyze and We can assert that today it has become 
tornou mais fácil fazer a manutenção solve problems (troubleshooting). easier to do maintenance in an efficient 
de forma efi caz e segura graças às Nowadays, aircraft communicate and safe way thanks to the available tools; 
ferramentas disponíveis, mas, para through computers, not only with pilots, however, in order to reach the goal of high 
atingir o objetivo de alta qualidade, but also with maintenance technicians, quality, allied to safety and low costs, it is 
aliada a segurança e baixos custos, é notifying which systems are faulty and, essential to have discipline to comply with 
essencial a disciplina na obediência literally, informing which task in the the published processes.
aos processos publicados. maintenance manual must be executed. Provide a safe flight, read the 

Proporcione um vôo seguro, leia The job of maintenance staff manual.
o manual.

12



RITMOS CIRCADIANOS, PROFA. DRA. MARIA LAURA NOGUEIRA PIRES

SONO  E  ALERTA Associação Fundo de Incentivo à Psicofarmacologia (AFIP)
Departamento de Psicobiologia da Universidade Federal 
de São Paulo

NNa aviação, manter um 
nível ótimo de alerta e 
desempenho é uma questão 
crítica e fundamental.  
Como em outras inúmeras 
atividades que exigem 
operação ininterrupta ao 
longo das 24 horas, esta 
atividade pode representar 
um desafio aos ritmos 
biológicos e ao sono. 

Necessidade de sono e sistema 
circadiano: dessa interação resulta o 
alerta
O Dicionário Aurélio defi ne alerta como 
atento, vigilante, em atitude de quem indivíduos nos dois extremos, os que a intrusão do sono na vigília. Tais 
vigia, de vigilância, de sobreaviso. necessitam de poucas horas de sono e episódios espontâneos de sono podem 
O alerta também pode ser colocado aqueles que precisam de muito mais do ser curtos (por exemplo, micro-sono, 
em um contínuo, com um dos pólos que a maioria das pessoas. com duração de alguns segundos) ou 
representando o estado mais elevado O sono é uma necessidade mais demorados (de alguns minutos). 
de vigilância e o extremo oposto, fi siológica vital e, quando alguém é Certamente tais episódios de sono 
o sono. O nível de alerta que você privado dele, a resposta fi siológica é incontrolável podem se associar a um 
está sentindo neste momento ao ler sonolência, um sinal ao cérebro de lapso importante no desempenho, por 
este artigo é baseado, em grande que é necessário dormir. No limite, exemplo, enquanto o indivíduo opera 
parte, em quanto e quão bem você quando privado de sono, aguda ou uma máquina, dirige um veículo ou 
dormiu e a hora do dia. Em relação ao cronicamente, o cérebro humano pilota um avião, situações cujo risco 
primeiro aspecto, embora exista grande pode, espontaneamente e de maneira intenso é óbvio.          
variabilidade individual, a maioria dos incontrolável, alternar entre vigília Dormir mal ou mesmo fi car sem 
adultos necessita de sete a oito horas e sono a fi m de atender a essa dormir uma noite é uma experiência 
de sono, em média, para atingir um necessidade fi siológica. comum e os sintomas desagradáveis 
estado ótimo de alerta e desempenho Quanto mais sonolenta uma pessoa, são familiares a praticamente todas as 
durante um dia típico. No entanto, há mais rápida e freqüentemente ocorre pessoas. Eles incluem irritabilidade, 

13



fadiga e incapacidade para se “A minha mente liga o início da secreção de melatonina e 
concentrar. Caracteristicamente, o e desliga... Eu tento do máximo da temperatura corporal. 
sono da noite de recuperação será No início da manhã se dá a secreção de 
mais longo e haverá um aumento da deixar um olho fechar cortisol, preparando o organismo para 
quantidade de estágios de sono mais por vez a atividade, e os níveis de melatonina 
profundo, como o de ondas lentas. retornam aos valores mínimos. É o 
No entanto, muito provavelmente, a enquanto mantenho conjunto dessas fl utuações que leva os 
ocorrência mais comum entre pilotos seres humanos a serem considerados 
e tripulação seja a redução crônica o outro aberto com como essencialmente diurnos: 
da quantidade de sono. Suponha que a força de vontade. normalmente ativos durante o dia e 
certo indivíduo, embora necessite de com maior propensão ao sono durante 
oito horas diárias de sono, durma Todo o meu corpo a noite.
apenas seis. Se este padrão se repetir ao argumenta com Mesmo após uma boa noite de 
longo de cinco dias, este indivíduo irá fraqueza que sono, é mais difícil manter o alerta em 
acumular um débito de dez horas de alguns momentos do dia do que em 
sono. O débito poderá traduzir-se em nada, nada que a outros. A sonolência durante a tarde, 
prejuízo da habilidade de desempenhar vida consiga, é tão por exemplo, já ocorreu para a maioria 
diversas funções, aumento do de nós, uma vez ou outra. Percebemos 
tempo de reação a um estímulo, desejável isso mais freqüentemente, porém, 
redução do estado de vigilância e da quanto o sono. A quando estamos envolvidos em uma 
capacidade de raciocínio, difi culdades tarefa ou atividade pouco interessante, 
de memorização, entre outros. Vale minha mente está como uma reunião monótona ou a 
ressaltar, contudo, que mesmo a perda leitura de um manual técnico, em 
aguda de duas horas de sono pode perdendo a decisão e um ambiente quente. O que se sabe, 
resultar em prejuízo ao desempenho e no entanto, é que tal diminuição 
nível de alerta. o controle.” no alerta, assim como a expressão 

Uma das mudanças ambientais Charles Lindbergh, The Spirit of St Louis de outros ritmos, é conseqüência do 
mais pronunciadas que percebemos nosso relógio biológico. Assim, muitos 
é a alternância entre claro e escuro estudos descrevem a existência de dois 
que decorre da rotação da Terra. períodos de sonolência ao longo do 
Em resposta a esse ciclo natural, zeitgebers (“doadores de tempo”), que dia: um deles durante a madrugada, 
praticamente todas as espécies, o mantêm em um esquema de 24 aproximadamente entre 03 h e 05 h, e 
incluindo a humana, desenvolveram horas. O zeitgeber mais importante o outro cerca de 12 horas depois, entre 
um relógio biológico interno que é a luz que atinge os olhos, levando 15 h e 17 h.
permite antecipar as mudanças a informação do mundo externo e 
ambientais associadas com o dia e ajustando o relógio ao ciclo de 24 Não conseguimos ajustar o nosso 
a noite e se preparar para elas. Isso horas. Embora ela seja absolutamente relógio biológico da maneira como 
garante ao organismo fazer a coisa essencial para esse ajuste, outros fazemos com o relógio de pulso.
certa no momento certo do dia. O fatores também contribuem, tais como Quando há uma mudança repentina 
relógio biológico também assegura interação social, atividade e horários de nesses agentes sincronizadores, como 
a organização temporal interna do trabalho e alimentação.  acontece no trabalho noturno, de 
organismo, ditando o momento de Os ritmos circadianos (do latim, revezamento, ou na alteração de fuso 
praticamente todos os aspectos da circa = ao redor; die = dia) regulam horário após viagens transmeridionais, 
fi siologia e comportamento humano. praticamente todas as funções do os ritmos circadianos não se 
Em uma analogia, ele pode ser organismo, incluindo a necessidade de ajustam ao novo esquema temporal 
considerado como o maestro de uma sono, o nível de alerta e desempenho imediatamente, mas sim com uma 
orquestra e os processos fi siológicos e mental, a temperatura corporal e certa demora, cuja dimensão depende 
comportamentais, como os integrantes. a secreção de hormônios, como de cada função em particular do 
Situado na estrutura cerebral melatonina e cortisol. Por exemplo, organismo. Suponha que você esteja 
chamada núcleo supraquiasmático do quando estamos sincronizados com vivendo uma vida “normal”, indo se 
hipotálamo, ele obedece a infl uências o dia de 24 horas, o episódio de sono deitar ao redor das 23 horas, acordando 
temporais externas – os chamados principal acontece algumas horas após por volta das 7 horas da manhã e 

14



pela investigação das causas do 
acidente com a aeronave Douglas 
DC-8-61 durante sua aproximação da 
estação norte-americana da Baía de 
Guantanamo, em Cuba, no dia 18 de 
agosto de 1993. Entre outras causas 
prováveis, o NTSB citou que a fadiga 
decorrente da falta de sono reduziu as 
habilidades de vôo, de julgamento e 
de tomada de decisões do comandante 
e tripulação. A hora do dia também 
foi mencionada: o acidente ocorreu 
às 16h56min, no fi nal da janela 
circadiana vespertina de sonolência. 
Outro fenômeno importante é 
que, em muitas ocasiões, há uma 
discrepância entre o nível de alerta (ou 

trabalhando durante o dia. Seu corpo do dia em que seu organismo está de sonolência) que relatamos sentir 
e seu cérebro estão adaptados a esse fi siologicamente preparado para e o que pode ser obtido por medidas 
esquema, de tal maneira que você dormir. De maneira correspondente, objetivas. De maneira geral, nossa 
tem um sono repousante, satisfatório quando tenta dormir durante o dia, tendência é achar que estamos alertas, 
e consegue desempenhar bem suas ele enfrenta a oposição do relógio quando, na realidade, é possível que 
atividades diárias. Agora, suponha biológico, que programou o organismo estejamos bem sonolentos. Isto ocorre 
que seu esquema foi invertido, você para a vigília. Em conseqüência, ele porque a própria sonolência prejudica 
precisa trabalhar à noite, das 23 às tenta combater a sonolência enquanto a nossa capacidade de julgamento, 
7 horas, e dormir durante o dia. É trabalha à noite e depois procura diminuindo também a precisão de 
bastante provável que tanto o seu sobrepujar o sinal circadiano de vigília nossas estimativas, inclusive a de 
sono quanto o seu desempenho no quando se esforça para dormir durante quanto estamos ou não sonolentos. 
trabalho sofram alterações negativas. o dia. O resultado é previsível: com o O comandante do Douglas DC-8-
Assim, você tentará trabalhar quando passar dos dias, acumula-se um débito 61 afi rmou ao comitê investigador 
o seu organismo sinaliza que é tempo de sono, que vai se manifestar por do NTSB que se sentia cansado de 
de dormir, e dormir quando ele está aumento da sonolência, difi culdade de manhã, quando aceitou a viagem a 
programado para fi car acordado. A manter a vigília e maior probabilidade Guantanamo após ter voado a noite 
adaptação não é imediata, e o tempo de adormecer em momentos inteira, mas não achou que o cansaço 
necessário para se ajustar ao novo inapropriados. Em relação a viagens fosse tão grande a ponto de tornar 
esquema temporal é variado. Durante a transmeridionais, não somente o inseguro voar. 
fase de readaptação, a relação temporal número de fusos horários ultrapassados  Outros desastres notórios, 
entre os vários ritmos circadianos do é importante, mas também o destino. como o da usina nuclear Three Mile 
organismo, e também entre eles e O deslocamento através de três ou Island, ocorrido por volta das quatro 
o mundo externo, fi ca perturbada, quatro fusos horários  já exige uma horas da manhã, ou o do cargueiro 
favorecendo o aparecimento de adaptação considerável do sistema Exxon Valdez, perto da meia-noite, 
sintomas de fadiga, irritabilidade, circadiano, adaptação que é mais difícil e inúmeras estatísticas de acidentes 
alterações de humor, problemas com quando a direção é leste e ocorre um de trânsito refl etem o fato de que 
o sono, distúrbios gastrointestinais, encurtamento do dia, do que para a sonolência e a desorganização 
entre outros. Mais ainda, o conjunto oeste, quando o dia é alongado, já circadiana podem comprometer a 
desses fatores compõe um cenário que a tendência natural do relógio segurança individual e, muitas vezes, 
favorável à redução da capacidade de biológico é se atrasar. também a segurança pública. É 
desempenho e aumento do risco de A importância do sono e dos evidente que a adoção de estratégias 
erros e acidentes. Nesta situação, se um ritmos circadianos na aviação foi preventivas e operacionais é uma 
indivíduo necessitar trabalhar durante mencionada na análise do comitê vantagem para todos, indivíduo e 
a madrugada, ele procurará manter do National Transportation Safety organização - e é nesta direção que 
um nível ótimo de alerta no momento Board  (NTSB/AAR-94/04), responsável devemos agir.

15



hours and those who need much more than between pilots and crewmembers is chronic 

CIRCADIAN most people. reduction of sleep quantity.
Sleep is a vital physiological need Let’s assume that a certain individual, 

RHYTHMS, SLEEP and, when someone is deprived of it, despite his or her need of eight sleep-hours 
AND ALERTNESS the physiological response is sleepiness or a day, sleeps only six. If this pattern repeats 

drowsiness, a signal to the brain that for five days, this person will accumulate 
PROFA. DRA. MARIA LAURA NOGUEIRA PIRES sleeping is necessary. At its boundary, when a debt of ten sleep-hours. This debt may 
Fund of Incentive to Psychopharmacology deprived of sleep, acutely or chronically, be translated into hazard in the ability 
Association (AFIP) 
Department of Psychobiology, Federal University of the human brain can, spontaneously to perform several functions, increase of 
São Paulo and uncontrollably, alternate between time response to a stimulus, reduction 

vigilance and sleep in order to satisfy this of vigilance state and thinking capacity, 
In aviation, keeping an optimum physiological need. difficulties in memorization, among others. 
alertness and performance level It is important to highlight, however, 
is a critical and fundamental  “My mind turns on and that even the acute loss of two sleep- hours 

matter. As in several other may result in hazard to performance and 

activities that demand nonstop off... I try to let one eye alertness level.

24-hour operation, this activity close at a time while I keep One of the most pronounced 

may represent a challenge to the other open willingly. environmental changes we notice is the 
alternation between light and dark due 

biological rhythms and sleep. My whole body argues to the Earth’s rotation. By responding to 
with weakness that this natural cycle, practically all species, 

The necessity of sleep and circadian nothing, nothing that life including human beings, have developed 
system: alertness results from this 
interaction can get, is so desirable as an internal body clock that allows one 

to anticipate the environmental changes 
The Aurelio Dictionary defines alertness sleep. My mind is losing associated with day and night and be 
as attentive, vigilant, watching attitude, decision an d control.” prepared to them. This guarantees the body 
ready to notice and deal with a situation. to do the right thing at the right moment of 
Alertness may be placed within a Charles Lindbergh, the day.
continuum, one of the poles representing the The Spirit of St Louis The body clock also ensures the 
highest state of vigilance and the opposite  internal temporal organization of the 
pole, sleep. The alertness level you are The sleepier the person, the faster body, dictating the moment of practically 
feeling at this moment while you read this and more often sleep intrusion into all aspects of physiology and human 
essay is based, mostly, on how much and vigilance occurs. Such spontaneous sleep behavior. By analogy, it can be considered 
how well you slept and time of the day. episodes may be short (e.g. microsleep, as the conductor of an orchestra, and the 

With regard to the first aspect, although lasting a few seconds) or longer (a few physiological and behavioral processes as its 
there is great individual variability, most minutes). Certainly, those uncontrollable musicians.
adult people need from seven to eight sleep- sleep episodes may be associated with Situated within the brain structure 
hours, on average, to reach an optimum an important lapse in performance, for called supraquiasmatic nucleus of 
state of alertness and performance during a instance, while the individual operates a hypothalamus, it obeys external temporal 
typical day. However, there are individuals machine, drives a car or fl ies an airplane, influences – the so-called zeitgebers 
at these two ends, those who need few sleep- situations whose intense risk is obvious.           (“donators of time”), which keep them in 

Having a bad night of sleep or even a 24-hour scheme. The most important 
being awake one nightlong is a common zeitgeber is the light that reaches the eyes, 
experience and its unpleasant symptoms taking information from the external 
are familiar to practically everyone. They world and adjusting the clock according to 
include irritability, fatigue and inability to the 24-hour cycle. Although it is absolutely 
concentrate. Characteristically, the recovery essential for this adjustment, other factors 
night sleep will be longer and there will be also contribute, such as social interaction, 
an increase of quantity of deep sleep stages, working tasks and schedule, and food.
such as those of low waves. Nevertheless, The circadian rhythms (from Latin, 
most likely, the most often occurrence circa = about; dies = day) regulate 

16



practically all body functions, including perform your daily activities well. Now, let’s rhythms in 
the need of sleep, the alertness level and assume your scheme has been inverted, you aviation was 
mental performance, body temperature need to work at night, from 23h to 7h, and mentioned at 
and hormones secretion, as melatonin sleep during the day. It is likely that both your the analysis of 
and cortisol. For instance, when we are sleep and work performance suffer negative the National 
synchronized with a 24-hour day, the changes. Therefore, you will try to work while Transportation 
main sleep episode occurs some hours your body signals that it is time to sleep, and Safety Board 
after melatonin is first secreted and body sleep when it is programmed to be awake. The committee 
temperature has reached its highest. Early in adaptation is not immediate, and the time (NTSB/AAR-
the morning, cortisol is secreted, preparing needed to adjust to the new temporal scheme 94/04), in charge of 
the body for activity, and melatonin levels varies. the investigation of causes 
push back to its minimum values. Human During the readaptation phase, the of the Douglas DC-8-61 accident 
beings are considered as essentially diurnal temporal relation among several body during its approach to the American station 
persons due to these variations altogether: circadian rhythms, and also between at Guantanamo Bay, in Cuba, on August 
usually active during the day and prone to them and the external world, is disrupted, 18th, 1993. Among other probable causes, 
sleep at night. facilitating the occurrence of symptoms such NTSB has cited that fatigue due to lack of 

Even after a good night sleep it is more as fatigue, irritability, changes in mood, sleep reduced the captain and crew’s abilities 
difficult to keep alertness in some moments sleep disorders, gastrointestinal disruptions, of flying, judging and decision-making. 
of the day than in others. Sleepiness during among others. Moreover, the set of these factors The time of the day was also mentioned: 
the afternoon, for instance, has already comprises a favorable scenario to reducing the the accident occurred at 16h56min, at the 
happened to most of us, once in a while. performance capacity and increasing accidents end of the afternoon circadian window of 
However, we notice it more often when and error risks. sleepiness. Another important phenomenon is 
we are involved in a less interesting task Under this condition, if an individual that, very often, there is discrepancy between 
or activity, such as a monotonous meeting needs to work during the night, he or she the alertness level (or sleepiness) that we say 
or the reading of a technical manual, in a will try to keep an optimum alertness level we feel and the one that can be obtained by 
stuffy room. at a moment of the day when his or her objective measures.

Nevertheless, it is known that body is physiologically prepared to sleep. In general, we tend to believe we are 
such reduction in alertness, as well as Correspondingly, when one tries to sleep alert, when, actually, it is likely we are very 
the expression of other rhythms, is the during the day, he or she faces the opposition sleepy. This occurs because sleepiness itself 
consequence of our body clock. Thus, a lot of of the body clock, which programmed the body harms our judgment ability, also reducing 
research describes that there are two periods to vigilance. As a result, the person tries to the precision of our predictions, including of 
of sleepiness during the day: one at night, defeat sleepiness while working at night and whether we are sleepy or not. The Douglas 
approximately between 03h and 05h, and then tries to take over the vigilance circadian DC-8-61 captain stated to the NTSB 
the other around 12h later, between 15h signal when making an effort to sleep during investigation committee he was feeling tired 
and 17h. the day. in the morning, when accepted the trip to 

We are not able to adjust our body clock The result is predictable: as days pass by, Guantanamo after having fl own throughout 
as we do it with our wristwatch. there is an accumulation of sleep debt, which the night, but didn’t believe his tiredness 

When there is a sudden change in these will be shown as an increase of sleepiness, would be so deep that would make the fl ight 
synchronizing agents, as it happens at night difficulty in keeping vigilance and increased unsafe. 
jobs or shifts, or there is a change in time probability of sleeping at inappropriate Other notorious disasters, for instance, 
zone after transmeridian trips, the circadian moments. Concerning the transmeridian the Three Mile Island nuclear power station 
rhythms do not adjust themselves to the new trips, not only the number of time zones is which occurred around 4 a.m., or the 
temporal scheme immediately, but they do so important, but also the destination. Traveling Exxon Valdez freighter, close to midnight, 
with some delay, whose dimension depends through three or four time zones already and several statistics of car accidents refl ect 
on each particular function of the body. Let’s demands a considerable circadian system the fact that sleepiness and circadian 
assume that you’ve lived a “normal” life, adaptation, which is more difficult when disorganization may compromise the 
going to bed around 23h, waking up around going eastward and the day is shortened, individual safety and, often, public safety. 
7h a.m. and working during the day. than when going westward, when the day is It is evident that the adoption of preventive 

Your body and brain are adapted to lengthened, as delaying is a natural tendency and operational strategies is an advantage 
this scheme in such a way that you have a of the body clock. for all, individual and organization – and 
satisfying and restful sleep and are able to The importance of sleep and circadian we have to act toward it.

17



O  ERRO  HUMANO
E  O  CONTEXTO DA AVIAÇÃO

SELMA LEAL DE OLIVEIRA RIBEIRO, D. SC. 
Coordenadora do Laboratório de Psicologia do 
Núcleo do Instituto de Ciências da Atividade Física da 
Aeronáutica (NUICAF)

Os pilotos, que desde o início da plena, por parte do piloto, sobre o 

Ohistória da aviação sempre foram comportamento da aeronave sob a 
vistos como seres míticos, cada vez tutela dos dispositivos automatizados.
mais se apresentam como aqueles que, Um exemplo bem característico 
além de conseguir vencer a famosa lei constitui-se o acidente ocorrido em 26 
da gravidade, também se destacam de abril de 1994, com uma aeronave 
por reunir, dentro de sua mente, Airbus A300-600, operada pela China 
os intricados e complexos sistemas Airlines, que caiu em Nagoya, no 
que compõem suas máquinas. Aliás, Japão, matando 264 passageiros e 
mais do que isso: além de tê-los na membros da tripulação. No relatório 
mente, utilizam-nos como ferramentas do acidente, foram apontados como 
imprescindíveis na resolução de fatores contribuintes as atitudes 
problemas e situações de seu confl itantes tomadas pela 
cotidiano. tripulação de vôo e pelo piloto 

Entretanto, eles nem sempre são automático (Abbott et al., 
lembrados por esses feitos diários. Em 1996, p.1 e D-6).
geral, a base de referência (quando Em 20 de dezembro 
esta acontece) reside nos erros de 1995, um Boeing 757 
que cometem. Infelizmente, nesse da American Airlines caiu 
momento, passam a ser vistos como próximo ao aeroporto de Cali, 
simples e mortais Seres Humanos. na Colômbia. Devido à inserção 

É fato que a aviação tem sido uma de dados no computador de 
das áreas que mais passou por avanços bordo, sugerindo que a aeronave 
tecnológicos, que fi zeram com que, sobrevoasse um ponto que já 
em pouco mais de meio século, desde havia sido sobrevoado, o piloto 
o primeiro vôo do “mais pesado do automático iniciou uma curva 
que o ar”, o ser humano se projetasse para voltar a ele. A tripulação 
para o espaço sideral em busca de interveio, mas as mudanças de 
novas conquistas. Entretanto, é fato curso colocaram a aeronave 
também que, a despeito de todos esses em rota de colisão com uma 
avanços que objetivavam, entre outras montanha. Com a sobrecarga de 
coisas, reduzir a carga de trabalho trabalho decorrente da tentativa 
do piloto e a ocorrência de erros, de reprogramar o computador 
acidentes continuaram a acontecer, de bordo ao invés de buscar corrigir 
hoje nem tanto pela sobrecarga o erro manualmente, a tripulação 
física do operador, mas muito mais não conseguiu evitar que a aeronave 
pela interrupção na compreensão seguisse em direção à montanha 

18



(Abbott et al., 1996, p.1 e D-8; objetivo apresentar alguns conceitos conceito de violação, questão que será 
Endsley & Strauch, 1997; Newman & relativos ao erro humano, tendo contemplada mais à frente.
Foyle, 2003, p.873). em vista a importância que o tema Segundo Reason (1990), “erro 

Estes dois exemplos, unidos a vem tomando em diferentes áreas, humano é um termo genérico que 
outros de acidentes, bem como nas quais a contribuição humana compreende toda ocasião em que 
alguns incidentes, mostram que as nas operações de sistemas de alta a seqüência mental planejada de 
difi culdades que conduzem uma tecnologia tem afetado, sobremaneira, atividades mentais ou físicas falha em 
aeronave tão sofi sticada e seus a confi abilidade de seus resultados. alcançar seu resultado pretendido”, ou 
tripulantes especialmente treinados Essa preocupação tem envolvido seja, toda vez que ocorre um desvio 
e qualifi cados a um destino não somente a comunidade aérea, entre o pretendido e o realizado.
catastrófi co, na maioria das vezes, que apresenta uma história de grandes Em geral, alguns erros são 
não são privilégio de determinada acidentes, como o de Tenerife, em detectados pelo próprio operador 
região geográfi ca, companhia aérea, 1977 e o da nave espacial Challenger, e corrigidos a tempo. Na aviação, 
fabricante ou tipo de aeronave. em 1986, mas também outros por exemplo, é tarefa do piloto 

Este breve ensaio tem por contextos. Alguns exemplos que verifi car constantemente se os 
trouxeram a questão à tona foram os resultados obtidos correspondem ao 
acidentes de Three Miles Islands (TMI), planejamento previsto, além de que a 
em 1979 e de Chernobyl, em 1986, no monitoração das possibilidades de erro 
contexto da energia nuclear, a tragédia ocorre quase naturalmente. Entretanto, 
da nuvem tóxica de Bhopal, em 1984, mesmo assim, acontecem falhas, 
na indústria química, e a explosão da cujos resultados, algumas vezes, são 
plataforma de petróleo Piper Alpha, catastrófi cos, o que freqüentemente 
em 1988. difi culta a identifi cação precisa do que 

realmente ocorreu. Isto é conseqüência 
O que é “Erro”? da complexidade inerente ao próprio 
O “Erro” pode apresentar ser humano e à compreensão exata 
diferentes signifi cados de seus comportamentos em situação 
para diferentes pessoas. real, bem como da complexidade das 
Para os teóricos, o erro é situações de trabalho (que envolve a 
utilizado como um meio complexidade estrutural e funcional 
para melhor compreender dos equipamentos, dos sistemas de 
e tentar controlar os comunicação e das ligações com 
processos cognitivos em outras estruturas, entre outras).
que se baseiam os atos Do ponto de vista estritamente 
humanos. Para aqueles cognitivo, a produção de erro se 

que atuam no dia-a-dia coloca em termos de processamento 
operacional – os práticos, o de informações. A pessoa interage de 
erro constitui-se na principal forma equilibrada com o ambiente, 
ameaça às operações seguras através de mediadores especializados: 
das tecnologias de alto risco. os órgãos dos sentidos. Isto se passa, 
Enquanto os teóricos coletam, em nível primário e secundário 
analisam e categorizam os (estimulação e sensação), a uma 
erros, os práticos tentam, sem velocidade, na maioria das vezes, 
sucesso, eliminá-los e conter maior do que aquela que o cérebro 
seus efeitos adversos. humano tem condições de processar. 

Hoje, como resultado dos O mecanismo que dota a sensação 
estudos de muitos desses teóricos, de signifi cante é a percepção, que 
sabe-se que é impossível a eliminação faz o estímulo captado interagir com 
total da ocorrência do erro humano, instâncias de raciocínio associativo. 
tendo em vista a noção de não- Como a quantidade e a velocidade 
intencionalidade que envolve seu deste sistema periférico são superiores 
conceito – o que o diferencia do às faculdades de 

19



raciocínio, o organismo necessita Em ambientes tão diversos como de provocar dano; na grande maioria 
de um sistema de triagem. Por este os de produção de combustíveis, das vezes, o objetivo é exatamente o 
motivo, desenvolvem-se mecanismos medicina, geração de energia nuclear contrário (Reason, 1990; Mauriño et 
denominados fi ltros, que têm por e aviação, entre outros, sabe-se al., 1995).
objetivo reduzir a quantidade de dados que os operadores se desviam dos Identifi car os comportamentos 
absorvidos a um número viável para procedimentos-padrão e “cortam que se desviam dos procedimentos 
permitir o gerenciamento cognitivo caminhos” de vez em quando. A prescritos é o primeiro passo para o 
(Wickens & Flach, 1988). maioria das atividades nestes setores levantamento dos motivos que os 

Cada um desses fi ltros, acrescido é altamente regulada, padronizada, desencadeiam e, conseqüentemente, 
de outras condições individuais, e devidamente preestabelecida; para o desenvolvimento de estratégias 
como cansaço, ansiedade etc., ou assim, a expectativa é que os para corrigi-los. Tais comportamentos 
de situações envolvendo pressões operadores conduzam suas tarefas não devem ser estimulados, porém são 
externas, de superiores, de tempo conforme preconizam os manuais, os sintomas de que algo pode não estar 
ou mesmo organizacionais, pode procedimentos organizacionais e as indo bem e, portanto, necessita ser 
favorecer ou não a detecção e o normas de comportamento seguro. revisto e corrigido.
processamento equivocado da 
informação gerada no sistema e O erro humano é o culpado do 
tornada disponível para o operador.  Identificar um erro acidente?
Por este motivo, o “erro” é visto como ou uma violação é Em aviação e em outras áreas, o erro 
característica humana, decorrente de humano é um dos fatores na longa 
problemas informacionais, no que apenas o início da lista de “causas” usadas pela imprensa 
diz respeito ao processo cognitivo. pesquisa das causas, e pelos investigadores de acidentes. 
Conseqüentemente, é considerado Tanto o erro como a violação são 
como não intencional, o que indica não o final comportamentos indesejáveis, 
a necessidade de um tratamento principalmente em ambientes de 
exploratório para determinar os risco, e devem ser vistos como 
aspectos que o desencadearam e, Entretanto, justamente por estar conseqüência e não causa e, como tal, 
então, desenvolver estratégias que envolvido por uma rede de regras e pesquisados em suas bases para que 
visem evitar a sua recorrência. procedimentos bem intencionados é se possam desenvolver estratégias mais 

que o operador pode se sentir com efi cazes para sua prevenção. Eles são 
E a “Violação”? pouca fl exibilidade para agir, já que a confi gurados e provocados por fatores 
Genericamente falando, a “violação” amplitude de ações permitidas parece encontrados no ambiente de trabalho 
também pode ser caracterizada como estar cada vez mais reduzida (Reason e organizacional. Identifi car um erro 
um tipo de erro, justamente por ser & Hobbs, 2003). ou uma violação é apenas o início da 
uma ação que também se desvia O trabalhador pode achar difícil pesquisa das causas, não o fi nal.
do previsto, ou do planejado; a completar o trabalho sem “tomar um Para a detecção das fontes de 
diferença reside no fato de que esse atalho”, economizar tempo, custos ou erro e minimização de seus efeitos, 
desvio é deliberado. Trata-se de uma energia na realização de suas tarefas. reforçam-se as atividades de 
ação intencional, embora os maus A base para tais comportamentos monitoração e reporte. Deste modo, 
resultados que porventura venham a pode decorrer de aspectos situacionais, os fatores indutores de erros presentes 
ocorrer não o sejam. pressões do ambiente, dos superiores no ambiente poderão ser identifi cados 

É claro que existem violações ou até mesmo dos próprios colegas, antes que se combinem com falhas do 
com um propósito maléfi co, como além de cansaço, preocupações desempenho humano, vindo a 
as sabotagens. Entretanto, esse tipo variadas, entre tantos outros motivos. 
de ação não será abordado neste Pular itens de um checklist, encurtar 
contexto e deve ter um tratamento uma aproximação, deixar de cumprir 
diferenciado. um SOP (Standard Operation 

Em anos recentes, os psicólogos e Procedure) são apenas alguns dos 
os pesquisadores da área de segurança comportamentos que ocorrem no 
têm procurado descobrir como tais dia-a-dia da aviação e que, embora 
ações estão se espalhando em postos realizados de forma intencional, não 
de trabalho onde a segurança é crítica. possuem necessariamente o desejo 

20



produzir quebras na segurança dos recorrência e caminhar no sentido do 3. Mauriño, D. E. Human factors and 
sistemas. desenvolvimento de um trabalho de aviation safety: what the industry has, 

Segundo Mauriño (2000), o real prevenção de acidentes. what the industry needs. Ergonomics. 
Taylor & Francis Ltd.: London, UK, Vol. 

desenvolvimento de mecanismos que O tema em foco não se encerra 43, n.7, 952-959, 2000.
levem à detecção do erro (antes que por aqui, ao contrário, muitas 
este possa produzir efeitos danosos aos outras nuanças da questão se fazem 4. Mauriño, D.E.; Reason, J.; Johnston, 
sistemas), à tolerância ao erro (através presentes e é necessário abordá-las N. and Lee, R. B. Beyond aviation human 
de redundâncias elaboradas a partir de e discuti-las. A intenção primária factors. Hants, Avebury Aviation, 1995.
análises prévias), e à reparação do erro foi trazer à tona a refl exão sobre o 

5. Newman, R. L. & Foyle, D. C. Test 
(decorrente de medidas contingenciais) assunto, tamanha a sua importância scenarios for rare events. In: Jensen, 
mostra uma compreensão teórico- no contexto dos estudos na área de R. S. XIIth International Symposium 
prática da questão, ao invés de Segurança. on Aviation Psychology. Proceedings. 
se fi xar em esforços patéticos Dayton: Wright State University, 2003.
objetivando unicamente a supressão 
do erro. Identifi car e desenvolver Referências: 6. Reason, J. Human error. Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
tais mecanismos mostram-se como 1. Abbott, K., Slotte, S., Stimson, D. et al. 

The interfaces between fl ight crews and 
os grandes desafi os ao trabalho, modern fl ight deck systems. (Report of the 7. Reason & Hobbs, A. Managing 
principalmente quando este envolve FAA HF Team). Washington, DC: Federal maintenance error: a practical guide. 
sistemas de alto risco e complexidade, Aviation Administration, 1996. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.
como no caso da aviação.

O erro ou a violação, assim como 2. Endsley, M. R. & Strauch, B. Automation 8. Wickens, C. D. & Flach, J. M. 
Information processing. In: Wiener, E. 

o desastre que pode se seguir a eles, é and situation awareness. In: Jensen, R. 
S. & Rakovan, L. Ninth International L. and Nagel, D. C. Human Factors in 

algo que requer explicação. Somente Symposium on Aviation Psychology. Aviation. San Diego: Academic Press, 
pela compreensão do contexto que os Proceedings. Columbus: Ohio State 1988.
provoca se poderá esperar limitar sua University, 1997.

HUMAN ERROR achievements. In general, the ground for accident that happened on April 26th, 
reference (when it occurs) resides in the 1994, with an Airbus A300-600, 

AND THE AVIATION errors they commit. Unfortunately, at operated by China Airlines, which 
CONTEXT this moment, they turn into simple and fell in Nagoya, Japan, killing 264 

mortal Human Beings. passengers and crewmembers. In the 
SELMA LEAL DE OLIVEIRA RIBEIRO, D. SC. It is fact that aviation is one of accident report, the confl icting attitudes 
Coordinator of the Laboratory of Psychology of the 
Aeronautical Physical Activity Science Institute the fields that has been through more taken by the crew and the autopilot 

technological advances that allowed were pointed as contributing factors.
Pilots, who have always been seen as human beings, in not more than half On December 20th, 1995, a 

mythical beings since the beginning of a century since the first fl ight of the Boeing 757 from American Airlines fell 
aviation history, are progressively being “heavier than air”, to project themselves near Cali Airport, in Colombia. Due 
introduced as those who, not only are to the sidereal space in search of new to the input of data in the computer, 
able to win the famous law of gravity, conquest.  However, it is also fact that, suggesting that the aircraft would fl y a 
but also outstand for gathering, in despite all these improvements that waypoint that had already been fl own, 
their minds, the intricate and complex aimed, among other things, to reduce the the autopilot started a turn to return 
systems that compound their machines. pilot’s workload and the occurrence of to that waypoint. The crew intervened 
As a matter of fact, it’s more than that: errors, accidents still happen nowadays, but the change of course put the aircraft 
besides having the systems in their not as much due to the operator’s physical in collision course with a mountain. 
minds, pilots use them as indispensable overload of work, but much more due With the overload of work arisen by the 
tools to solve problems and situations of to the interruption of the pilot’s full attempt to reset the computer instead of 
their ordinary lives. comprehension of the aircraft behavior manually correcting the error, the crew 

Nevertheless, they are not under the tutoring of automated devices. couldn’t prevent the aircraft from fl ying 
always remembered for these daily A very typical example comprises the toward the mountain (ABBOTT 

21



et al., 1996, p.1 e D-8; ENDSLEY occurrence of human error, having in out data. For this reason, mechanisms 
& STRAUCH, 1997; NEWMAN & mind the notion of non-intentionality called filters are developed, which aim 
FOYLE, 2003, p.873). that involves its concept – what to reduce the quantity of absorbed 

Both examples, along with other differentiates it from the concept of data to a feasible number to allow the 
accidents, as well as some incidents, violation, a matter that will be further cognitive management (WICKENS & 
show that the difficulties that lead considered. FLACH, 1988).
such a sophisticated aircraft and its According to Reason (1990), Each of these filters, augmented 
specially trained and qualified crew to “human error is a generic word that by other individual conditions, 
a catastrophic fate, most of the times, comprises every circumstance in which such as tiredness, anxiety, etc., or by 
are not privilege of a certain geographic the planned mental sequence of physical situations involving external pressures, 
region, airline, manufacturer or type of or mental activities fail to achieve the of superiors, of time or organizational, 
aircraft. intended result”, i.e., every time that a may favor or not the misled detection 

This short essay aims to present some deviation between the intended and the and processing of information generated 
concepts related to human error, having accomplished action occurs. in the system and made available to 
in sight the importance the subject has In general, some errors are detected the operator. For this reason, “error” 
had in different areas, in which the by the operator himself and corrected is seen as a human feature, arisen by 
human contribution in the operation of in time. In aviation, for example, informational problems, concerning 
high tech systems has greatly affected the it’s the pilot’s task to constantly verify the cognitive process and, therefore, is 
reliability of its results. if the achieved results correspond to considered as non-intentional, what 

This concern has involved not the planning predicted, besides the points out the need of an exploratory 
only the aeronautical community who monitoring of error possibilities occur treatment to determine the aspects 
presents a record of huge accidents, such quite naturally. Nevertheless, there are which unleashed it and, thus, develop 
as in Tenerife, 1977, and Challenger failures, which results are catastrophic strategies that aim to prevent its 
space shuttle, 1986, but also other sometimes, what usually makes it recurrence. 
contexts. Some examples that brought difficult to precisely identify what really 
up the subject were the Three Miles happened. This is the consequence of the What about “Violation”?
Island (TMI) accident, 1979, and complexity inherent to human beings Generally speaking, “violation” may 
Chernobyl, 1986, in the nuclear and the exact understanding of their also be characterized as a type of 
energy context; the toxic cloud tragedy behavior in an actual situation, as well error, exactly for being an action that 
in Bhopal, 1984, in the chemical as the complexity of work situations also deviates from its prediction or 
industry; and the Piper Alpha oil rig (which involve the structural and planning. The difference resides in the 
explosion, 1988. functional complexity of equipment, fact that this deviation is deliberate. It 

communication systems and links with is an intentional action, although bad 
What is “Error”? other structures, among others). results that might occur are not.
“Error” may have different meanings From the strict cognitive viewpoint, It is obvious that there are 
for different people. For theorists, error production is placed in terms of violations with malevolent purposes, 
error is used as a means of better information processing. The person such as sabotages. However, this kind 
understanding and trying to control interacts in a balanced way with the of action will not be mentioned within 
the cognitive processes in which human environment, through specialized this context and shall be treated 
acts are based upon. For those who mediators: the sense organs. This differently.
lead the operational routine – the occurs, in primary and secondary levels In recent years, psychologists and 
practitioners, error constitutes the (stimulus and sensation), most of the 
main threat to safety operations of times in a speed higher than the one that 
high-risk technologies. While theorists the human brain is able to process. The 
collect, analyze and categorize errors, mechanism that owns the sensation of 
practitioners try, unsuccessfully, to significance is perception, which makes 
eliminate and preclude their adverse the captured stimulus interact with 
effects. entreaties of associative thinking. Due to 

Nowadays, as a result of many of the quantity and speed superiority of this 
these theorists’ studies, it is known that peripherical system over the faculties of 
it is impossible to totally mitigate the thinking, the body needs a system to sort 

22



To identify an error reasons. Skipping items from a checklist, efforts which only aim the error 

or a violation is just shortening an approach, not complying suppression. Identifying and developing 
with a SOP (Standard Operation such mechanisms are seen as the major 

the beginning of the Procedure) are only some of the ordinary challenges at work, mainly when it 

research of causes, not behaviors in aviation that, although involves high-risk and complex systems, as 

the end. performed intentionally, do not necessarily it is in aviation.
have the intention to cause harm; most Error or violation, as well as 
of the times, the aim is just the opposite the disaster that may follow them, is 

researchers in the safety area have (REASON, 1990; MAURINO et al., 1995). something that requires explanation. 
been trying to find out how these To identify the behaviors that deviate Only by understanding the context in 
actions are spreading at workstations from the prescribed procedures is the first which they are created, can one expect to 
where safety is critical. In such various step to bring up reasons that unleash them limit their recurrence and walk towards 
environments such as fuel production, and, therefore, to develop strategies to the development of an actual accident 
medicine, nuclear energy generation and correct them. Such behaviors shall not be prevention work.
aviation, among others, it is known that stimulated; however, they are symptoms The subject above does not close here, 
operators deviate themselves from the that something may not be doing well and, on the contrary, there are many other 
standard procedures and make “shortcuts” thus, need to be revised and corrected. nuances of the matter and it is necessary 
from time to time. Most of the activities to bring them up and discuss them. The 
in these fields are highly regulated, Is human error to blame for the primary intention was to bring up the 
standardized and duly pre-established; accident? refl ection on the subject, so important it is 
thus, the expectation is that operators In aviation and other fields, human in the context of safety related studies.
conduct their tasks according to what error is one of the factors on the long list 
manuals, organizational procedures of “causes” used by the press and accidents References: 
and safe behavior regulations advocate. investigators. Both error and violation 1. Abbott, K., Slotte, S., Stimson, D. et al. The 
Nevertheless, just because operators are are undesired behaviors, mainly in interfaces between flight crews and modern flight deck 
involved by a net of well-intentioned rules risky environments, and must be seen as systems. (Report of the FAA HF Team). Washington, 

DC: Federal Aviation Administration, 1996.
and procedures, they may feel with little consequence and not as cause and, as such, 
fl exibility to act, as the scope of allowed must be researched in their foundations so 2. Endsley, M. R. & Strauch, B. Automation and 
actions seem to be reducing progressively that more efficient strategies are developed situation awareness. In: Jensen, R. S. & Rakovan, 
(REASON & HOBBS, 2003). to prevent them. They are shaped and L. Ninth International Symposium on Aviation 

Workers may find it difficult to caused by factors found in the workplace Psychology. Proceedings. Columbus: Ohio State 
University, 1997.

accomplish a job without “taking a and organizational environment. To 
shortcut”, saving money, time or effort identify an error or a violation is just the 3. Mauriño, D. E. Human factors and aviation 
by executing their tasks. The ground for beginning of the research of causes, not the safety: what the industry has, what the industry 

those behaviors may arise from situational end. needs. Ergonomics. Taylor & Francis Ltd.: London, 
UK, Vol. 43, n.7, 952-959, 2000.

aspects, pressures of the environment, In order to detect the sources of error 
superiors or co-workers, besides tiredness, and minimize their effects, monitoring and 4. Mauriño, D. E.; Reason, J.; Johnston, N. and 
various concerns among so many other reporting activities are reinforced. Hence, Lee, R. B. Beyond aviation human factors. Hants, 

the inducing factors of errors existing in the Avebury Aviation, 1995.

environment can be identified before they 5. Newman, R. L. & Foyle, D. C. Test scenarios 
match human performance failures, which for rare events. In: Jensen, R. S. XIIth International 
lead to disruptions in the systems safety. Symposium on Aviation Psychology. Proceedings. 

According to Mauriño (2000) the Dayton: Wright State University, 2003.

development of mechanisms that lead to 6. Reason, J. Human error. Cambridge: Cambridge 
error detection (before it may cause harmful University Press, 1990. 
effects to the systems), to error tolerance 
(by means of redundancies created from 7. Reason & Hobbs, A. Managing maintenance 

previous analyses), and to error restoration error: a practical guide. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003.
8. Wickens, C. D. & Flach, J. M. Information 

(due to contingent measures) show a processing. In: Wiener, E. L. and Nagel, D. C. 
theoretical-practical comprehension of Human Factors in Aviation. San Diego: Academic 
the subject, instead of sticking to pathetic Press, 1988.

23



ADMINISTRAÇÃO
DE  PILOTOS CMTE. GERALDO MEDEIROS 

Diretor de Operações
TAM

VVivemos na aviação moderna uma 
busca incansável de qualidade, 
com o propósito de oferecer ao 
usuário fi nal, nosso cliente, o 
passageiro, toda segurança e 
conforto possíveis.

O controle absoluto de todas 
as atividades relacionadas à área 
operacional de uma empresa 
aérea, que inclui os departamentos 
de engenharia, manutenção, 
suprimentos, ensino e administração 
de pilotos, somado à aplicação da 
tecnologia disponível, conformidade 
com as legislações pertinentes e 
treinamento contínuo de cada 
participante, garante que cada um, 
em sua função específi ca, torne-se 
um pilar de sustentação do objetivo  
– o vôo seguro.

Dentro deste conjunto, a 
administração de pilotos é uma 
atividade de extrema importância, 
pois cada decisão tem infl uência 
direta no resultado fi nal. Para 
um candidato ser contratado, 
exigimos dele uma série de pré- eles tenham à sua disposição e certifi cados pelas autoridades 
requisitos; eles são selecionados treinamentos específi cos de competentes. 
com critérios rígidos, que garantam pilotagem e ensino teórico que, A indústria aeronáutica está 
que o piloto tenha uma base sólida juntos, assegurem a manutenção e em constante evolução, o que 
de conhecimentos e experiência, a atualização de sua capacidade e implica mudanças constantes 
para poder exercer sua função conhecimentos. Dadas as condições, de procedimentos, exigências 
com efi ciência e evoluir dentro a profi ciência do profi ssional é operacionais, legislação e recursos 
da empresa. No decorrer dessa continuamente monitorada por disponíveis. Por isso, é necessário 
evolução, a administração investe instrutores e examinadores que, que o departamento que administra 
continuamente nos profi ssionais por sua vez, foram escolhidos e os pilotos lhes dê condições de se 
e não mede esforços para que preparados pela administração manterem atualizados e em 

24



is an extremely important activity, for 
each decision has direct influence on 
the final result. For a candidate to be 
hired, we demand that he follow several 
prerequisites; they are selected within 
rigid criteria, which guarantee that 
the pilot has a solid base of knowledge 
and experience, so that he can perform 
his job with efficiency and grow in the 
company. Within this evolution, the 
administration continuously invests 
on professionals and does not measure 
efforts so that they have theoretical and 
specific piloting training available that, 
all together, ensure the maintenance 
and update of their abilities and 
knowledge. Given the conditions, the 
professional proficiency is continuously 
monitored by instructors and examiners 
who were chosen and prepared by the 
administration and certified by the 
competent authorities.

The aeronautical industry is in 
constant evolution, which implies 
constant changes of procedures, 
operational demands, legislation and 
resources available. Therefore, it is 
necessary that the department which 

conformidade com esse PILOT administers pilots gives them conditions 
progresso, a fi m de que cada to keep themselves update and in 
Comandante e Co-piloto receba ADMINISTRATION

conformity with this progress, so that 
sem demora todas as diretrizes each Captain and Copilot receives with 
necessárias para que os vôos CPT. GERALDO MEDEIROS no delay all necessary directives in order 
permaneçam sempre dentro dos Operations Director

TAM to keep flights within high standards of 
mais altos padrões de qualidade, quality, thus ensuring the maintenance 
assegurando assim a manutenção de We live in modern aviation a tireless of our obsession, total safety.
nossa obsessão, a segurança total. search for quality, in order to offer all I believe I have already convinced 

Acredito já ter convencido o leitor safety and comfort possible to the final the reader that it is useless to be 
de que de nada adianta ser líder de user, our customer, the passenger. leader in the market, profitable 
mercado, ter lucro e reconhecimento, The absolute control of all activities and well known, if each activity in 
se cada atividade dentro da empresa related to the operational area of an the airline is not being constantly 
aérea não estiver sendo auditada airline, which includes the departments of audited. The administration of pilots 
constantemente. A administração de engineering, maintenance, supply, training has, therefore, this other task, which 
pilotos tem, portanto, mais esta tarefa, and pilots administration, allied to the is to favor, making every effort, the 
que é favorecer, sem medir esforços, application of the available technology, correct application of all published 
a correta aplicação de todas as conformity with pertinent legislations and procedures and policies and, with the 
políticas e procedimentos publicados continuous training of each participant, unconditional support of the board 
e, com o apoio incondicional da ensures that each one, in his or her specific of directors, be permanently update, 
alta direção da empresa, atualizar- function, becomes a supporting pillar of the aiming continuous improvement, with 
se permanentemente, buscando a target – a safe flight. the sole objective of accomplishing our 
melhoria contínua, com a única Within this set, pilots administration mission with total safety.
fi nalidade de cumprirmos nossa 
missão com total segurança. 

25



A CONTRIBUIÇÃO DO
PLANTÃO PSICOLÓGICO
PARA A SEGURANÇA DE VÔO RAQUEL WRONA 

Psicóloga
Psicoterapeuta

NNão seria necessário citar 
aqui a estatística que 
atribui ao Fator Humano a 
causa, ou parte da causa, 
de 70 a 80% dos acidentes 
aeronáuticos (Shappell & 
Wiegmann, 1996). Esse  
índice já é constantemente 
mencionado nas 
publicações referentes a 
Segurança de Vôo e os 
leitores desta edição da 
TAM Safety Magazine 
certamente o conhecem. 
Mas jamais se poderia 
esquecer essa famigerada 
estatística, que nos chama a atenção 
por ser chocante e ao mesmo tempo Clínica ao esforço multidisciplinar para em muitos textos, parece sugerir 
óbvia. a segurança de vôo e prevenção de intercorrência, variável interveniente; 

É chocante porque alta, para esta acidentes aéreos. mais ainda, de tão freqüentemente  
época de acelerado desenvolvimento Encontramos, em boa parte associada a erro, a expressão chega a 
tecnológico; e óbvia porque, não da  literatura sobre Fator Humano sugerir uma intervenção indesejável, 
só na atividade aeronáutica como e Segurança de Vôo, a concepção como se o  ideal fosse um sistema não 
em todas as outras, a despeito da do ser humano como uma espécie só imune à participação humana, mas 
sempre crescente automação, participa de máquina, um robô  passível totalmente  isento dela!
– e sempre participará –  o homem, de ser moldado e controlado por Quem iria se preocupar com 
origem e fi m último de qualquer meio de treinamento. É freqüente Segurança de Vôo em um sistema que 
invenção. vermos explicitada essa comparação não tivesse a participação humana?!

É claro que preferiríamos que o do homem à máquina, imbuída de Numa visão hoje ultrapassada, 
índice estatístico da contribuição uma perspectiva que decompõe o a responsabilidade principal pela 
humana para a ocorrência de comportamento humano em módulos Segurança de Vôo era atribuída 
acidentes e incidentes se limitasse, ou unidades a serem analisados estritamente à tripulação, 
quando muito, à casa das unidades, isoladamente (Dejours, 2002, controladores de tráfego e pessoal 
jamais chegando à das dezenas! p.18), algo muito próximo de uma técnico em geral.
Para tanto, apresentaremos aqui a concepção mecanicista de homem, A perspectiva atual, datada de 
contribuição do Plantão Psicológico, uma visão desumanizada do humano. aproximadamente 16 anos, preconiza 
que agrega a perspectiva da Psicologia A expressão ‘Fator Humano’, a abordagem sistêmica, que considera 

26



a inter-relação entre os elementos dimensões acontecem simultaneamente. de ordem  emocional podem alterar a 
do sistema: homem, máquina, Isto quer dizer que emoções percepção, gerando comportamento 
ambiente, organização. Assume e sentimentos – que podem ser de risco para a segurança.
aqui importância predominante conscientes ou inconscientes – influem Quando se identifi ca ‘desatenção’ 
a Psicologia Organizacional, que na percepção e interpretação da como causa de um acidente ou 
considera os valores da instituição, realidade e  conseqüentemente incidente, isto não signifi ca ‘ausência de 
seus princípios norteadores como interferirão na  resposta a essa atenção’, mas pode signifi car que esta 
determinantes de uma cultura realidade, determinando, portanto, o função esteve deslocada, isto é, deveria 
organizacional que poderá ser comportamento. estar focada em X, mas voltou-se para 
favorável ou não à segurança, como Sabemos que estados tensionais Y: um problema familiar, a preocupação 
apresenta Moreira (2001). como os presentes na ansiedade, medo com compromissos fi nanceiros, a 

Simultaneamente ao enfoque e  raiva podem alterar a percepção, doença de um fi lho, necessidades 
sistêmico, no entanto, e sem incorrer provocando a distorção ou supressão de afetivas insatisfeitas, desentendimento 
em ‘psicologismo’*, deve ser  possível informações enviadas à consciência.   com colegas de trabalho, tensão, 
considerar também a dimensão A contínua adaptação à realidade irritação. São situações que podem 
pessoal e a atenção e cuidado com os externa depende de processos acontecer a qualquer pessoa que, 
indivíduos que compõem o sistema. por mais treinada e competente, 

O que acontece se esses poderá se sentir perturbada a ponto 
profi ssionais tiverem difi culdades 
psicológicas que ocasionem Quando se identifica de concentrar a atividade psíquica 

em seu mundo interior, aparentando 
comportamentos de risco? ‘desatenção’ como estar ausente, absorta. Terá impedida 

Será que temos utilizado todo o 
conhecimento disponível em Ciências causa de um acidente sua disponibilidade para atender aos 

estímulos externos, especialmente 
Humanas, mais especifi camente na ou incidente, isso não aqueles que exigiriam uma resposta 
Psicologia, em benefício daqueles que 
trabalham na aviação e, portanto, em significa ‘ausência imediata, urgente – colocando então a 

segurança em risco.
benefício da Segurança de Vôo? de atenção’, mas Diagnosticar a causa do incidente 

Antes de apresentar o Plantão 
Psicológico como uma contribuição de pode significar que ou acidente como ‘problema 

de atenção’ é sufi ciente para a 
âmbito preventivo, convém esclarecer esta função esteve prevenção de ocorrências futuras? 
a que nos referiremos ao falar do 
‘humano’ na expressão Fator Humano. deslocada Submeter essa pessoa a treinamento 

resolveria? Muitos poderão passar pelo 
treinamento apenas ‘passando’, isto é, 

O Humano e o Fator Humano o treinamento é que passa por eles e 
Fator Humano é expressão que remete cognitivos, processos ativos de nada se transforma, porque o problema 
ao ser humano em seus aspectos percepção que envolvem atenção, aqui é como restabelecer o equilíbrio 
fi siológicos e psicológicos; os aspectos memória, raciocínio. Essas funções emocional, não é apenas uma questão 
psicológicos, por sua vez, envolvem as – essenciais para a adaptação de de comportamento treinável. Férias 
dimensões cognitiva e emocional. qualquer ser humano à vida cotidiana ou licença também não garantirão a 

Ao tratar de Fator Humano aqui – assumem importância extraordinária prevenção de situações futuras se essa 
estaremos nos referindo a pessoas: no caso dos pilotos, devendo pessoa não tiver a oportunidade de 
homens e mulheres que, além de encontrar-se em condições ótimas de  aprender a identifi car o que se passa 
habilidades e capacidades cognitivas, prontidão e  funcionamento. consigo, ampliando a consciência de si 
têm paixões, aspirações, valores e Por outro lado, vimos que as mesma.
sonhos, como também frustrações, disposições subjetivas, situações 
medos e sofrimento. afetivamente signifi cativas, estados Consciência Situacional e 

A distinção entre fatores cognitivos de tensão emocional interferem no Consciência de Si
e emocionais nos induz a entender comportamento, podendo ocasionar, Nos CRMs apresenta-se o conceito de 
uma cisão, como funções que ocorrem por exemplo, reações intempestivas ou consciência situacional, a consciência 
separadas, o que não corresponde ao mesmo ausência de reação, chamada, que o observador deverá ter de todas as 
fenômeno como se dá na experiência na linguagem aeronáutica, de variáveis presentes numa determinada 
imediata do indivíduo, para quem essas ‘cristalização’. Portanto, difi culdades situação. 

* Segundo Dejours, psicologismo é o pressuposto que elimina a infl uência das exigências do ambiente de 
trabalho na determinação das condutas humanas. 27



Acrescentaríamos aqui o próprio hesitação e sugestionabilidade. Buscar relata sofrer dolorosa solidão a cada 
olhar do observador como uma ajuda, compartilhando uma dúvida, pernoite? 
dessas variáveis; portanto, ao lado da é uma  atitude mais segura do que • Por que – enquanto alguns 
consciência situacional, poderíamos procurar manter a imagem de auto- colegas descansam, estudam, lêem, 
incluir a consciência de si mesmo sufi ciência e infalibilidade. Permitir- conversam, passeiam – outros 
como componente imprescindível do se buscar ajuda é saudável não só chegam a pensar em se embriagar 
quadro: consciência de seu bem- ou para a segurança como também como forma de adormecer logo e 
mal-estar, consciência das próprias para as relações interpessoais, pois fazer o tempo passar mais rápido?
condições emocionais, consciência de torna os contatos mais genuínos e • Como lidar com esse tipo de 
suas difi culdades, consciência de seus humanizados, afastando a imagem de sentimento? O que ele signifi ca e o 
recursos e, especialmente, consciência arrogância (e a solidão que ela traz!), que pode acarretar?
de suas limitações. permitindo a aproximação de outros • O que fazemos diante dos cada 

Tanto o excesso quanto a falta que se sentirão também estimulados vez mais freqüentes estados 
de autoconfi ança podem gerar a apresentar suas questões. depressivos?
problemas graves: o excesso, porque Há inúmeras situações muito • Como o psicólogo pode ajudar? 
leva a assumir riscos desnecessários, peculiares na vida de pessoas que Como encorajar quem não se sente 
enquanto a falta de autoconfi ança trabalham numa companhia aérea: bem a procurar ajuda?
produzirá ansiedade, nervosismo, • O que fazer quando um tripulante 

O  QUE É PLANTÃO PSICOLÓGICO?
Nos últimos anos, principalmente a propiciasse uma oportunidade também determinados períodos da semana, 

partir da década de 80, vem se difundindo de escutar a si mesmas, identificando e numa sala acusticamente protegida, 
no Brasil uma modalidade de atendimento reconhecendo seus próprios sentimentos e garantindo privacidade e total sigilo 
psicológico de função notadamente possibilidades de autodireção, no momento quanto ao assunto tratado. Não há 
preventiva. Cada vez mais presente em em que enfrentam a dificuldade, sem que anotações, relatórios ou qualquer registro 
instituições de diferentes âmbitos, trata- necessariamente tenham que se submeter a que possa expor a intimidade de quem 
se de uma intervenção psicológica que atendimento sistemático, prolongado, como procura o serviço. O encontro poderá se 
acolhe a pessoa no exato momento de sua tradicionalmente oferecem as psicoterapias desenvolver no período de uma hora ou 
necessidade, ajudando-a a lidar melhor (Wrona Rosenthal, 1999, p.16). pouco mais e não há obrigatoriedade 
com seus recursos e limites. O Plantão Psicológico apoia-se no de retorno, ficando a critério de cada 

Consiste simplesmente em reconhecimento de que a escuta empática pessoa buscar o atendimento no 
proporcionar um espaço de privacidade (‘como se’ estivéssemos no lugar do outro): momento em que sentir que o psicólogo 
para falar da angústia em relação a seus • possibilita entrar em contato consigo pode ajudar. O atendimento poderá 
problemas, oferecendo-se a oportunidade e ouvir-se a si mesmo, e avaliar as ser individual e também em pequenos 
de reflexão com um interlocutor possibilidades de lidar com as próprias grupos, como no caso, por exemplo, 
profissional especializado, que poderá dificuldades, desenvolvendo recursos de uma equipe que esteja vivendo 
ajudar a clarear seus sentimentos, internos para o enfrentamento de algum conflito interpessoal, quando o 
favorecendo o reconhecimento das situações futuras; psicólogo pode atuar como facilitador 
questões que enfrenta. Não se trata de • contribui para o autoconhecimento no sentido de propiciar condições para o 
dar conselhos, muito menos de julgar. É propiciando insights, desenvolve a    restabelecimento da harmonia e coesão 
a chamada consulta não-diretiva (non- consciência de si; do grupo. 
directive counseling). O psicólogo estará • tem caráter preventivo, pois uma O Plantão Psicológico enfatiza o 
centrado na pessoa – não no problema intervenção no momento oportuno bem-estar, o equilíbrio emocional, a 
–, oferecendo presença, acolhimento, poderá evitar conflitos posteriores ou a saúde mental. Pessoas que se sentem 
escuta ativa, possibilitando com isso que a cronificação da dificuldade; bem preservam a vida em todas as suas 
pessoa se mobilize frente à sua situação, • realiza encaminhamentos, orientando manifestações. Segurança é preservação, 
certo de que ela encontrará dentro de si os para outros serviços ou profissionais e é também  cuidado.
recursos para superar a dificuldade. especializados quando  a situação não for Ao  propor o cuidado com  as pessoas, 

Muitas  pessoas, em determinada do âmbito de competência de um Plantão o Plantão Psicológico pode, sem nunca 
circunstância de suas vidas, poderiam Psicológico. perder a perspectiva sistêmica, se 
se beneficiar ao encontrar essa Como funciona o Plantão? Consiste constituir como importante contribuição 
interlocução diferenciada, que lhes em manter um psicólogo disponível em para a segurança de vôo.

28



Referências Bibliográficas
1. DEJOURS, Christophe. O Fator Humano. comparison between man and machine 
Trad. Maria Irene Stocco Betiol e Maria José THE CONTRIBUTION is frequently expressed, permeated 
Tonelli. 3.ed. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV, 
2002. OF PSYCHOLOGICAL with a perspective that breaks down 

human behavior in modules or units 
DUTY FOR FLIGHT to be separately analyzed (Dejours, 

2. MOREIRA, Silvia Lucia Bozzetti. A 
Psicologia da Aviação e a Segurança de Vôo. SAFETY 2002, p.18), something very close to 
In: PEREIRA, M. da Conceição e RIBEIRO, a mechanistic conception of man, a 
Selma Leal de Oliveira (Org.) Os Vôos da dehumanized view of man.
Psicologia no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: DAC; RAQUEL WRONA

Psychologist The expression “Human Factor”, 
NulCAF, 2001. Psycotherapist in several texts, seems to suggest 

intercurrence, intervening variable; 
3. SHAPPELL, S. A. & WIEGMANN, D. A. 
(1996). US naval aviation mishaps 1977-92: It wouldn’t be necessary to mention moreover, being so frequently related 
Differences between single- & dual-piloted herebelow the statistics that attribute to to error, the expression tends to suggest 
aircraft. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Human Factor the cause, or part of the an undesirable intervention, as if the 
Medicine, 67, 65-9 apud Shappell, S. A. & cause, of 70% to 80% of air accidents ideal were a system not only immune 
Wiegmann, D. A. (2001). Human Factors (Shappell & Wiegmann, 1996). This to human participation, but also 
Analysis and Classifi cation System. Flight index is constantly mentioned in completely exempted of it! Who would 
Safety Digest, February, 15. publications regarding Flight Safety be concerned with Flight Safety in 
4. WRONA ROSENTHAL, Raquel. Plantão and the readers of this TAM Safety a system that there were no human 
Psicológico: uma nova proposta de Digest issue surely know it. However, participation?!
atendimento à comunidade. In: MAHFOUD, one could never forget this notorious In an old-fashioned conception 
Miguel (Org.) Plantão Psicológico: novos statistics, which calls our attention for nowadays, the main responsibility for 
horizontes. São Paulo: Cia. Ilimitada, 1999. being shocking while obvious. Flight Safety was strictly attributed to 
p. 16. It is shocking because it is high, crewmembers, air traffic controllers and 

for this time of fast technological technical personnel in general. 
development; and obvious because The current perspective, as of 
man, not only in aeronautics activity 16 years ago, advocates the systemic 
but also in all other fields, regardless of approach, which considers the 
the always increasing automation, will interrelation among the system 
always take part as the origin and last elements: man, machine, environment 
aim of any invention. and organization. The Organizational 

We would certainly prefer the Psychology takes on its importance, 
statistics index of human contribution which considers the values of the 

to the occurrence of accidents institution, its guiding principles as 
and incidents to be restrained determinants of an organizational 
at most, to single numbers, culture that may be favorable or not to 
never reaching 10s! Thus, we safety, as presented by Moreira (2001).
will introduce hereafter the Simultaneously to the systemic 
contribution of Psychological approach, however, and not incurring 
Duty, that aggregates the in ‘psychologism’, it shall be also possible 
Clinic Psychology perspective to consider the personal dimension 
to the multidisciplinary effort and the attention and care with the 
towards fl ight safety and air individuals that constitute the system.
accidents prevention. What happens if these professionals 

We can fi nd, in a great deal face psychological difficulties which lead 
of Human Factor and Flight to risky behavior? Have we been using 
Safety literature, the conception all sources of knowledge available in 
of human being as a kind of Human Sciences, more specifically, in 
machine, a robot subject to Psychology, on behalf of those who work 
being molded and controlled in aviation and, therefore, on behalf of 
through training. The Flight Safety?

29



Before introducing the Psychological lack of reaction, the so-called ‘crystallization’ awareness of one’s well-being or ill-
Duty as a contribution of preventive scope, in aeronautical language. Therefore, being, awareness of one’s own emotional 
it is important to clarify what we refer emotional difficulties may alter perception, conditions, awareness of one’s difficulties, 
to when speaking about “human” in the generating risky behavior to safety. awareness of one’s resources and, specially, 
expression Human Factor. When ‘inattentiveness’ is identified awareness of one’s limitations.

as the cause of an accident or incident, it Both excess and lack of self-confidence 
The Human and the Human Factor does not mean ‘lack of attention’; however, may generate severe problems: excess, 

Human Factor is the expression that it may mean that this function has been because it leads to taking on unnecessary 
refers to human being in its physiological displaced, i.e., it should be focused in X, risks, while the lack of self-confidence will 
and psychological aspects; and the but it turned to Y: a domestic problem, a arise anxiety, nervousness, hesitation and 
psychological aspects involve cognitive and concern with financial commitments, a suggestionability. Seeking for help, sharing 
emotional dimensions. sick child, dissatisfied affectionate needs, a doubt, is a safer attitude than trying to 

When dealing with Human Factor disagreement with coworkers, tension, keep the infallibility and self-sufficiency 
here, we’ll be referring to people: men irritation. They are situations which image. Allowing oneself to look for help 
and women who, beyond their cognitive may happen to anyone who, no matter is healthy not only for safety but also for 
capacities and abilities, have passions, how trained and competent he or she interpersonal relationships, as the contacts 
aspirations, values and dreams, as well as is, may feel disturbed to an extent that become more genuine and humanized, 
frustrations, fears and suffering. concentrates the psychic activity in his keeping away the image of being arrogant 

The distinction between emotional or her inner world, apparently absent, (and the loneliness it brings!), allowing 
and cognitive factors induces us to away. His or her availability to respond others to come closer who will also feel 
understand a fissure, as functions that to external stimulus will be impaired, stimulated to bring up their questions. 
occur separately, which does not correspond specially those which would demand an 
to the phenomenon as it is realized in immediate, urgent response – then putting There are several very peculiar 
the individual immediate experience, safety into risk. situations in the life of airline personnel:
for whom these dimensions occur Is diagnosing the cause of an incident • What to do when crew members tell 
simultaneously. or accident as an ‘attention problem’ about the painful loneliness they feel at 

This means that emotions and feelings enough to prevent further occurrences? each layover?
– that may be conscious or unconscious – Would submitting this person to training • Why – while some colleagues rest, 
influence the perception and interpretation be a solution? Many may go through study, read, chat, stroll – others think 
of reality and, consequently, will interfere training just ‘passing by’, i.e., it is training of getting drunk as a means of sleeping 
with the response to this reality, therefore which goes through them and nothing is soon and making time pass fast?
determining behavior. transformed, because the problem here is • How to deal with this kind of feeling? 

We know that tensional states as the like reestablishing the emotional balance, What does it mean and what can it 
ones present in anxiety, fear and rage may not only being a matter of trainable bring on?
alter perception, causing the distortion behavior. Vacations or licenses will not • What do we do before the more and 
or suppression of information sent to guarantee the prevention of further more frequent depressive states?
conscience. situations either, if this person does not • How can psychologists help? How 

The continuous adaptation to external have the opportunity to learn to identify to encourage one who does not feel 
reality depends on cognitive processes, what is going on with him or herself, comfortable to seek help?
active processes of perception which enlarging the awareness of one’s self.
involve attention, memory, thinking. In the past few years, mainly after 
These functions – essential to any human Situational Awareness and the 1980s, a kind of psychological 
being adaptation to daily life – take on Awareness of Oneself assistance notably preventive has been 
extraordinary importance with pilots, At the CRMs, the concept of situational spread. In Brazil more and more 
who shall be in optimum readiness and awareness is arisen, awareness the observer present in institutions of different 
working conditions. shall have of all variables present in a characters, it concerns a psychological 

On the other hand, we have seen determined situation. We could add the intervention that shelters the person at 
that subjective dispositions, affectionate observer’s own view as one of these variables; the same moment of his or her needs, 
significant situations and tensional states therefore, next to situational awareness, helping them to better deal with their 
interfere with behavior, which may cause, we could include the awareness of oneself resources and limits.
for example, ill-timed reactions or even as an essential component of the picture: It simply consists of providing a 

30



room acoustically protected, ensuring 
WHAT IS PSYCHOLOGICAL DUTY? privacy and total secrecy regarding 

the subject mentioned. There are no 
room of privacy to talk about the necessarily having to be subjected notes, reports or any kind of record 

anguish related to their problems, to systemic assistance, prolonged, that may expose the intimacy of those 
offering the opportunity for refl ection as it is traditionally offered by who look for the service. The meeting 
as a specialist professional interlocutor, psychotherapies (Wrona Rosenthal, may evolve within a period of one 
who will be able to help the person 1999, p.16) hour or a little bit more and return is 
to clarify their feelings, favoring the The Psychological Duty is based not mandatory, being the person free 
recognition of the subjects they face. on the recognition that the empathic to search for assistance whenever he or 
It does not concern advising, let alone listening (‘as if ’ we were in one’s shoes): she fells the psychologist can help. The 
judging. It is called non-directive • allows one to get in touch with and meeting may be individual or in small 
counseling. The psychologist will be listen to oneself, and evaluate the groups, for example, if a team is going 
centered in the person – not in the possibilities of dealing with one’s own through some interpersonal conflict, 
problem -, offering presence, sheltering, difficulties, developing inner resources when the psychologist may act as a 
active listening, allowing the person in order to face future situations; facilitator, providing conditions for the 
to be mobilized face to his or her • contributes to self-knowledge, reestablishment of harmony and group 
situation, certain that he or she will providing insights, develops the cohesion.
find inside themselves the resources to awareness of oneself; The Psychological Duty 
overcome the difficulty. • has preventive character, once an emphasizes the well-being, the 

Many people, in certain intervention at an opportune moment emotional balance, the mental 
circumstances of life, could benefit may avoid future confl icts or the health. People who feel well preserve 
themselves as they encounter this difficulty to become chronic; life in all its manifestations.
differentiated interlocution, which • carries out referrals, advising to other Safety is preservation, and it is 
would also provide them with an services or specialist professionals when also care.
opportunity to listen to themselves, the situation does not concern the Upon proposing care with people, 
identifying and recognizing their competency of a Psychological Duty. the Psychological Duty may constitute 
own feelings and possibilities of How does the Duty work? It consists itself as important contribution 
self-direction, at the moment when of maintaining a psychologist available for fl ight safety, never missing the 
they face the difficulty, without in arranged periods within a week, in a systemic perspective.

Reference
1. DEJOURS, Christophe. O Fator Humano. Trad. Maria 
Irene Stocco Betiol e Maria José Tonelli. 3.ed. Rio de Janeiro: 
Editora FGV, 2002. 

2. MOREIRA, Silvia Lucia Bozzetti. A Psicologia da 
Aviação e a Segurança de Vôo. In: PEREIRA, M. da 
Conceição e RIBEIRO, Selma Leal de Oliveira (Org.) Os Vôos 
da Psicologia no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: DAC; NulCAF, 2001.

3. SHAPPELL, S. A. & WIEGMANN, D. A. (1996). US 
naval aviation mishaps 1977-92: Differences between 
single- & dual-piloted aircraft. Aviation, Space, and 
Environmental Medicine, 67, 65-9 apud Shappell, S. A. 
& Wiegmann, D. A. (2001). Human Factors Analysis and 
Classification System. Flight Safety Digest, February, 15.

4. WRONA ROSENTHAL, Raquel. Plantão Psicológico: 
uma nova proposta de atendimento à comunidade. 
In: MAHFOUD, Miguel (Org.) Plantão Psicológico: novos 
horizontes. São Paulo: Cia. Ilimitada, 1999. p. 16.

31



TRANSTORNO
DE  ESTRESSE MARIA HELENA PEREIRA FRANCO

Doutora em Psicologia pela PUC-SP, 
com Pós-Doutorado na Universidade 

PÓS-TRAUMA de Londres. Professora Titular da 
PUC-SP, onde fundou e coordena o 
Laboratório de Estudos e Intervenções 
sobre o Luto – LELu. Fundadora e 
membro do 4 Estações Instituto de 

e  Fatores Humanos Psicologia. Fundadora e coordenadora 
do IPÊ – Intervenções Psicológicas em 
Emergências. Psicoterapeuta.

situações de crise, catástrofe, 
emergência e luto, nos diferentes 
âmbitos de necessidade dos 

AA proposta deste artigo é abordar a envolvidos, visando uma ação assistência às famílias de vítimas 
experiência de enfrentar situações- preventiva em situações de estresse de desastres aéreos. Em 16 de 
limite, no que se refere ao pós- pós-traumático e de luto traumático; dezembro de 1997, foi promulgada 
acidente aéreo. Focaliza o eixo b) desenvolver, nos profi ssionais outra portaria, Foreign Air Carrier 
trauma-luto, ampliando para as envolvidos com essa atividade, Family Support Act (NTSB, 1997), 
possibilidades de intervenção habilidades que os tornem aptos a que incluía na obrigatoriedade de 
em situações de luto traumático, uma atuação efi ciente, com risco assistência às famílias as empresas 
em conseqüência de desastres controlado para sua saúde mental. aéreas estrangeiras que pousassem 
aéreos. Comenta o atendimento a O trabalho desse grupo responde ou voassem sobre solo americano. 
emergências, a partir de desastres diretamente à IAC 200-1001, que Em 1 de agosto de 2000, foi 
aéreos; embora haja um protocolo de recomenda que as empresas aéreas feita uma atualização no Aviation 
atendimento, a inexistência de dois prestem assistência à família dos Disaster Family Assistance Act, 
desastres iguais leva, necessariamente, passageiros vitimados em desastres pormenorizando o tipo de assistência 
a fl exibilidade na atuação. aéreos. A portaria foi elaborada a ser prestado (NTSB, 2000). O Brasil 

A experiência realizada no com base em medidas da agência é o segundo país do mundo a ter 
Brasil, com psicólogos cujo objetivo americana de segurança em meios de uma medida nesse sentido, o que 
específi co foi preparar-se para transporte – National Transportation levou as companhias aéreas nacionais 
atuar em situações de emergência Safety Board (NTSB), a partir de 9 a se preparar para assistir a família 
relacionadas a desastres, traumas e de outubro de 1996, quando foi das vítimas, em caso de desastre 
luto traumático, já foi apresentada promulgado o Aviation Disaster aéreo.
e comentada (Franco, 2003b). Sua Family Assistance Act (NTSB, A experiência recomenda (Young, 
proposta é: a) oferecer atendimento 1996), que obrigava as companhias 1998) que a resposta ao desastre, com 
psicológico especializado para aéreas americanas a prover ampla cuidados em situações traumáticas, 

32



se destine a: sobreviventes, fi siológicas diante desta exposição: do sono; irritabilidade, hostilidade 
feridos ou não; parentes e amigos ansiedade, sensações físicas, pânico; e explosões de raiva; difi culdade 
enlutados e traumatizados; equipe de diminuição do interesse pelas de concentração e compreensão, e 
assistência emergencial; membros da atividades rotineiras, com menor confusão; desconfi ança, agitação 
equipe de resgate e outros serviços participação nelas; sensação de e insegurança; resposta exagerada 
de apoio; membros da mídia que estranhamento diante das outras aos estímulos do ambiente; suor 
cobriram o fato; vítimas secundárias. pessoas, retraimento e isolamento; excessivo, palidez, taquicardia, dor de 
Como se observa, é amplo o incapacidade para fazer projetos cabeça, febre, desmaios e enjôo.
espectro de pessoas atingidas por O trauma, associado às demais 
um acidente aéreo, mesmo que condições que o defi nem, pode se 
o órgão governamental brasileiro Entende-se ‘crise’ manifestar como Reação Aguda 
recomende prestação de assistência como a interrupção de Estresse - RAS (aparecimento 
exclusivamente às famílias. dos sintomas logo após o desastre 

Entende-se ´crise´ como em um estado e elaboração desses sintomas 
a interrupção em um estado previamente normal no período de um mês) ou pelo 
previamente normal de Transtorno de Estresse Pós-
funcionamento, interrupção que de funcionamento, traumático - PTSD ou DSPT 
resulta em instabilidade e signifi cativo interrupção (persistência dos sintomas descritos 
desequilíbrio no sistema. Apresenta que resulta em anteriormente por mais de um mês 
sintomatologia complicada, que ou aparecimento deles pelo menos 
abrange indivíduo, familiares e instabilidade um mês após o trauma). 
comunidade. Ninguém fi ca imune e significativo Como as reações a um desastre 
ao impacto de uma crise, mas cada são muito variáveis, não é possível 
pessoa a enfrentará com recursos desequilíbrio no prever o tempo de que as pessoas 
próprios, mesmo que as circunstâncias sistema. traumatizadas necessitarão para se 
sejam semelhantes. recuperar. Entre os fatores que podem 

Um trauma é uma ruptura no contribuir para a recuperação ou 
tecido vivo, causada por agente impedi-la, destaca-se a existência de 
externo. Pode se dar como resultado e medo de morrer (Hodgkinson e sistemas de apoio dentro e fora da 
de uma cirurgia, um ato violento, um Stewart, 1998). comunidade envolvida, o que ressalta 
desastre. Geralmente leva a um estado O acontecimento traumático é a importância de apoio psicológico 
de crise. Pode também ser defi nido persistentemente revivido pelo menos específi co (Hodgkinson e Stewart, 
como um período de desequilíbrio de uma das seguintes maneiras 1998).
psicológico, resultante de um evento (American Psychiatric Association, 
ou situação danosa, constituindo 1994): memórias recorrentes ou O luto nas emergências
assim um problema signifi cativo intrusivas, abrangendo imagens, A outra vertente para a compreensão 
que não pode ser resolvido com percepções e sonhos; agir ou da vivência da pessoa envolvida em 
as estratégias de enfrentamento sentir como se a pessoa falecida um desastre é o luto, aqui entendido 
conhecidas. A experiência traumática estivesse viva e presente (incluindo como reação normal e esperada 
se dá quando a pessoa se confronta alucinações). Outras reações possíveis ao rompimento de um vínculo 
com a morte, ameaça de morte, são: evitamento dos acontecimentos (Parkes, 1998). Tem como função 
ferimentos sérios em si mesma ou associados ao trauma, como: esforço proporcionar a reconstrução de 
no outro e reações de intensa dor, para evitar pensamentos, sentimentos recursos e viabilizar a adaptação às 
desamparo ou horror.                       ou conversas relacionadas; tentativa mudanças ocorridas em conseqüência 
       de fugir de atividades, lugares ou das perdas (Parkes, idem; Bromberg; 
Trauma psicológico em resposta a pessoas que lembrem a pessoa 1994, Franco, 2002).
desastres perdida ou o próprio evento A compreensão do luto como um 
As reações típicas ao trauma se traumático; incapacidade para processo permite entendê-lo ao longo 
apresentam como intensa angústia recordar algum aspecto importante, de fases, das quais a primeira é a que 
diante de situações que lembrem relacionado á negação da perda; mais toca de perto a realidade do 
o momento traumático, ou mesmo inabilidade para sentir e apegar-se. atendimento em acidentes aéreos. É a 
algum aspecto referente a ele; reações Ainda outros sintomas são: distúrbios etapa de entorpecimento, com 

33



reação de choque e descrença. O da situação de crise, sempre atribuem signifi cados ao contato 
enlutado tem difi culdade para entrar levando em conta as condições físico e à comunicação gestual, 
em contato com a nova realidade, individuais, porque a intervenção principalmente entre pessoas de sexos 
o que é acentuado em situações de deve contemplar ambos os aspectos, diferentes. Atitudes de proximidade, 
perda repentina ou inesperada. As o genérico e o específi co, fazendo como chamar as pessoas pelo nome, 
fases seguintes (anseio e protesto, uso de técnicas que considerem essa podem ser um grande elemento de 
desespero e recuperação e restituição) demanda (Hodgkinson e Stewart, ajuda e aproximação.
podem se intercalar e têm duração 1998). Cabe destacar a importância É muito comum o uso de clichês, 
variada. de considerar diferentes necessidades, na tentativa de acalmar ou diminuir 

Mesmo sendo considerado uma específi cas de cada fase de o sofrimento do enlutado em 
resposta normal ao rompimento de atendimento. situações traumáticas. No entanto, 
um vínculo, o luto pode ser descrito A experiência do grupo NOVA consideramos que clichês têm o 
por seus sintomas: culpa, depressão, – National Organization for Victims objetivo de tranqüilizar aquele que 
ansiedade, raiva e hostilidade, falta Assistance (Young, 1998) recomenda oferece ajuda e não sabe como 
de prazer, solidão, agitação, fadiga, esta seqüência no atendimento a fazê-lo, sendo, na melhor das 
desamparo, perturbação do sono, vítimas de desastres aéreos: hipóteses, inócuos. Nosso trabalho 
perda de energia, queixas somáticas, 1.ª resposta: resgate físico – a tem identifi cado a importância de 
aumento do uso de psicotrópicos, resposta de emergência é voltada uma comunicação assertiva com o 
bebidas alcoólicas e fumo, para as necessidades de sobrevivência enlutado em situações traumáticas 
maior suscetibilidade a doenças, física de indivíduos e comunidades e, assim sendo, não se admitem 
lentidão de pensamento e baixa e para reduzir os estressores ações fúteis, como o uso dos chavões 
concentração, mudança de hábitos traumáticos agudos: cuidados exemplifi cados a seguir: “... com 
alimentares, difi culdade para manter médicos para os feridos, abrigo, o tempo passa...”; “... pense 
relacionamentos (Parkes, 1998). alimentação e vestimenta para os em tudo que ainda tem e 

Quando as reações perante as desabrigados, proteção temporária agradeça a Deus...”; “... 
perdas não são as esperadas, isto é, para impactos traumáticos adicionais. fi que contente porque ele 
fogem à sintomatologia e processo 2.ª resposta: intervenção não sofreu...”; “... eu sei 
descritos anteriormente, o processo psicológica em emergência, com como está se sentindo...”.
é de luto complicado, que pode caráter de intervenção em crise.
ser entendido de uma destas três 3.ª resposta: psicoterapia ou Lidando com perdas 
formas (Bromberg, 1994): a) crônico, aconselhamento. pessoais
marcado pela estagnação em uma das O profi ssional que atua 
fases do processo; b) inibido, quando Lidando com pessoas enlutadas e exposto a situações de 
não há sintomas identifi cáveis como traumatizadas estresse, como o que 
de luto, em razão da necessidade A pessoa enlutada em condições atende vítimas de desastres 
de lidar com outras exigências traumáticas está fragilizada e precisa aéreos, também apresenta 
concomitantes à perda; c) adiado: o de acolhimento, paciência e atenção; reações que podem ser, 
processo é postergado em função de geralmente está desorganizada, segundo Lewis (1994) e 
outras atividades mais pesadas do que incoerente, assustada, paralisada. Hodgkinson e Stewart (1998): 
a perda, e a reação de luto pode se Levando em conta estas condições emocionais 
manifestar posteriormente, a partir de peculiares, alguns cuidados são 
um estímulo que, aparentemente, não primordiais na maneira de tratar a 
deveria ter tal poder. pessoa. É muito importante levar em 

consideração estes cuidados, que se 
Respondendo ao desastre colocam além do domínio da técnica 
James e Gilliland (2001) recomendam e refl etem a postura a ser mantida 
que o trabalho de intervenção nessas situações. 
em crise não tenha por objetivo Tocar e amparar fi sicamente 
a modifi cação de características podem ser formas de oferecer ajuda 
peculiares da pessoa ou de seu não-verbal; no entanto, cabe aqui 
padrão de personalidade. Portanto, a recomendação para que se levem 
é necessário perceber a confi guração em conta as diferenças culturais, que 

34



(ansiedade, medo, pesar, irritabilidade, anteriores; a possibilidade de estar pessoais naquele que oferece ajuda, 
entorpecimento, distanciamento, em um acidente expõe não apenas a então se tratará apenas da execução 
pensamentos intrusivos), físicas equipe de apoio, que lida diretamente de mais uma tarefa, que até pode 
(fadiga, tremores musculares, com vítimas e familiares, como todos ser corretamente realizada, mas, no 
suor frio, dispnéia, distúrbios os funcionários da empresa. A morte entanto, não terá alma. E sem alma 
gastrintestinais, tontura, náusea, de um colega de trabalho altera não há fator humano que possa se 
distúrbios de apetite e/ou de sono, profundamente o meio social dos manifestar.
disfunções sexuais) e cognitivas sobreviventes, e é esse mesmo meio 
(problemas de memória, confusão que pode ter função equilibradora 
mental, pensamentos intrusivos, para os que sofrem com a perda. Referências Bibliográficas
difi culdade para tomar decisões). No momento de um desastre, é 1- AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION 

Isto requer, portanto, que, além muito difícil, para grande parte dos (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 

do profundo conhecimento das funcionários, reconhecer que também of Mental Disorders. 4. ed. Washington, DC: 
APA.

técnicas empregadas, o profi ssional perderam alguém. Para que possam 
tenha consciência de suas condições lidar com pessoas enlutadas, cabe 2- BROMBERG, M. H. P. F. (1994). A 
pessoais para este tipo de atividade à empresa aérea viabilizar para eles Psicoterapia em Situações de Perdas e Luto. 
e possa identifi car suas necessidades a vivência de um processo de luto, Campinas: Ed. Psy II. 
de descanso, alívio, e até mesmo de abrindo espaços de comunicação 

3- Departamento de Aviação Civil – DAC, 
afastamento da atividade. Trata-se de dentro do local de trabalho, Ministério da Aeronáutica. http://dac.gov.
um indivíduo em risco. promovendo rituais. Vale lembrar br/legislacao/port0019dgac.htm (acesso em 

Um desastre remete a perdas que as famílias dos funcionários 16/05/2004). 
mobilizam-se e preocupam-se 
por sua saúde e seu futuro e 4- FRANCO, M. H. P. (2002). Estudos 
há o estigma de trabalhar em Avançados sobre o Luto. Campinas: Livro 

Pleno.
uma empresa aérea quando 
ela sofre um desastre. Muitas 5- HODGKINSON, P. E. e STEWART, 
vezes, o funcionário ouve M. (1998). Coping with Catastrophe; a 
comentários desagradáveis sobre handbook of post-disaster psychosocial 
o acidente, vindos de pessoas aftercare. Londres: Routledge.
não afetadas tão diretamente. 

6- JAMES, R. K. e GILLILAND, B. E. (2001). 
Por esse motivo, deve haver Crisis Intervention Strategies. Londres: 
um espaço onde o estresse Brookes Cole.
seja trabalhado, para que os 
funcionários possam apresentar 7- KLING, T. (2002). Exit Row: The True 
boa qualidade de trabalho, Story of an Emergency Volunteer, a 
como recomendam Hodgkinson Miraculous Survivor and the Crash of  Flight 

965. Naperville: Sourcebooks.
e Stewart, 1998.

Finalizando, o preparo 8- LEWIS, G. W. (1994). Critical Incident 
técnico/profi ssional daquele Stress and Trauma in the Workplace; 
que se propõe a oferecer recognition, response, recovery. Levinton: 
apoio a pessoas em situações Accelerated Development.
traumáticas exige uma 

9- National Transportation Safety Board 
disposição intrínseca de – NTSB (1996). Aviation Family Assistance 
ajuda, sensibilidade e empatia Act. <http://www.ntsb.gov-publictn-2000-
para entender o sofrimento spc.pdf> (acesso em 01/06/2004).
humano sem, porém, perder os 
limites pessoais nessa relação 10- National Transportation Safety Board 
tão delicada. A experiência – NTSB (1997). Foreign Air Carrier Family 

Support Act. <http://frwebgate.access.gpo.
mostra que, por mais que se gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?name=105-cong-
escrevam e leiam manuais e public-law&docid=f:publi148.105.pdf> 
que se apliquem regras, se não (acesso em 01/06/2004).
houver estas características 

11- National Transportation Safety Board 

35



1996) was published, which obliged that can not be solved with the known 
POST-TRAUMATIC all American air carriers to provide confronting strategies. The traumatic 

wide assistance to families of air disaster 
STRESS DISORDER experience takes place when the person 

victims. is confronted with death, death threat, 
AND HUMAN On December 16th, 1997, another serious injuries to oneself or to others, 

FACTORS directive was published, the Foreign Air and reactions of intense pain, distress or 
Carrier Family Support Act (NTSB, horror.
1997), which included the foreign air 

MARIA HELENA PEREIRA FRANCO
Doctor in Psychology at PUC-SP, post-doc at London carriers that would land or overfly the Psychological Trauma in Response 
University. Professor at PUC-SP, where she founded 
and coordinates the Grief and Intervention Studies American territory to comply with the to Disasters
Lab – LELu, Founder and member of 4 Seasons mandatory support to families. On August The typical responses to trauma are 
Institute of Psychology. Founder and Coordinator 
of IPE – Psychological interventions in Emergency. 1st, 2000, the Aviation Disaster Family presented as intense anguish before 
Psychotherapist.  Assistance Act was updated, detailing the situations that remember the traumatic 

kind of support to be provided (NTSB, moment, or even any aspect related to 
The aim of this article is to address 2000). Brazil is the second country in the it; physiological reactions before this 

the experience of facing limit-situations, world to have such a measure, which led exposure; anxiety, physical sensations, 
regarding a post air-accident. It focuses the national airlines to be prepared to aid panic; decrease in interest in everyday 
the trauma-grief axis, extending to the victims’ families, in case of an air disaster. activities, with less participation in 
possibilities of intervention in traumatic The experience recommends (Young, them; sensation of strangeness before 
grief situations, due to air disasters. It 1998) that the response to a disaster, other people, seclusion and isolation; 
talks about the emergency assistance from with care in traumatic situation, be inability to make plans and fear of 
air disasters. Although there is service addressed to: survivors, injured or not; dying. (Hodgkinson and Stewart, 1998).
protocol, the inexistence of two identical grieved and traumatized relatives and The traumatic event is persistently 
disasters leads, necessarily, to fl exibility friends; emergency assistance crew; rescue coming back to consciousness by one 
in action.       crewmembers and other supportive of the following manners, at least 

The experience held in Brazil, services; press members who covered the (American Psychiatric Association, 
with mental health professionals whose fact; secondary victims. As it is observed, 1994): recurrent or intrusive memories, 
specific aim was to be prepared to act in the spectrum of people affected by an comprehending images, perceptions 
emergency situations related to disasters, air accident is wide, even though the and dreams; acting or feeling as if the 
traumas and traumatic grief, has Brazilian governmental department deceased person were alive and present 
already been presented and commented recommends that support be given (including hallucinations). 
(Franco, 2003b). Its proposal is: a) to exclusively to families. Other possible responses are: 
offer specialized psychological service  ‘Crisis’ is understood as an avoidance of the events associated 
for situations of crisis, catastrophes, interruption of a previous normal working with the trauma, such as: effort to 
emergency and grief, in different state which results in instability and avoid related thoughts, feelings or 
domains of the needs of the involved significative disequilibrium in the system. conversations; attempt to try to run away 
ones, aiming a preventive action in It presents complicate symptomatology, from activities, places or people which 
post-traumatic stress and traumatic grief; which comprehends the individual, remind the person of the lost loved one 
b) develop, in the professionals involved the family and the community. No one or the traumatic event itself; inability 
with this activity, abilities that qualify is immmune to the impact of a crisis, to recall any important aspect, related 
them to effective actions, with controlled but each person will face it with his to loss denial; inability to feel and be 
risk to their mental health. or her own resources, even though the attached.

The work of this group responds circumstances are similar. Still other symptoms are: sleep 
directly to IAC 200-1001, which Trauma is a rupture of the live tissue, disrorders; irritability, hostility and rage 
recommends that airlines provide caused by an external agent. It may outbursts; difficulty in concentrating and 
assistance to families of air accidents happen as a result of a surgery, a violent understanding, and confusion; distrust, 
victims. The directive was created act or a disaster. It usually leads to a agitation and insecurity; exagerate 
based on the National Transportation status of crisis. It may also be described as response to environmental stimuli; 
Safety Board (NTSB) measures, since a period of psychological disequilibrium, excessive sweating, paleness, tachycardia, 
October 9th, 1996, when the Aviation due to a harmful situation or event, migraines, fever, faint and nausea.
Disaster Family Assistance Act (NTSB, thus constituting a significative problem Trauma, associated with other 

36



Responding to disasters
James and Gilliland (2001) recommend 
that the job of crisis intervention not aim 
to change peculiar features or pattern of 
personality of the person. Therefore, it 
is necessary to realize the configuration 
of the crisis situation, always bearing in 
mind the individual conditions, because 
the intervention shall contemplate 
both generic and specific aspects, using 
techniques which will consider this 
demand (Hodgkinson and Stewart, 
1998). May we highlight the importance 

CRISIS of considering different needs, specific for 
each phase of  the assistance.

conditions that describe it, may the phase of numbness, with reactions NOVA’s experience – National 
develop as Acute Stress Response – ASR such as shock and disbelief. The grieved Organization for Victims Assistance 
(the appearance of symptoms just after person finds it difficult to get in touch (Young, 1998) recommends that 
the disaster and the digestion of these with the new reality, which is stressed in the sequence for air disaster victims 
symptoms within one month) or as situations of sudden or unexpected loss. assistance be as follows:
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder – PTSD The following phases (anxiety and protest, 1st response: physical rescue – the 
(the persistence of symptoms previously dispair and recovery and restituition) can emergency response is centered on the 
described for more than one month or its be interchangeable and vary in time. physical survival needs of individuals 
development at least a month after the Despite being considered a normal and communities and on the reduction 
trauma). response to the rupture of a bond, grief of acute traumatic stressors: medical care 

As responses to disasters vary a lot, can be described by its symptoms: guilt, for the injured, shelter, food and clothing 
it is not possible to anticipate how long depression, anxiety, rage and hostility; lack for the unsheltered, temporary protection 
traumatized people will need to recover. of pleasure, lonileness, agitation, fatigue, for additional traumatic impacts.
The existence of supportive systems distress; sleep disorders, energy loss, somatic 2nd response: psychological 
within and outside the community complaints; increase of alcoholic beverages, intervention in emergency, with crisis 
involved stands out among the factors smoking and psychotropic usage; higher intervention aspect.
that may contribute to their recovery susceptibility to diseases; slow thinking 3rd response: psychotherapy or 
or its prevention, highlighting the and low concentration; change in eating counseling.
importance of specific psychological habits; difficulty keeping relationships 
support (Hodgkinson e Stewart, 1998). (Parkes, 1998). Lidando com perdas pessoais

When the responses before losses The grieved person in traumatic 
Grief in emergencies are not as expected, i.e, they do not conditions is fragile and needs care, 
Another notion to understand the fit the symptomatology and process pacience and attention; one is usually 
experience of a person involved in a abovementioned, the process is of disorganized, incoherent, frightened, 
disaster is grief, taken as a normal and complicate grief, and can be understood paralized. Taking into consideration 
expected response to the rupture of a as one of following (Bromberg, 1994): these peculiar conditions, some kinds 
bond (Parkes, 1998). Its function is to a) chronic, marked by estagnation in one of care are essential in the manner to 
provide the restoration of sources and of the phases of the process; b) inhibited, treat the person. It is very important to 
make feasible the adaptation to changes when there are no symptoms identifiable consider this care, which is placed beyond 
occurred due to losses. (Parkes, idem; as grief, due to the need of coping with the technique domain and refl ects the 
Bromberg; 1994, Franco, 2002). other concurrent demands to the loss; c) posture to be kept under these situations.

The understanding of grief as a postponed, the process is put off due to To touch and to support physically 
process allows one to understand it other activities heavier than the loss, and may be ways of offering non-verbal aid; 
throughout its phases, the first of which the response to grief may develop later on, however, it is recommended that cultural 
is the one that more closely touches the from a stimulation which, apparently, differences be taken into account, which 
reality of assistance in air accidents. It’s should not have such power. attribute meanings to physical contact 

37



and body communication, mainly and it is this same environment that may Ministério da Aeronáutica. http://dac.gov.
between people of different gender. work as an equilibrium to those who grieve br/legislacao/port0019dgac.htm (acesso em 
Attitudes of closeness, such as calling one the loss. 16/05/2004). 

by its name, may be a great element of At the moment of a disaster, it is very 
4- FRANCO, M. H. P. (2002). Estudos 

help and closeness. hard, for most of the employees, to recognize Avançados sobre o Luto. Campinas: Livro 
The use of clichés is very common, in they also lost someone. In order to be able Pleno.

an attempt to calm down or reduce the to deal with grieved personnel, it is the 
pain of the grieved person in traumatic company’s responsibility to allow them the 5- HODGKINSON, P. E. e STEWART, M. 
situations. However, we consider that experience of a grief process, providing space (1998). Coping with Catastrophe; a handbook 

clichés aim to calm down the one who for communication within the workplace, of post-disaster psychosocial aftercare. Londres: 
Routledge.

offers help and does not know how to promoting rituals. It is worth to remember 
do it, being inocuous at best. Our work that employees’ family members mobilize 6- JAMES, R. K. e GILLILAND, B. E. (2001). 
has identified the importance of assertive themselves and are concerned about their Crisis Intervention Strategies. Londres: Brookes 
communication with the grieved person in health and future; and there is the stigma of Cole.
traumatic situations and, therefore, futile working for an airline when it goes through 

7- KLING, T. (2002). Exit Row: The 
actions are not admitted, such as the use a disaster. True Story of an Emergency Volunteer, a 
of clichés as follows:   “..time is the best The employee often listens to unpleasant Miraculous Survivor and the Crash of  Flight 
remedy…”; “think of everything you still comments regarding the accident, coming 965. Naperville: Sourcebooks.
have and thank God…”; “be glad because from people who are not directly affected. 
he didn’t feel any pain…”; “… I know For this reason, there must be space where 8- LEWIS, G. W. (1994). Critical Incident 

how you feel…”. stress is worked out, so that employees Stress and Trauma in the Workplace; 
recognition, response, recovery. Levinton: 

are able to perform their tasks well, as Accelerated Development.
Coping with personal losses recommended by Hodgkinson and Stewart, 
The professional who is exposed to stressful 1998. 9- National Transportation Safety Board – NTSB 
situations, such as one who assists air Finally, the professional/technical (1996). Aviation Family Assistance Act. 
disaster victims, also presents responses preparation of those who propose themselves <http://www.ntsb.gov-publictn-2000-spc.pdf> 

that may be, according to Lewis (1994) (acesso em 01/06/2004).
to offer assistance to people under traumatic 

and Hodgkinson and Stewart (1998): situations demands an intrinsic disposition 10- National Transportation Safety Board 
emotional (anxiety, scare, grief, irritability, to help, sensibility and empathy to – NTSB (1997). Foreign Air Carrier Family 
numbness, seclusion, intrusive thoughts), understand the human grief; nevertheless, Support Act. <http://frwebgate.access.gpo.
physical (fatigue, muscle quivering, without losing their personal limits in such gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?name=105-cong-public-

cold sweating, dyspnea, gastrointestinal delicate relationship. law&docid=f:publi148.105.pdf> (acesso em 
01/06/2004).

disruptions, dizziness, nausea, apetite or Experience shows that, besides writing 
sleep disorders,  sexual disfunctions) and and reading manuals and applying rules, if 11- National Transportation Safety Board 
cognitive (memory problems, mental these personal characteristics are not present – NTSB (2000). Amendments for the Federal 
confusion, intrusive thoughts, difficulty in in those who offer help, so it will be simply Family Assistance Plan for Aviation Disaster. 

making making). <www.cgi-bin/usefpt.cgi?Ipaddress=162.14
referred to the execution of one more task, 064.21&filename=publ18/pdf> (acesso em 

Therefore, it requires that, beyond which may even be correctly performed; 01/06/2004).
further knowledge of the techniques used, however, there will be no soul. And no 
the professional be conscious of his or her human factor can be developed without 12- PARKES, C. M. (1998). Luto, estudos 
personal conditions for this kind of activity soul. sobre a perda na vida adulta. Trad. Maria 

and be able to identify his or her needs for Helena Franco Bromberg. São Paulo: Summus 
(trabalho original publicado em 1996).

rest, relief, as well as activity dismissal as it References:
concerns an individual in risk. 1- AMERICAN PSYCHIATRIC ASSOCIATION 13- ROBERTS, A. R. (2000). An Overview 

A disaster refers to previous losses. The (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of of Crisis Theory and Crisis Intervention. Crisis 
possibility of being in an accident exposes Mental Disorders. 4. ed. Washington, DC: APA. Intervention Handbook: assessment, treatment and 

not only the supportive staff, who deals research. Nova Iorque: Oxford University Press.

directly with victims and family members, 2- BROMBERG, M. H. P. F. (1994). A 
Psicoterapia em Situações de Perdas e Luto. 14- YOUNG, M. A. (1998). The Community 

but also all employees of the company. The Campinas: Ed. Psy II. Crisis Response Team Training Manual. 2. ed. 
death of a coworker modifies profoundly Washington, DC: National Organization for 
the social environment of the survivors, 3- Departamento de Aviação Civil – DAC, Victims Assistance – NOVA.

38



39



Flight Safety



Team Training in the Skies: Does Crew Resource
Management (CRM) Training Work?

Eduardo Salas, C. Shawn Burke, Clint A. Bowers, and Katherine A. Wilson, University
of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida

The aviation community has invested great amounts of money and effort into
crew resource management (CRM) training. Using D. L. Kirkpatrick’s (1976)
framework for evaluating training, we reviewed 58 published accounts of CRM
training to determine its effectiveness within aviation. Results indicated that
CRM training generally produced positive reactions, enhanced learning, and pro-
moted desired behavioral changes. However, we cannot ascertain whether CRM
has an effect on an organization’s bottom line (i.e., safety). We discuss the state
of the literature with regard to evaluation of CRM training programs and, as a
result, call for the need to conduct systematic, multilevel evaluation efforts that
will show the true effectiveness of CRM training. As many evaluations do not col-
lect data across levels (as suggested by D. L. Kirkpatrick, 1976, and by G. M.
Alliger, S. I. Tannenbaum, W. Bennett, Jr., & H. Traver, 1997), the impact of
CRM cannot be truly determined; thus more and better evaluations are needed
and should be demanded.

INTRODUCTION 1991; Gregorich, Helmreich, & Wilhelm, 1990;
Leedom & Simon, 1995).

In aviation, accidents and mishaps have been Within the aviation environment, teamwork
attributed to human error in 60% to 80% of deficiencies are not only embarrassing and
cases (Freeman & Simmon, 1991). A large part highly publicized but also can lead to tragic
of these are attributable to failures in coordina- consequences. For example, Eastern Airlines
tion among cockpit crews. For example, poor Flight 401 crashed in the Florida Everglades in
pilot performance and faulty crew resource December 1972 because the crew permitted
management (CRM) have been cited as con- their fully operational Lockheed L-1011 to fly
tributing factors in numerous accidents and into the ground. What the crew failed to realize
incidents reported by major airlines during the was that the altitude hold feature of the autopi-
period covering 1983 to 1985 (U.S. General lot had been accidentally disconnected (as cited
Accounting Office, 1997). The U.S. General in Kayten, 1993). Results of the investigation
Accounting Office (1997) found that CRM defi- revealed that the entire three-person crew was
ciencies (e.g., lack of coordination among cock- preoccupied with a landing gear light that had
pit crews, captain’s failure to assign tasks to failed to illuminate at the time of the accident.
other members, and a lack of effective crew Many other aviation accidents resulting in dis-
supervision) were a contributing cause in astrous consequences have also been attributed
approximately half of accidents that occurred to faulty CRM skills (Allegheny Airlines in
between 1983 and 1985 that involved one or 1971 and 1978; Mohawk Airlines in 1972;
more fatalities. Other reviews have found simi- United Airlines in 1978; and others as cited in
lar factors at work within cited accident reports Kayten, 1993; U.S. General Accounting Office,
(see Chidester, Helmreich, Gregorich, & Geis, 1997).

Address correspondence to Eduardo Salas, Department of Psychology, University of Central Florida, P.O. Box 161390,
Orlando, FL 32816-1350; esalas@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu. HUMAN FACTORS, Vol. 43, No. 4, Winter 2001, pp. 641–674.
Copyright © 2001, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. All rights reserved.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



642 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

In an effort to manage some of these prob- information about how to maximize the design
lems with teamwork and the resulting safety and delivery of CRM training through scenario
issues, the aviation industry introduced the design (Prince, Oser, Salas, & Woodruff, 1993;
concept of CRM (Salas, Bowers, & Edens, Prince & Salas, 1999), scenario feedback
2001; Wiener, Kanki, & Helmreich, 1993). (Prince, Brannick, Prince, & Salas, 1997; Salas,
CRM was introduced as a way to train aircrews Rhodenizer, & Bowers, 2000), and the training
to use all available resources – equipment, peo- of operational personnel as observers and raters
ple, and information – by communicating and (Brannick, Salas, & Prince, 1997). In this vein,
coordinating as a team. CRM has been used Helmreich and Wilhelm (1987) found that the
within the aviation industry for more than 20 systematic training of raters in CRM concepts
years and has undergone several evolutions made a significant difference in the quality of
with varying foci (Helmreich & Foushee, 1993; ratings and scale use (e.g., raters using the
Helmreich, Merritt, & Wilhelm, 1999; Maurino, entire scale) as compared with raters who were
1999). Specifically, during the first evolution, trained less systematically (as cited in Helm-
the emphasis was on changing individual styles reich, Chidester, Foushee, Gregorich, & Wil-
and correcting deficiencies in individual behav- helm, 1990).
ior, with a heavy focus on psychological test- Evidence has also been provided that sug-
ing. The second evolution represented a focus gests that low-fidelity simulations can be used
on cockpit group dynamics, was more modu- to practice and/or train CRM-related skills
lar, and dealt more with specific aviation con- (Baker, Prince, Shrestha, Oser, & Salas, 1993;
cepts related to flight operations. With the third Bowers, Salas, Prince, & Brannick, 1992;
evolution came a broadening of scope; specifi- Jentsch & Bowers, 1998). Furthermore, it has
cally, training began to take into account the been shown that national culture plays a pow-
characteristics of aviation systems in which erful role in determining the effectiveness of
crews must function and expanded to areas CRM training programs (Maurino, 1994; Merritt
outside the cockpit (e.g., cabin crews, mainte- & Helmreich, 1995b). Specifically, attitudes
nance personnel). With the fourth generation that define the core concepts of CRM differ
came integration and proceduralization. Under dramatically across national borders (e.g., indi-
the Advanced Qualification Program (AQP), vidualism/collectivism, power distance, uncer-
carriers were allowed to tailor training to fit tainty avoidance, and division of roles between
the needs of their specific organization, they sexes; see Hofstede, 1988). As such, initial
were required to provide both CRM and line- attempts to apply CRM globally were often un-
orientated flight training (LOFT) to all crews, successful because of a failure to recognize the
and CRM training was integrated with techni- power of national culture (Helmreich, Wilhelm,
cal training. Klinect, & Merritt, 2001). Finally, anecdotal

The fifth and latest evolution represents an evidence and reactions to CRM training gener-
awareness that human error is inevitable and ally suggest that CRM training can prevent
can provide a great deal of information. CRM is accidents (see Diehl, 1991; Kayten, 1993) and
now being used as a way to try to manage these that CRM is being applied in domains outside
errors by focusing on training teamwork skills aviation (see Flin, 1995; Howard, Gaba, Fish,
that will promote (a) error avoidance, (b) early Yang, & Sarnquist, 1992; Merritt & Helmreich,
detection of errors, and (c) minimization of con- 1995a).
sequences resulting from CRM errors. Programs Although positive lessons have been learned,
are beginning to go beyond error management areas in need of improvement exist. To begin
to include a focus on threat recognition and with, despite CRM’s long history, there re-
management. mains a lack of consistency within the aviation

These evolutions in CRM have occurred industry with regard to its definitions, training
over roughly two decades of use within the avi- content, and methods of delivery (Wilhelm,
ation community; research during this time has 1991; Helmreich & Wilhelm, 1987; Salas,
produced several lessons learned (see Salas et Prince, et al., 1999). Second, with the develop-
al., 2001). For example, research has yielded ment of the AQP guidelines, each individual

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 643

airline now has two choices in deciding how THE NEED FOR EVALUATION
they want to implement CRM training: (a) by
using traditional requirements, as mandated by Training evaluation has been defined as “the
Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 121; systematic collection of descriptive and judg-
or (b) by using the AQP guidelines. FAR Part mental information necessary to make effective
121 states the general operating requirements training decisions related to the selection, adop-
for domestic, flag, and supplemental opera- tion, value, and modification of various instruc-
tions and contains the general requirements for tional activities” (Goldstein, 1993, p. 147).
CRM training. However, it leaves methods for Although systematic training evaluation is not
CRM curriculum design and development, as an easy task, it is the only way to ensure that
well as for evaluation, ambiguous. training programs are having the desired effect

In an effort to resolve the lack of guidance and are a worthwhile investment for the organi-
offered by the Federal Aviation Administration zation. Similarly, Cannon-Bowers et al. (1989)
(FAA) regarding CRM training, the AQP guide- have argued that training evaluation may serve
lines were created. Under the AQP guidelines, a number of important functions. First, and
airlines are provided with (a) a process for most obvious, program evaluation results can
developing the curriculum in order to integrate indicate whether the goals and objectives of a
traditional CRM programs with technical train- program are appropriate to achieve the desired
ing, (b) the required level of performance that outcome. Second, evaluation can indicate
must be achieved, and (c) guidelines that pro- whether the content and methods used in train-
vide inspectors with evaluation criteria to deter- ing will result in achievement of the overall
mine whether or not the curriculum meets all program goal. Third, evaluation data can be
FAA requirements (Helmreich et al., 1999; U.S. used to determine how to maximize transfer of
General Accounting Office, 1997). Despite the training. Fourth, it can serve as feedback at
creation of AQP guidelines, airlines are not both the individual and team levels to suggest
required to use them in replacement of FAR areas in need of improvement or revision.
Part 121 requirements – therefore, much ambi- Goldstein (1993) offered similar arguments as
guity and a lack of consensus still exist when it to the benefits of evaluation.
comes to the design, delivery, and evaluation of The most popular framework for guiding
CRM training programs. training evaluations is Kirkpatrick’s (1976)

Although this ambiguity surrounds the de- typology. Kirkpatrick argued for a multilevel
sign (i.e., content) and evaluation of these pro- approach to training evaluation consisting of
grams, the aviation community continues to four levels of evaluation: reactions, learning,
invest millions of dollars into CRM training, behavior (i.e., extent of performance change),
and other communities (e.g., medical, offshore and results (i.e., degree of impact on organiza-
oil, maritime shipping companies) are now tional effectiveness or mission success). Within
starting to “jump on the bandwagon.” Given recent years, this typology has been expanded
the increased adoption of CRM as a worth- by several researchers (see Kraiger, Ford, &
while team-training approach, there is a need Salas, 1993; Salas & Cannon-Bowers, 2001).
to summarize the current state of knowledge For example, Kraiger et al. (1993) expanded
about the effectiveness of CRM training in a Kirkpatrick’s typology by arguing that learning
systematic manner. That is, the effectiveness of is multidimensional and results in cognitive,
the implemented team training systems needs affective, and skill-based learning outcomes.
to be assessed. Therefore, the purpose of this Moreover, Kraiger et al. suggested potential
paper is to use Kirkpatrick’s (1976) typology methods that can be used to evaluate each of
for training evaluation as a framework to eval- these outcomes: cognitive (verbal knowledge,
uate the effectiveness of CRM training pro- knowledge organization, cognitive strategies);
grams in aviation. Specifically, the review is affective (attitudinal, motivational); and skill
organized via the type of evidence collected based (compilation, automaticity). Goldsmith
after training (i.e., reactions, learning, behav- and Kraiger (1997) have built upon this work
iors, and/or organizational effectiveness). by describing a method for the structural

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



644 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

assessment of an individual learner’s knowl- ducted. Reaction evidence is perhaps the easi-
edge and skill, a method that has been success- est to collect and usually takes the form of a
fully used in aviation research efforts (see paper-and-pencil questionnaire in which the
Kraiger, Salas, & Cannon-Bowers, 1995; Stout, response format is typically a Likert scale. A
Salas, & Kraiger, 1997). small sample of studies have also gathered

The utilization of Kirkpatrick’s typology and reaction data through the utilization of ques-
corresponding revisions serves several impor- tionnaires that ask participants to rank order
tant functions within the training evaluation the perceived usefulness of the CRM compo-
process. First, it has served to organize the type nents included in training.
of information that should be collected in the In reviewing the available literature, we saw
assessment of training. Second, it has served to that reaction data are a commonly collected
argue for the added benefit and/or importance type of evaluation data. Of the studies includ-
of collecting more than one level of evaluation ed in our review, 27 of 58 (46%) involved the
information. Although both points perform collection of reaction data (see Tables 1 and
important functions, the second has been more 5). Of these 27 studies, 9 collected informa-
difficult to put into practice than has the first. tion solely related to participant reactions.
Specifically, Alliger and Janak (1989) reported Furthermore, the reaction data collected in the
that less than 10% of organizations assess reviewed studies tended to reflect (a) affective
training programs at all four levels of evalua- feelings toward CRM programs, (b) the utility
tion, as argued for by Kirkpatrick. of these programs, or (c) a combination of

both affect- and utility-related information.
HEEDING THE CALL: Alliger, Tannenbaum, Bennett, and Traver

EVALUATION OF CRM TRAINING (1997) argued that “liking of training” is the
most common form of training assessment, and

Our review resulted in the identification of the results from the current review tend to sup-
58 studies that appeared to evaluate the effec- port this argument in that 12 of these 27 studies
tiveness of aviation CRM training programs. We (44%) assessed participants’ affective reactions
next provide a description of the state of CRM toward training. Overall, the results of these
evaluation efforts with respect to each of the studies suggest that most participants like CRM
levels of evaluation as identified by Kirkpatrick training. In addition to assessing the overall
(1976). Specifically, studies that assessed train- affective reactions to training, some studies
ing at only one level will be reviewed first, (e.g., Baker et al., 1993; Hörmann, Goeters,
beginning with those collecting reaction data Maschke, & Schiewe, 1995) also assessed affec-
and ending with those collecting results/organi- tive reactions to particular components of CRM
zational effectiveness data. Following this will be training. For example, Schiewe (1995) found
a brief review of studies that assessed training that units that were based on case studies or
at multiple levels, as argued for by Kirkpatrick. that used role play were very well liked by par-
For a summary of individual studies, see Tables ticipants, whereas those based mostly on lecture
1 through 5, which describe the findings of each were not rated favorably. Others have found
of the identified studies in relation to their data similar findings (see Baker, Bauman, & Zalesny,
on reactions, learning, behavior, and organiza- 1991), suggesting, perhaps, that methods that
tional effectiveness. promote interaction among participants are

liked better than those that are more passive.
Do Aviators Like CRM? Reaction Evidence Reactions as to how participants “liked”

Reaction evidence is the first level of Kirk- training are not the only type of reactions that
patrick’s (1976) typology and amounts to an may be collected from participants. Alliger et
assessment of trainee’s feelings toward the al. (1997) also suggested assessing partici-
training program. Reaction data are assessed pants’ reactions to the utility of training.
after training and examine the degree to which Questions related to the assessment of utility
participants perceive that training was worth- “attempt to ascertain the perceived utility value,
while, relevant, interesting, and/or well con- or usefulness, of training for subsequent job

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 645

performance” (p. 344). Nine of the 27 studies that many of the reviewed studies did not men-
(33%) assessed the utility of training. In terms tion the specific components of CRM that
of utility, the reviewed CRM training programs were trained within the evaluated program. As
were seen to be worthwhile, useful, and applica- CRM training is still not uniformly taught, the
ble. Specifically, themes were seen as relevant delineation of the particular skills taught is
(Grau & Valot, 1997; Hörmann et al., 1995), important in attempting to make sense of the
and participants felt that the CRM class should presented findings as well as in determining
be expanded to other fleets and/or populations the extent to which findings may generalize.
(Incalcaterra & Holt, 1999). See Tables 1 and 5 This last comment is not so much a critique of
for further information. The remaining 7 studies the data collection process as it is of the dis-
assessed both affective and utility reactions. semination of results.

Positive reactions to CRM (affective, utility) Summary. Despite the shortcomings men-
were found to exist in single-airline studies as tioned, the studies that assessed participant reac-
well as in multifleet and multiairline studies (see tions to CRM training provided sufficient rigor
Butler, 1993; Helmreich & Wilhelm, 1991). and converging evidence to lead to the conclu-
Furthermore, the teaching of teamwork behav- sion that CRM training in aviation settings does
iors (e.g., communication, decision making, produce positive reactions. Furthermore, avia-
leadership; see Alkov, 1991; Alkov & Gaynor, tors like CRM training and perceive that it is
1991), the use of role-playing exercises (see worthwhile and useful to the safe conduct of
Baker et al., 1991), and the inclusion of cabin their tasks. Although this is the simplest form of
crew members in training (see Vandermark, evaluation criteria, it serves an important pur-
1991) have all contributed to obtaining posi- pose. Positive reactions to training are crucial in
tive affective and utility reactions in training. that they can provide an avenue by which to gar-
Although the aviation community should be ner the top-level support that is essential for a
applauded for beginning to assess both affective program’s lasting success, can provide evidence
reactions to training and the perceived utility of a program’s credibility, and may enhance
of training, a few areas of improvement are trainee motivation to learn. Conversely, negative
suggested. reactions may point to areas of training that need

First, in the assessment of the perceived utili- to be revised and provide insight into why
ty of training, few studies were found that asked desired changes at other levels of evaluation
participants how they would apply the newly (e.g., learning, behavior) have not occurred
learned behaviors to their jobs (i.e., specific (Orlady & Foushee, 1987).
instances as to how and/or when these newly
acquired skills might be beneficial). Second, Do Aviators Learn About CRM? 
Goldstein (1993) argued for guidelines that Learning Evidence
should be followed in developing assessment
of participant reaction, yet some of the In a multilevel evaluation effort, learning evi-
reviewed studies seemed to fall short on these. dence is the second level of evaluation, and it
For example, although Goldstein recommend- refers to “the principles, facts, and skills which
ed that responses should be able to be tabulat- were understood and absorbed by participants”
ed and quantified, most of the studies reviewed (Kirkpatrick, 1976, p. 11). Although evidence
(or at least the data presented) were not in a at this level includes the learning that occurred
format in which it was apparent that the data during the program, it does not include the
were quantifiable. Typical evidence provided actual exhibition of learned behaviors (i.e.,
consisted of notes such as “most of the partici- skills). Also included in this level is the extent to
pants reported liking the training” and “a few which training leads to desired attitude changes
selected cases reported liking the training.” A (i.e., positive attitudes toward CRM training). It
second concern is that although many studies is considered here because learning and attitude
reported using a Likert-type scale to assess changes are not only cognitive events; both
participant reaction, few studies assessed the processes mediate performance and, as such,
reliability of the scales used. A final concern is should be evaluated together. The bottom line is

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



646 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 1: CRM Evaluative Efforts – Reactions Studies

Source Community CRM Training Content

Baker et al. (1991) 41 CH-46 pilots Preflight brief 
Assertiveness

Baker et al. (1993) 112 male military aviators No specification of skills taught
Acceptability of tabletop training system to
augment CRM training

Chute & Wiener (1995) Survey conducted at 2 airlines No specification of skills taught
1 had joint CRM program for
1 year (cockpit/cabin crew)
1 CRM for pilots

Clark, Nielsen, & Wood 135 commercial airline pilots No specification of exact skills taught 
(1991) (mention importance of stress manage-

ment, communication, interpersonal skills)

Maschke, Goeters, Cockpit crews; Deutsche Judgment/decision making
Hörmann, & Schiewe Forschungsanstalt für Luft- Communication
(1995) und Raumfahrt e.V./ Lufthansa Leadership/teamwork

Hörmann et al. (1995) 750 participants in Lufthansa Judgment/decision making
cockpit crews Communication

Leadership/teamwork

Schiewe (1995) 724 cockpit members Communication
Judgment/decision making
Teamwork

Vandermark (1991) America West Flight attendants Those suggested by Hackman (1989) but
and cockpit crew (n = ≈1200) no actual specification

Young (1995) 42 junior-year flight students Communication skills
at Purdue University Stress management

Leadership
Psychological factors
Team building
Crew coordination
Conflict resolutions
Situational awareness
Decision making/problem solving

that assessment of learning criteria provides learning, with 11 of these studies solely assess-
evidence as to how successful the training pro- ing learning criteria (see Tables 2 and 5).
gram was in imparting the targeted knowledge, Within these efforts, the most common type of
skills, and attitudes, and also provides the evidence offered in support of CRM affecting
basis for feedback and areas in need of further learning was changes in attitudes regarding
refinement. CRM. Evaluation of attitudes was usually done

Within the reviewed studies, 52% (30 of 58) by collecting information with the Cockpit
collected information related to participant Management Attitudes Questionnaire (CMAQ;

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 647

TABLE 1: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative EffortsCReactions Studies

Type of Study/Data Collection Reactions Findings

Quasi-experimental Review of means indicated that preflight brief exercise was a worthwhile
Self-report survey addition to the aircrew coordination training course and likely to have an

impact on next briefing experience (approx 4.4 on 5-point scale)
Able to cite specific ways they planned to use information gained in
both exercises
Open-ended questionnaire revealed favorable impressions of both exercises
75% ranked role play assertiveness exercise as 1st or 2nd choice (n = 4)

Quasi-experimental 90% of aviators agreed that tabletop system could be used for CRM skills training
Self-report survey Most felt good way of learning

Most agreed system demonstrated importance of CRM

Quasi-experimental Good program that should be reinstated (joint)
Self-report survey Good reactions, suggest extend to cabin crew (other)

Quasi-experimental Felt CRM enhanced information processing ability
Self-report survey Majority indicated that negative effects of aviation stress outweigh posi-

tive effects of CRM

Quasi-experimental 80% thought course was useful or extremely useful (as per Likert scale)
Self-report survey

Quasi-experimental Preliminary data indicate that 90% indicated that the course content
Self-report survey was highly relevant

Preliminary data indicate that 84% thought the method of presentation
was attractive

Quasi-experimental Units that were based on case studies or those that used role play in job-
Self-report survey related scenarios had very positive reactions

Methods based mostly on lecture not rated favorably

Quasi-experimental Favorable reactions (Likert scale)
Self-report survey

Quasi-experimental Positive reaction: class worthwhile
Self-report survey

Helmreich, 1984) or a modification of this ation and compensation for stressors). Overall,
instrument. The CMAQ is composed of three studies that assessed learning via attitude
major scales: (a) communication and coordina- change seem to indicate that CRM training can
tion (i.e., communication of intent and plans, produce positive changes in attitudes that are
delegation of tasks, assignment of responsibili- somewhat stable given top management sup-
ties, and monitoring of crew members); (b) port (see Tables 2 and 5).
command responsibility (i.e., leadership); and For the most part, CRM programs seem to
(c) recognition of stressor effects (i.e., consider- produce positive examples of participant learning,

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



648 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

primarily as indexed by attitude change (see whether participants had a positive or negative
Tables 2 and 5); however, there are a few attitude change (i.e., boomerang) as a result of
reported instances of CRM programs achieving CRM training (Chidester et al., 1991). The
a “boomerang effect” (e.g., instances of nega- remaining studies reporting this effect, howev-
tive attitude change; Helmreich, 1991). One er, did not report the possible cause of the neg-
study found that personality type influenced ative attitudes (see Irwin, 1991). For example,

TABLE 2: CRM Evaluative Efforts – Learning Studies

Source Community CRM Training Content

Alkov & Gaynor (1991) 58 CRM training instructors Two-week instructor training course
No specification of CRM skills taught

Chidester et al. (1991) 528 aviators from U.S. Air No specification of CRM skills taught
Force military airlift command

Gregorich (1993) 1191 participants – major air No specification of skills taught
carrier

Gregorich et al. (1990) National air carrier (696 par- No specification of skills taught
ticipants)

Grubb, Morey, & Simon U.S. Air Force flight crews U.S. Air Force CRM behaviors (group
(1999) (n = 2095) and mission crews dynamics, stress awareness, mission plan-

(n = 564) ning, risk management behaviors, workload
management, communication, situation
awareness, human performance behaviors)

Helmreich et al. (1999) Pilots in several organizations No specification of skills taught
surveyed just after completion
of CRM course and several
years later

Irwin (1991) Major U.S. air carrier No specification of exact content

Morey, Grubb, & Simon 188 fighter, 198 transport, and U.S. Air Force CRM training: 8 core CRM
(1997) 77 bomber U.S. Air Force pilots behaviors

undergoing CRM training

Rollins (1995) 3 commercial airlines (2 U.S., No description of specific CRM skills trained
1 Canadian); 1 U.S. military Training lasted 1–2 days
(n = 508)

Simpson & Wiggins Approximately 88 general No specification of skills taught
(1995) aviation pilots

Yamamori & Mito 2300 crew members of Japan Recognize and understand different interper-
(1993) airline sonal styles and effects on crew interaction in

cockpit (inquiry, advocacy, conflict, problem
definition, critique, problem solving)

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 649

was this boomerang effect attributable to Despite evidence of a boomerang effect with
something within the training itself or to crews some participants, the preponderance of evi-
having very high, positive attitudes prior to dence seems to suggest that the majority of
training (Chidester et al., 1991)? Or could per- participants attending CRM training do learn
sonality or cultural aspects have played a role in the sense that there is typically a positive
(Chidester et al., 1991; Helmreich, 1991)? change in targeted attitudes.

TABLE 12: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative EffortsCReactions Studies

Type of Study/Data Collection Learning Findings

Quasi-experimental Positive shifts in attitudes were detected as a result of instructor training
Self-report survey/CMAQ course

Quasi-experimental Training produced both positive and negative attitude change via type
Self-report survey/CMAQ of personality

Quasi-experimental Initial training produced significant positive attitude change
Self-report survey Initial increase followed by significant reductions in attitude levels

between training cycles

Quasi-experimental Positive attitude change (CMAQ)
Self-report survey/revised Reduction in response variation for 2 scales of CMAQ after training
CMAQ

Quasi-experimental Results were combined for all platforms – indicate significant positive
Self-report survey attitude change as per all 8 behaviors

Quasi-experimental Decay in attitudes not immediately apparent, but some decay over time
Self-report survey

Quasi-experimental Significant positive attitude change (CMAQ)
Self-report survey Few examples of boomerang 

Found attitudes decline over time
Recurrent training results in positive attitude change

Quasi-experimental Pretraining attitudes varied by pilot group (transport vs. fighter, bomber)
Self-report survey For all 3 groups pilot attitudes toward CRM significantly improved with training

Improvement rate varied across groups with most positive posttraining
attitudes being shown by transport, followed by bomber and fighter pilots

Quasi-experimental Measurable improvement in positive CRM attitudes (CMAQ)
Self-report survey/CMAQ

Quasi-experimental Pilots who had previously completed human factors course had attitudes
Self-report survey significantly different from those who had not

Pilots who had a human factors course were more confident in terms of
their ability to cope with emergency situations and exhibited a relatively
heightened level of self-awareness

Quasi-experimental Strengthens and crystallizes attitudes toward more effective CRM in
Self-report survey cockpit

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



650 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

Although the assessment of learning via atti- skills, and attitudes as well as the stability of
tude change is the most popular form of assess- changes over time (see Helmreich et al., 2001).
ing learning, a few studies used other methods Summary. Similar to the assessment of reac-
(see Hayward & Alston, 1991; Incalcaterra & tion data, the overall picture provided by learn-
Holt, 1999; Salas, Fowlkes, Stout, Milanovich, ing criteria seems to suggest that CRM training
& Prince, 1999). For example, Hayward and is effective in producing changes in aviator
Alston (1991) reported that as a result of CRM knowledge and attitudes. This conclusion is
workshops there was an increased awareness of further supported in that although the predom-
human factors, crew performance, and potential inant form of collecting learning data is
stressors as well as methods by which to handle through the assessment of attitude change, sev-
these stressors. Assessing another form of learn- eral studies assessed other forms of learning as
ing (i.e., knowledge acquisition), Salas, Fowlkes, well (e.g., knowledge structures, paper-and-
et al. (1999) found that CRM-trained groups pencil tests) and found evidence of learning.
exhibited higher levels of knowledge regarding The positive evidence offered by multiple mea-
CRM principles than did teams not trained in sures of learning makes a stronger case for the
CRM. Finally, several studies by Salas and col- effectiveness of CRM on learning. Although
leagues (see also Stout, Salas, & Kraiger, 1997) heading in the right direction, evaluation efforts
have shown the positive effects of CRM training must continue to strive for the inclusion not
by assessing learning via a change in participant only of measures examining attitude change but
knowledge structures (i.e., mental models). also measures of declarative knowledge as well

Although the overall picture seems to sug- as the assessment of knowledge structures and
gest that CRM training does have a positive shared mental models (see Cannon-Bowers et
impact on participant learning, another impor- al., 1989; Kraiger et al., 1993).
tant factor to consider is the stability of these
learning changes over time. Although many Do Aviators Apply Learned CRM Behaviors
cited studies (see Tables 2 and 5) have shown in the Cockpit? Behavioral Evidence
that CRM affects initial learning and/or change, Behavioral evidence, the third level identified
fewer studies have assessed the long-term sta- by Kirkpatrick (1976), provides an assessment
bility of these changes. The few studies that of whether the lessons and/or knowledge
have examined whether the changes produced learned in training transfers to actual behavior
by training programs remain stable over time on the job or a similar simulated environment.
have had varying results. For example, although It has also been argued to indicate (a) the extent
some have indicated that positive attitudes are to which trainees learned how to perform the
stable after 2 (Incalcaterra & Holt, 1999) to 5 knowledge, skills, and attitudes taught during
years (Byrnes & Black, 1993), others have training as well as when to apply these skills;
reported that initial attitude change produced and (b) trainee readiness and overall program
by CRM programs declines over time, regress- effectiveness (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1989).
ing toward pre-CRM levels (Gregorich, 1993; Of the 58 studies reviewed for this effort,
Helmreich, 1991; Helmreich et al., 1999; Irwin, 32 (55%) gathered some type of behavioral
1991). Empirical results have suggested that data, as defined by Kirkpatrick (1976). Further-
one factor contributing to whether attitudes more, 12 of the reviewed studies collected
decline over time is whether management rein- information solely at this level. The reader is
forces and supports the knowledge, skills, and referred to Tables 3 and 5 for a specific break-
attitudes learned in CRM programs or provides down of studies that collected behavioral evi-
only “lip service” to material learned in CRM dence. Within the reviewed studies, the most
programs (Gregorich, 1993; Helmreich, 1991; common method of assessing behavioral change
Helmreich et al., 1999). Recent work by Helm- was through the measurement of CRM-related
reich and colleagues has begun to examine the behaviors while participants performed line-
impact of organizational culture – including orientated simulation, such as LOFT. More
the safety culture within an organization – on the specifically, this type of assessment was evident
initial learning of targeted CRM knowledge, in 18 of the 32 studies (56%). Less common

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 651

was behavioral assessment as measured by collected during simulated situations is a close
on-line assessment of behavior (11 of 32), surrogate and a welcomed start in the right
although a small subset of studies did evaluate direction.
both behavior in line-orientated simulators and
on-line behavior (3 of 32). Are the Skies Safer? Results/Evidence of

The studies that collected behavioral data Organizational Impact
tended to use a combination of the following Organizational impact (i.e., increased safety,
tools: behavioral observation forms, behavioral fewer errors) is the highest level of evaluation in
checklists, analysis of crew communication (via Kirkpatrick’s (1976) framework. Although this
real-time ratings or post hoc analysis of video- type of evidence is highly valued, very few eval-
tapes), and peer or self-evaluations/reports. uations were conducted at this level – only 6
The predominant number of studies reviewed (10%) of the reviewed studies collected evalua-
that collected some form of behavioral evidence tion data at this level (see Tables 4 and 5).
indicated that CRM training had a positive Because of the difficulty of collecting this type
impact on behavior (see Tables 3 and 5). of information (in terms of time, resources,
Specifically, results tended to indicate that identification of a clear criterion, and low occur-
CRM-trained crews tended to exhibit improved rences of accidents and mishaps), evidence of
performance (a) as measured by behaviors CRM training’s impact on the organization as a
indicative of CRM (e.g., decision making, mis- whole is not often sought or obtained. Speci-
sion analysis, adaptability, situation awareness, fically, evidence of this type is difficult to collect
communication, leadership) or (b) as compared because it generally requires some type of longi-
with crews not trained in behaviors indicative tudinal data, as it takes time for the impact of
of CRM. For example, in a study by Leedom training to appear at the organizational level. In
and Simon (1995), results indicated that after addition, criterion measures are difficult to iden-
receiving CRM training, crews exhibited im- tify, and it is hard to control the various extrane-
proved team communication patterns, more ous variables that may influence (e.g., moderate,
efficient management of crew resources, fewer mediate) the relationship between CRM training
team errors, and improved team coordination. and organizational effectiveness.

Summary. Behavioral evidence has been Of the six studies that collected some form
argued to be highly valuable in determining the of results measure, two collected information
effectiveness of a training program because it on only organizational effectiveness and the
provides a means to assess whether training par- others collected additional types of evaluation
ticipants can actually translate the knowledge, evidence (more on this later). Within the re-
behaviors, and attitudes learned in training into viewed studies that collected data at the organi-
action. Overall, the behavioral evidence we zational level, most of the information tended
reviewed suggests rather strongly that CRM to come from one of two sources: anecdotal
training does have an impact on behavior (pri- evidence (e.g., accident reports, incident re-
marily as evidenced through LOFT or similar ports) or longitudinal studies. The predominant
evaluations): Aviators do exhibit more team- type of evidence that has been used to illustrate
work behavior in the cockpit, and presumably CRM’s impact on aviation safety consists of
this will lead to safer outcomes. Although more anecdotal reports contained in incident or acci-
evaluations were found at the behavioral level dent investigations conducted by the National
than initially expected, most of these evaluations Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). For exam-
were conducted in simulated environments ple, Kayten (1993) cited several examples of
rather than on the job. Although resources may reports by the NTSB in which good CRM prac-
restrict the ease with which behavioral data can tices were reported to limit the detrimental
be captured on the job, as opposed to in a sim- effects of either human or mechanical error.
ulated condition, behavior on the job would Although anecdotes contained in accident re-
provide even stronger support for the suggested ports are perhaps the most common and easiest
effectiveness of CRM training with regard to evidence of organizational impact to collect,
behavioral change. However, behavioral data some problems with accident data argue for

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (text continues on page 654)



652 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 3: CRM Evaluative Efforts – Behavior Studies

Source Community CRM Training Content

Arnold & Jackson 96 flight crews at United Recurrent training (topic changes each year)
(1985) Airlines Decision making

Barker, Clothier, 17 crews of active duty U.S. No specification of CRM skills previously taught
Woody, McKinney, Air Force Compared fixed and formed crews
& Brown (1996)

Brannick, Prince, 51 military air crews No specification of skills trained
Prince, & Salas (1995) (U.S Navy) Skills measured (assertiveness, decision

making/mission analysis, adaptability, situa-
tion awareness, leadership, communication)

Clothier (1991) Major domestic airline (3000
crews; 2000 untrained, 1000
trained); also look at data
across 5 airlines – same
results

Connolly & Blackwell Aeronautical science students Risk assessment
(1987) at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical Decision making

University (16 experimental, Hazardous thought patterns
13 control)

Helmreich, Wilhelm, Major airline No specification of skills taught
et al. (1990) Over 2000 line flights &

LOFT sessions
For 859 crews LOFT involved
in flight emergencies

Helmreich & Foushee Major airline No specification of skills taught
(1993); Taggart (1994)

Hansberger, Holt, & 19 instructor/evaluators (I/Es) Communication
Boehm-Davis (1999) evaluating 2 above fleets; Situation assessment

considering all pilots that Planning/decision making
these I/Es have evaluated
over past 6 months

Jentsch, Bowers, 20 instrument-rated pilots Mission analysis
& Holmes (1995) from Embry-Riddle Situation awareness

Aeronautical University

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 653

TABLE 13: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative EffortsCReactions Studies

Type of Study/Data Collection Behavior Findings

Quasi-experimental No statistical analysis presented
Rating On a 6-point scale that evaluates overall CRM performance in line-

oriented flight training (LOFT), most fall between 3 and 6 (most 4–5)

Quasi-experimental No significant differences in CRM behaviors between 2 crews
Observation Average overall rating using line operational simulation checklist was

3.35 (fixed) and 3.38 (formed)
Fixed crews committed more minor errors than formed crews (4.4 vs 2.6),
while there were no significant differences in the number of major
errors committed via crew formation

Quasi-experimental On average participants were rated as slightly above average in performing
Observation behaviors related to CRM (mean = 3.56, 3.67, Scenarios A and B,

respectively)

Post hoc Significant improvement seen in LOFT exercises (485 trained out-
performed 1625 untrained crews)
Crews flying on the line exhibited improved performance (significant
improvement in 12 of 14 areas)
Crew interactions earned higher scores (line operational simulation) as
they progressed through initial training to recurrent training

Experimental Checklist scores and flight ratings indicated experimental group performed
Observation significantly better on posttest than did control

Compared with control group, experimental group witnessed a signifi-
cantly greater amount of change on both checklist scores and flight 
ratings after training

Quasi-experimental Global rating of overall crew performance using line/LOFT worksheet –
Observational ratings behavior both on line and in LOFT indicates positive changes in CRM

performance
Wide variation in specific CRM behaviors used between fleets at same
airline

Quasi-experimental Significant positive shifts in process behavior during line operations
Observations across a 3-year period

Quasi-experimental Advanced Crew Resource Management (ACRM) pilots assessed higher
Instructor ratings after than non-ACRM pilots on workload management, communication, and
the fact planning

Expected questions from behavioral observation form to factor into
workload, communication, and situation awareness; situation awareness
factored into planning instead
I/E has positive evaluations for ACRM training, especially in area of
communication
ACRM strong in facilitating establishment of bottom lines and back up
plans, not so strong in reducing distractions or helping crew to be 
generally organized and composed

Experimental Communication ratio decreased for groups receiving training
Observation Crews tended to maintain efficient communication patterns through 

all 7 flights
Communication frequencies did not change significantly after 45 days
Assessed performance differences, none

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



654 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 3 (continued)

Source Community CRM Training Content

Nullmeyer & Spiker 11 U.S. Air Force SOC Mission planning/debrief
(in press); Silverman, MC-130P aircrews Task management
Spiker, Tourville, & Situation awareness
Nullmeyer (1997); Crew coordination
Spiker, Nullmeyer, Communication
Tourville, & Silverman Risk management
(1998); Spiker, Tactics employment
Silverman, Tourville, 
& Nullmeyer (1998)

Nullmeyer & Spiker 87 students in MC-130P Mission planning/debrief
(in press) Task management

Situational awareness
Crew coordination
Communication
Risk management
Tactics employment

Predmore (1991) United Flight 232 No specification of CRM skills taught at
(communication analysis) United

other types of organizational effectiveness decrease after CRM training was implemented.
measures. Perhaps the most predominant is Although assessing organizational impact, the
the low frequency of accidents (see Gregorich Byrnes and Black study was conducted over sev-
& Wilhelm, 1993; Helmreich & Foushee, 1993; eral years and was designed without a control
Maurino, 1999; Salas, Prince, et al., 1999); group to act as a comparison against potential
therefore the investigation of incidents (as intervening environmental confounds that may
opposed to accidents) has been suggested. have occurred. As such, although the evidence

The other source of evidence used within the provided is positive, it is not conclusive – more
reviewed studies to assess the impact of CRM controlled studies need to be conducted.
training on organizational effectiveness is based Summary. What can be concluded from the
on the longitudinal collection of data. For exam- reviewed evidence? Unfortunately, not much.
ple, Byrnes and Black (1993) evaluated a CRM Although anecdotal reports indicate that CRM
program implemented at Delta Airlines and behaviors may contribute to reducing the im-
found indications of CRM’s impact on organiza- pact of human and mechanical error within the
tional effectiveness: Quarterly air carrier dis- aviation community, much stronger evidence is
crepancy reports were found to significantly needed. This is easier said than done. A num-

TABLE 4: CRM Evaluative Efforts – Results/Organizational Impact Studies

Source Community CRM Training Content

Diehl (1991) Summary paper No specification of  specific skills

Kayten (1993) National Transportation No specification of skills taught within 
Safety Board reports particular incidents

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 655

TABLE 13: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative EffortsCReactions Studies

Type of Study/Data Collection Behavior Findings

Quasi-experimental Team coordination behaviors positively related to mission performance
Instructor ratings, self- Crew coordination processes were differentially related to performance
report survey, observation across missions

Quality of mission planning related to mission performance
Self-report of mission performance and crew coordination positively
related

Quasi-experimental Based on rating system devised from instructor comments in grade
Instructor comments folders, students rated above average in mission preparation and 
translated into ratings crew coordination

Students rated below average in decision making and communication

Post hoc case study Efficient use of resources
Distribution of communication across multiple tasks and members
Maximum utilization of 4th crew member
Explicit prioritizing of tasks
Active involvement of captain through entire process

ber of difficulties exist in establishing a clear about the evaluations. Several, in fact, hinted at
cause-and-effect relationship between CRM the impact of CRM on a particular subset of
and safety. For example, various factors may crews but did not provide enough information
intervene between the point at which a CRM to reach any real conclusions; therefore they
program is implemented and the assessment of were not included. Of those not included, the
the program’s impact, making inference some- information presented was either ambiguous or
what problematic. Clearly, evaluation efforts very general in nature; as such, it was felt that
that systematically track the impact of a partic- the results were too speculative to be reported.
ular CRM program on safety provide a stronger
argument than do anecdotal reports. The bot- Multilevel Evaluation Efforts
tom line appears to be that although there is Reviewing the 58 identified studies via Kirk-
evidence of a positive trend regarding the patrick’s typology has suggested that when each
impact of CRM on safety, more and better eval- level of training evaluation criteria is considered
uations need to be conducted. Of the evalua- independently, a fair amount of evidence sug-
tions reviewed during the course of the gests that CRM training does have a positive
literature search, many lacked important details impact on participant reaction, learning, and

TABLE 14: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative EffortsCReactions Studies

Type of Study/Data Collection Results/Organizational Impact

Post hoc Reduction in accident rates cited from 4 environments (U.S. Air Force,
U.S. Navy helicopters, U.S. Navy fighter-bomber, Petroleum Helicopter Inc.)

Post hoc Several near incidents saved by good CRM practices – cites incidents

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



656 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

behavior, although the impact on safety cannot of CRM training. For example, Smith (1994)
yet be determined. However, these conclusions found that when participant reactions and
are, in some sense, based on weak data, for in learning (attitudes) were assessed, a self-analy-
order to truly assess whether CRM training is sis technique used to develop CRM skills in 10
effective, evaluation efforts should focus on col- undergraduate flight students was not highly
lecting information from multiple levels (e.g., valued and produced little change in attitudes.
reaction, learning, behavior, results). The collec- However, when behavior was assessed, it was
tion of multilevel assessment data is important found that self-analysis did have an impact in
in that it provides a cleaner, more complete pic- that it helped crews to perform significantly
ture of training efficacy because the evaluator is better in three LOFT sessions and moderately
not looking at one piece of evidence in isolation. better in three others. Another example of the
In order for training to be truly effective, it must benefit of conducting multilevel evaluation is
affect participant learning, learning must trans- the results of a study conducted by Stout, Salas,
fer to behavior, and behavior must transfer to a and Kraiger (1997). Specifically, these research-
difference at the organizational level. The assess- ers found positive reactions to training, evidence
ment of participant reactions is also an important of learning via changed knowledge structures,
part of the multilevel assessment, for reactions and evidence of behavioral change in that
provide an initial check as to whether training is trained participants performed an average of
relevant to the knowledge, skills, and abilities 8% more desired CRM behaviors than did a
needed on the job, as perceived by participants. control group. However, when learning was
In addition, reaction data serve as an important assessed via attitude change, there was a posi-
piece of information because “liking” the train- tive but nonsignificant change. Had either of
ing will serve to motivate participants in the these two studies collected only single-level
learning process. evaluation data, they might have come to dif-

Of the 58 identified studies, 24 (41%) col- ferent overall conclusions as to how to improve
lected information at multiple levels of Kirk- the implemented training program.
patrick’s (1976) typology. Of these 24, most (13) Alkov and colleagues (see Alkov, 1991; Alkov
collected information at only two levels, typically & Gaynor, 1991) provided the only reviewed
the lower levels (e.g., reaction-learning, reaction- study that evaluated CRM training at all four
behavior; see Table 5). Although a review of levels of Kirkpatrick’s (1976) typology. Specifi-
those studies indicated that CRM training gener- cally, they evaluated a CRM training program
ally produced positive results, assessment at only targeted at 45 naval aviation training squadrons:
two levels still provides a limited view of the helicopters, attack bombers, and multiplaced
overall effectiveness of the program. A clearer, fighters. Results suggest that squadrons report-
more complete picture would be provided by ed the training as useful and indicated a desire
either collecting information at more levels or at for training to continue. Positive attitude
least the higher levels (i.e., behavior and results). changes regarding CRM training were noted,

A fair number of studies evaluated training and squadron commanding officers reported
programs at three of Kirkpatrick’s four levels that training was found to contribute to better
(10 studies), but only one study was found that communication between instructors and stu-
evaluated training at all four levels (see Table dents. Finally, some evidence of organizational
5). As the studies that assess three or four levels impact was found: Following CRM training,
of Kirkpatrick’s typology provide the clearest overall aircrew mishap rate declined in all three
picture as to the actual effectiveness of CRM communities. However, it should be noted that
training, a brief overview of the value added by this study is not meant to serve as an example
these studies is provided. to others as a way to conduct multilevel evalua-

The studies that assessed at least three levels tions, as it is a preliminary analytical effort and,
of evidence attest to the fact that the various hence, many of the conclusions offered are ten-
types of evaluation evidence provide different tative. We do, however, commend their efforts
pieces of information, which may lead to a dif- in attempting to evaluate CRM training at all
ferent overall conclusion as to the effectiveness four levels.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 657

Summary. It has been said that in the ab- allow the assessment of whether or not this link
sence of a well-defined, measurable, “ultimate” exists.
criterion (which rarely exists in the real world),
it is important to assess training at multiple lev- DOES CRM TRAINING WORK?
els, for each additional source of data serves to
increase confidence in the overall evaluation As reported by Salas, Fowlkes, et al. (1999),
(Cannon-Bowers et al., 1989). For example, the data are encouraging. Although some have
although reaction data can indicate whether the previously argued that there is no evidence that
trainee felt the program was worthwhile, it has CRM training is effective (Besco, 1995, 1997,
little if any relation to whether the participant 1998; Komich, 1997; Simmon, 1997), this
learned the material. Similarly, just because a review concludes that some evidence does
trainee learned the knowledge during training exist, and this is important. The picture that
does not guarantee that he or she can translate has emerged after reviewing the existing evi-
this knowledge into effective behavior; nor does dence within the current framework suggests
it guarantee that the behavior, if applied, will that CRM training is effective, but, as stated
have an effect on organizational outcomes. Each earlier, the picture is not as clear as it should be
source of data provides a limited picture of the after 20 years. The lack of systematic studies
results. that can clearly show cause and effect, as well

The studies reviewed in this section indicate as the transfer of learned material to behavior
that the advice concerning the assessment of and behavior to results, is a key factor in this
multiple levels is beginning to take hold within unclear picture. Nevertheless, given that CRM
the aviation community. However, all the par- training is one of a number of factors that may
ties involved (aviators, researchers, regulators, influence the practice and effectiveness of CRM
the public, the airlines) need to continue to behaviors, it may be argued that the current
push for assessment at all levels of evaluation. evidence for the effectiveness of CRM training
Although the efforts reviewed within this paper programs, although imperfect, is impressive.
suggest that CRM training programs are gener- Specifically, what can be said is that CRM gen-
ally effective in producing some level of change erally produces (a) positive reactions; (b) en-
in participants (e.g., reaction, learning, behav- hanced learning, primarily as measured through
ior), the paucity of multilevel evaluation efforts attitude change, although other learning criteria
makes it difficult to determine whether CRM is are also used (e.g., knowledge tests, knowledge
truly effective. Specifically, of the 58 reviewed structures); and (c) desired behavioral change in
studies, the predominant number (34) collected the cockpit (simulated or real). However, what
data at only one level, whereas 13 collected cannot be answered with certainty is whether
data at two levels and 10 collected data at three CRM training has an effect on the bottom line –
levels, as argued for by Kirkpatrick (1976) and in this case, aviation safety. At this point, we
others (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1989; Robert- believe the tools exist to determine this; what is
son, Taylor, Stelly, & Wagner, 1995). Only one needed are the resources and a mandate to
study collected data at all four levels. make it happen.

In order to be truly effective and worth the
investment companies and airlines make into WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
CRM programs, positive reactions must transfer
to learning, learning must transfer to behavior, In terms of evaluation, the current review
and changes in behavior must translate into seems to suggest two areas in which future
reducing aviation-related mishaps and acci- efforts should be concentrated. The first is that
dents. We recognize that achieving four levels of additional evaluation efforts need to begin to
evaluation might be impractical, if not impossi- assess CRM training at multiple levels, using
ble, in many situations. However, stronger links multiple sources of criteria within each level.
between CRM training and reduction of acci- Fewer than half (40%) of the studies reviewed
dents need to be established. At this point, there here used multiple levels to evaluate training.
have not been enough multilevel evaluations to As noted, analyses of these studies suggest that

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (text continues on page 670)



658 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5: CRM Evaluative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Alkov (1991) 45 naval aviation training Pilot judgment Quasi-experimental
squadrons (helicopters, Situation awareness Self-report survey
attack bombers, multi- Decision making
placed fighters) Policy and regulations

Command authority
Workload performance
Use of available resources
Communication skills

Byrnes & Delta Airlines Crew dynamics Quasi-experimental
Black (1993) (leadership/followership) Self-report survey

Communication
Decision making
Stress management

Geis (1987) 838 U.S. Army pilots; Decision making Quasi-experimental
163 completed both Communication Self-report survey
pre- and post-CMAQ Resolving conflict
(results based on these) Assertiveness
Follow up: 290 ques- Feedback/criticism
tionnaires mailed to ran- Pilot attitudes
dom subjects who had Situation awareness
participated from the Judgment
original 838; 3 months Problem solving
later data analyzed Workload management
based on 142 responses Stress management

Identification of  resources

Grau & Valot Questionnaire sent to Crew topics Quasi-experimental
(1997) 312 crew members that Communication Self-report survey

had participated in Understanding the situation
CRM training Confidence/doubt
(response of 172); Occupational stress
French Air Force Fatigue

Human error

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 659

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

Squadrons report Positive change in Contributed to better Overall aircrew mishap
benefit and wish to attitudes regarding communication rate declined in all three
continue CRM behaviors between instructors communities

and students 

Positive attitude Flight attendants Quarterly air carrier dis-
change as measured reported that cockpit crepancy reports signifi-
by CMAQ crew treated them cantly decreased
Stability of change with more respect
over 5-year period after CRM

Flight attendants re-
ported that cockpit
crew made them feel
more a part of crew
and were included in
more preflight briefings

140 felt material Paired t tests indicated Effective in helping
applicable to their job significant positive them to reduce

attitude change potential for mishaps;
At an item level most consciously apply
of the individual items techniques taught
of the CMAQ witnessed 135 felt they had
positive change become safer pilots
Training had positive Some were able to
effect regardless of comment on specific
position in cockpit, instances where they
level of experience, had used principles
aircraft flown learned (40 com-

ments in all)

95% of trainees see 50% said they frequent-
themes as relevant ly changed their cock-

pit behavior with
other crew members 
65% reported that the
way they analyze situ-
ations or their own
behavior has changed
65% reported a differ-
ence in the ways that
crews operate after
CRM training
80% self-reported
changes during flight,
53% mentioned
changes during
preparation phase,
35% reported
changes during

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



660 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5 (continued)

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Halliday, 49th Military Airlift Wing; Problem solving Quasi-experimental
Biegalski, & approximately 250 crew Decision making Self-report survey,
Inzana (1987) members trained peer survey

Hayward & Pilots and No specification of specific skills Quasi-experimental
Alston (1991) spouses/partners taught Self-report survey

Helmreich Summary article based on No specification of skills taught Quasi-experimental
(1991) data collected through Self-report survey

NASA/University of
Texas Crew Research
Project

Helmreich & 2 major airlines; inde- No specification of exact content Quasi-experimental
Wilhelm pendently developed Self-report survey
(1991) CRM courses

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 661

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

debriefing phase,
10% reported a large
impact in terms of
changing life at squad-
ron level (51% felt
some occasional change)

90% response rate to Argue that attitudes Of those not trained
survey; indications are toward CRM are also in CRM who had
that students devel- improving flown with a person
oped a highly recep- trained in CRM, 75%
tive attitude toward indicated that CRM
seminar format trained crew members

exhibited recogniz-
able behavioral
changes
80% of untrained indi-
viduals felt that they
had observed better
coordination and
flight-deck atmosphere
from crew members
who had undergone
training

Most participants re- Report that workshops
sponded enthusiasti- promoted increased
cally awareness of human

factors, crew perfor-
mance, and safety
implications
Report increased
awareness of potential
stressors and way
could be dealt with

8000 surveys from 3 Without reinforcement,
airlines indicate that flight deck manage-
line-oriented flight ment attitudes began
training (LOFT) is valued to regress to pre-CRM
by crews as a training levels
technique, consider- Cited normative cultural
able variability in differences in attitudes
quality of scenarios toward CRM concepts
developed

Overall pattern of Significant positive
evaluation was change on all 3 scales
extremely positive of CMAQ
Lots of variability
across seminars

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



662 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5 (continued)

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Ikomi, 50 crews eastern U.S. Communication Quasi-experimental
Boehm-Davis, regional airline; 2 fleets Situation assessment Observation
Holt, & (experimental/control Planning/decision making
Incalcaterra fleet)
(1999)

Incalcaterra & 600 active pilots in Communication Quasi-experimental
Holt (1999) above airline Situation assessment Self-report survey

(184 trained, 84 non- Planning/decision making
ACRM group)

Holt, Boehm- All pilots in ACRM fleet Communication Quasi-experimental
Davis, & and control fleet Situation assessment Observation
Hansberger Planning/decision making
(1999)

Jackson 4059 participants at Inquiry Quasi-experimental
(1983) United Airlines Advocacy Self-report survey

Conflict resolution
Critique
Decision making

Lassiter, Undergraduates from Communication Experimental
Vaughn, University of Central 3 conditions (control, knowledge- Self-report survey,
Smaltz, Florida (n = 90) based training, skill-based training) observational ratings
Morgan, &
Salas (1990)

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 663

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

Crews from Advanced Trained fleet performed
Crew Resource significantly better over-
Management (ACRM) all (observer summary
group showed superi- evaluation – jump seat
or performance in 13 observations)
of 20 items (5-point
Likert scale – jump
seat observations)

93% of pilots voted to Pilots trained in ACRM 91% felt it had
expand use of ACRM showed positive atti- improved their flight
to other fleets tudes toward CRM performance

(CMAQ)
Positive attitudes
toward ACRM (neutral
on workload)
Correct knowledge of
content and timing of
ACRM procedures (2
yrs after training)

Performance for 9 of Trained fleet superior on
10 behaviors signifi- 6 of 12 line check items
cantly higher for
trained group (line
operational evaluation)

Descriptive statistics 41% shift in self-per- Argued that improve-
only ceived style of inter- ment has been noted
Participants tend to action – crew members in nearly all of the tar-
find experience quite more aware of own geted areas during
rewarding (average interaction style each of four quarters
response 6.8 on a 9- of the first year –
point scale) sounds like self-
Over 95% of trained reported improvement
crew members felt Steady decline in the
CRM training has number of proficiency
value to crew and can check failures since
be applied to opera- advent of LOFT at
tion of their aircraft United Airlines
LOFT program seems
quite successful over-
all; most participants
rate LOFT experience
as very good

Attitude change via Teams receiving skill-
CMAQ nonsignificant based communication

training exhibited sig-
nificantly better com-
munication skills than
other two conditions
(behavioral observa-
tion rating scale)

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



664 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5 (continued)

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Leedom & 32 U.S. Army UH-60 No specification of exact skills Quasi-experimental
Simon (1995) aviators (battle-rostered Self-report survey,

crews) observations

Leedom & 30 U.S. Army AH-64 No specification of exact skills Quasi-experimental
Simon (1995) aviators (battle-rostered Self-report survey,

crews) observations

Margerison, Australian airline Decision making Quasi-experimental
Davies, & Planning/priority setting Self-report survey
McCann Delegation
(1987) Communication

Interpersonal skills

Mudge (1983) 25 pilots enrolled – No specification of skills taught Quasi-experimental
some with FAA, corpo- Self-report survey
rate pilots, individual
pilots, airline execu-
tives testing program

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 665

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

Small positive shift of Improved team com-
attitudes (Army Aviation munication patterns,
Crewmember Ques- more efficient man-
tionnaire) agement of crew

resources, fewer team
errors; team coordina-
tion improved
(Aircrew Coordination
Evaluation checklist)
Mission performance
ratings improved, as
did mission accom-
plishment (# complet-
ed as well as quality)

No significant change Improvement across
(already had positive all 13 dimensions of
attitude toward CRM) team coordination

Higher flight profi-
ciency ratings
Higher mission per-
formance

Favorable reactions Provides evidence of
some learning (aircrew
members better under-
stand interpersonal
issues; discussions
more productive)

No final conclusions Too early to determine
as program is ongo- if produces positive
ing – present trends behavioral changes
No pilot has rated a but has positive indi-
study unit at less than cations
good; more flight The four pilots that
time = higher ratings have graduated at

this point self-report
that their actions on
the flight deck are
changing as a result
of program
Also have unsolicited
comments from several
still in program that
their own actions are
changing

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



666 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5 (continued)

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Naef (1995) Swissair pilots and Communication Quasi-experimental
instructors Feedback Self-report survey

Decision making
Judgment
Functioning under pressure

Salas, 35 pilots & 34 enlisted Assertiveness Quasi-experimental
Fowlkes, et aircrew from U.S. Navy Communication Self-report survey,
al. (1999) transport helicopter Situational awareness multiple choice,

squadron Mission analysis observation

Salas, 27 aviators from naval Decision making Quasi-experimental
Fowlkes, et helicopter community Assertiveness Self-report survey,
al. (1999) (15 experimental, 12 Mission analysis multiple choice,

control) Communication observation
Coordination
Leadership
Adaptability
Situational awareness

Smith (1994) 10 undergraduate flight Self-analysis vs. traditional debrief Quasi-experimental
students to develop CRM skills Self-report survey,

observation

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 667

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

Majority of pilots felt 53% response rate on
course presentation survey taken 6 months
was above average later indicated that
(≈560 of 640) 97% of flight crew
Majority of instructor members reported
pilots felt the course one or more positive
related to their needs behavior transfer
and was worthwhile
53% response rate 6
months later indicated
that 70% of instructors
would invest an off-
duty day for this type
of training

Strong endorsement Trained group showed Overall trained teams
of training usefulness more positive attitudes performed better than

toward use of CRM untrained teams –
Significant increases Target Acceptable
in positive attitudes Response to Generated
via overall Aircrew Events or Tasks
Coordination Attitudes (TARGETs)
Questionnaire scale Correctly managed
and CMAQ 15% more during pre-
Communication and brief and 9% more
Coordination subscale during higher work-
Trained group exhibited load segment
higher levels of knowl-
edge regarding CRM
principles

Strong endorsement No significant change Trained teams per-
of training (restriction of range) formed better during
Positive support for (Aircrew Coordination preflight brief
CRM training Attitudes (TARGETs)
Reported that skills Questionnaire) No differences in low
learned would be Trained scored higher workload times
implemented for on knowledge test (TARGETs)
more effective pre- than untrained Trained teams en-
and debriefs gaged in greater

number of teamwork
behaviors during
high-workload seg-
ment (TARGETs)

Self-analysis was not Self-analysis produced Self-analysis helped
valued highly as a little change in attitudes crews to perform sig-
training technique nificantly better in 3
LOFT reported as LOFT sessions, mod-
being more helpful erately better in 3
than self-analysis
technique
Positive reaction to ac-
tive learning technique

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015 (continued on next page)



668 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

TABLE 5 (continued)

CRM Type of Study/
Source Community Training Content Data Collection

Stout, Salas, 42 student pilots in Navy Communication Experimental
& Fowlkes Advanced Maritime Assertiveness Self-report survey,
(1996, 1997) Curriculum (20 experi- Situation awareness multiple choice

mental, 22 control)

Fowlkes, 22 aviators, helicopter Communication Experimental
Lane, Salas, community Assertiveness Self-report survey,
Franz, & Oser observation
(1994);
Fowlkes,
Lane, Salas,
Oser, &
Prince (1992);
Stout, Salas,
& Kraiger
(1997)

Wilhelm 8300 crew members Summary article results obtained Quasi-experimental
(1991); subset from 4 airlines NASA/University of Texas/LOFT Self-report survey,
of this also survey instructor evaluation
presented in No specification of skills across (1 organization)
Butler (1991, airlines
1993)

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 669

TABLE 5: (CcoRnMti nEuveadlu)ative Efforts – Multilevel Studies

Findings

Results/
Reactions Learning Behavior Organizational Impact

Positive reaction to Examples provided of Trained teams per-
training how new skills used formed better

on job (TARGETs) as per both
Trained group scored real-time instructor rat-
higher on knowledge ings and post hoc ratings
test of video
Positive attitude
change found
(CMAQ)

Positive reaction to Evidence of learning via Trained participants
training (n = 12) changed knowledge performed an average

structures (n = 22) of 8% more desired
Attitude change posi- behaviors than control
tive but not signifi- (TARGETs, n = 12)
cant (n = 12)
Knowledge test did
not show learning
effects (suggest
restriction of range)

Crew members value Crews typically think they do a
LOFT as a training much better than average job
technique during LOFT (self-evaluation)

Found low to moderate agree-
ment in performance ratings
between self-evaluation and
instructor evaluation (one
organization)
When asked about the exhibi-
tion of specific CRM behaviors
in LOFT, large differences
found across organizations in
CRM behavior patterns,
although self-reports all tend-
ed to be high
Significant but small relation-
ship between instructor ratings
and self-ratings of specific
CRM behavior
Over 2 years at one airline,
CRM behaviors decreased, as
did ratings of scenario and
instructor quality in LOFT
Over 3 years at one airline,
scenario, instructor, and LOFT
delivery remained constant in
perceived quality, and self-
reports of CRM behavior
steadily increased; overall this
airline received lower ratings
than others on several LOFT
scales

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



670 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

the use of multilevel evaluations provides a 1987). As it now stands, the ambiguity that
much clearer and diagnostic picture of training exists in regard to the content, implementa-
efficacy than does single-level evaluations. tion, and evaluation methods, combined with

Furthermore, we found that reaction data the lack of explicit descriptions as to the con-
were primarily gathered via questionnaires or tent contained within evaluated CRM programs,
verbal reports of how well participants liked the makes it hard to compare findings across stud-
course or thought it was worthwhile. Learning ies or provide general guidance.
criteria were primarily collected through the Finally, the predominant number of studies
assessment of attitude change via the CMAQ. that we reviewed provided only descriptive data
Although there have been arguments for several or generalized anecdotal evidence. For exam-
other types of learning criteria (structural knowl- ple, in relation to reaction data, several re-
edge, knowledge tests), few studies collected searchers reported that participants generally
more than one type of learning criteria within the found training useful. Interpretation of this
same evaluation study. In most of these studies, type of information is very subjective. There is
attitude change was the only criterion collected. no type of relational meaning, nor does the
Similar arguments can be made with regard to reader know how the term useful is defined
the collection of behavioral data and data exam- (i.e., were there anchor points on a scale, or
ining organizational impact. Utilization of multi- were they totally open responses?). Although
ple methods to assess the same type of criteria descriptive data are obviously better than gen-
(e.g., learning) increases confidence in the results eralized anecdotal evidence, they still make it
obtained. The importance of conducting longitu- hard to determine the effect of CRM training,
dinal evaluation efforts that use multiple mea- as neither significance nor effect sizes can be
sures and methodologies has been established determined. Future studies should attempt to
(see Helmreich & Wilhelm, 1987; Helmreich, report data at levels higher than merely descrip-
Wilhelm, Gregorich, & Chidester, 1990), and tive information so that better conclusions can
more such efforts need to be conducted. be drawn.

The second way to strengthen evaluation
efforts is to ensure that the evaluation and dis- Exploration and Expansion
semination of results regarding CRM training As a field in general, CRM training and the
provide diagnostic information. Although mul- corresponding evaluation efforts are moving in
tilevel evaluation is one method by which diag- two general directions. First, as the aviation
nostic information can be obtained, we community continues to invest money into
identified a few other ways in which “better sci- CRM training, other communities are taking
ence” could contribute to making collected data note and beginning to implement similar pro-
more diagnostic and meaningful from a grams (Salas et al., 2001). The emerging exten-
research standpoint. First, many evaluation sion of CRM training to other domains further
efforts reviewed for the current paper were drives the need for multilevel evaluation efforts
written up in such a way as to make it difficult so that the effectiveness of CRM training can
to assess the degree to which tools used to col- be determined once and for all.
lect the evaluation data were theoretically driv- A second area that has begun to be investigat-
en. This information is important because it ed (Chidester et al., 1991; Helmreich & Merritt,
would have provided a sound framework that 1998; Maurino, 1999; Merrit & Helmreich,
relies on the science of training teams. Second, 1995b), but which must be further examined, is
many evaluation efforts were written up in such the identification of variables that may moderate
a way that it was difficult to assess whether the or mediate the relationship between CRM train-
tools used possessed acceptable psychometric ing and performance. Understanding how fac-
properties (e.g., reliability, validity) such that tors such as culture (e.g., national, professional,
results are consistent and meaningful. Finally, safety, and organizational), personality, and orga-
there is a need within the aviation community nizational climate affect the message delivered in
for more guidance in how to implement and CRM training will help in the design, delivery,
evaluate CRM programs (Helmreich & Wilhelm, and evaluation phases of CRM. This in turn

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 671

would serve to allow the aviation community, as of the University of Central Florida/Federal
well as other areas of industry, to get the “most Aviation Administration/Naval Air Warfare
bang for their buck.” Center Training Systems Division Partnership

for Aviation Team Training.
CONCLUDING REMARKS

REFERENCES
After reviewing the 58 identified evalua-

tions of CRM training programs within the Alkov, R. A. (1991). U.S. Navy aircrew coordination training – A
aviation community, the following can be said. progress report. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th
First, CRM training programs seem to pro- International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp.

368–371). Columbus: Ohio State University.
duce positive participant reactions, learning, Alkov, R. A., & Gaynor, J. A. (1991). Attitude changes in navy/
and application of learned behavior via simu- marine flight instructors following an aircrew coordination

training course. International Journal of Aviation Psychology,
lators, on line, or on the job. However, the 1, 245–253.
final word on whether CRM has an impact on Alliger, G. M., & Janak, E. A. (1989). Kirkpatrick’s levels of train-

ing criteria: Thirty years later. Personnel Psychology, 42,
safety remains to be seen. Second, although 331–342.
the aviation community should be commend- Alliger, G. M., Tannenbaum, S. I., Bennett, W., Jr., & Traver, H.

(1997). A meta-analysis of the relations among training crite-
ed in that multilevel evaluations are becoming ria. Personnel Psychology, 50, 341–358.
more common, evaluation needs to become a Arnold, R. L., & Jackson, D. L. (1985). Recurrent cockpit resource

management training at United Airlines. In R. S. Jensen & 
systematically accepted cost of business. Third, J. Adrion (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Aviation
the review raised a few methodological con- Psychology (pp. 345–351). Columbus: Ohio State University.

Baker, D. P., Bauman, M., & Zalesny, M. D. (1991). Development of
cerns: Many times, descriptions of the compo- aircrew coordination exercises to facilitate transfer. In R. S. Jensen
nents of CRM training or the methodology (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on

Aviation Psychology (pp. 314–319). Columbus: Ohio State Uni-
used to develop and test evaluation measures versity.
were not clear within the literature, making it Baker, D. P., Prince, C., Shrestha, L., Oser, R., & Salas, E. (1993).

Aviation computer games for crew resource management train-
hard to determine the reliability, validity, and ing. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 3, 143–156.
transferability of reported results. It is unclear Barker, J. M., Clothier, C., Woody, J. R., McKinney, E. H., &

Brown, J. L. (1996, January). Crew resource management: A
whether this is a concern with pure method- simulator study comparing fixed versus formed aircrews.
ology or a combination of methodology and Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 67(1), 3–7.

Besco, R. O. (1995). The potential contributions and scientific
the procedures used to disseminate findings. responsibilities of aviation psychologists. In N. Johnston, 
Finally, the current review illustrated that R. Fuller, & N. McDonald (Eds.), Aviation psychology:

Training and selection. Proceedings of the 21st Conference of
although some rough spots still exist in terms the European Association for Aviation Psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
of evaluating implemented CRM training pro- 141–148). Aldershot, England: Avebury Aviation.

Besco, R. O. (1997). The need for operational validation of human
grams, the picture is not as bleak as some relations-centered CRM training assumptions. In R. S. Jensen
opponents would make it out to be – trends & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International

Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 536–540). Columbus:
seem to indicate that CRM training does have Ohio State University.
an impact on multiple aspects of the individu- Besco, R. O. (1998). Crew resource management training: What to

teach and how to teach it! Unpublished manuscript.
als and crews completing the program. More Bowers, C. A., Salas, E., Prince, C., & Brannick, M. (1992). Games
and better evaluations are needed, however, teams play: A method for investigating team coordination and

performance. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
and the aviation community should demand Computers, 24, 503–506.
them. We believe that time and continued sys- Brannick, M. T., Prince, A., Prince, C., & Salas, E. (1995). The

measurement of team process. Human Factors, 37, 641–651.
tematic evaluations will reveal CRM’s long- Brannick, M., T., Salas, E., & Prince, C. (Eds.). (1997). Team per-
term impact: improved safety in the skies. formance assessment and measurement: Theory, methods, and

applications. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Butler, R. E. (1991). Lessons from cross-fleet/cross-airline observations:

Evaluating the impact of CRM/LOFT training. In R. S. Jensen

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Avia-
tion Psychology (pp. 326–331). Columbus: Ohio State Uni-
versity.

Butler, R. E. (1993). LOFT: Full mission simulation as crew
We would like to thank Eleana Edens, resource management training. In E. L. Wiener, B. G., Kanki,

Deborah A. Boehm-Davis, Janis A. Cannon- & R. L. Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit resource management (pp.
231–259). San Diego, CA: Academic.

Bowers, and two anonymous reviewers for Byrnes, R. E., & Black, R. (1993). Developing and implementing
their thoughtful comments on earlier drafts. CRM programs: The Delta experience. In E. L. Wiener, 

B. G. Kanki, & R. L. Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit resource man-
This work was performed under the auspices agement (pp. 421–443). San Diego, CA: Academic.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



672 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Prince, C., Salas, E., Owens, J., Morgan, B., Jr., Grubb, G., Morey, J. C., & Simon, R. (1999). Applications of the
& Gonos, G. (1989, November). Determining aircrew coordi- theory of reasoned action model of attitude assessment in the
nation training effectiveness. Paper presented at the 11th Inter- air force CRM program. In R. S. Jensen, B. Cox, J. D. Callister,
service/Industry Training Systems Conference, Fort Worth, TX. & R. Lavis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International

Chidester, T. R., Helmreich, R. L., Gregorich, S. E., & Geis, C. E. Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 298–301). Columbus:
(1991). Pilot personality and crew coordination: Implications Ohio State University.
for training and selection. International Journal of Aviation Hackman, J. R. (1989). Resource management training and cabin
Psychology, 1, 25–44. crew coordination. Soldier’s Field, MA: Harvard Graduate

Chute, R. D., & Wiener, E. L. (1995). Cockpit-cabin communica- School of Business Administration.
tion: I. A tale of two cultures. International Journal of Aviation Halliday, J. T., Biegalski, C. S., & Inzana, A. (1987). CRM training in
Psychology, 5, 258–276. the 349th Military Airlift Wing. In H. W. Orlady & H. C. Foushee

Clark, R. E., Nielsen, R. A., & Wood, R. L. (1991). The interactive (Eds.), Proceedings of the NASA/MAC Workshop on Conference
effects of cockpit resource management, domestic stress, and Resource Management (NASA Conference Publication No.
information processing in commercial aviation. In R. S. Jensen 2455, pp. 148–158). Moffett Field, CA: NASA-Ames Research
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Center.
Aviation Psychology (pp. 776–781). Columbus: Ohio State Hansberger, J. T., Holt, R. W., & Boehm-Davis, D. (1999). Instructor/
University. evaluator evaluations of ACRM effectiveness. In R. S. Jensen,

Clothier, C. C., (1991). Behavioral interactions across various air- B. Cox, J. D. Callister, & R. Lavis (Eds.), Proceedings of the
craft types: Results of systematic observations of line opera- 10th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp.
tions and simulations. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 279–284). Columbus: Ohio State University.
6th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. Hayward, B., & Alston, N. (1991). Team building following a pilot
332–337). Columbus: Ohio State University. labour dispute: Extending the CRM envelope. In R. S. Jensen

Connolly, T. J., & Blackwell, B. B. (1987). A simulator approach (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on
to training in aeronautical decision making. In R. S. Jensen Aviation Psychology (pp. 377–383). Columbus: Ohio State
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on University.
Aviation Psychology (pp. 251–258). Columbus: Ohio State Helmreich, R. L. (1984). Cockpit management attitudes. Human
University. Factors, 26, 583–589.

Diehl, A. (1991). The effectiveness of training programs for pre- Helmreich, R. L. (1991). Strategies for the study of flightcrew
venting aircrew “error.” In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of behavior. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th Inter-
the 6th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. national Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 338–343).
640–655). Columbus: Ohio State University. Columbus: Ohio State University.

Flin, R. (1995). Crew resource management for teams in the off- Helmreich, R. L., Chidester, T. R., Foushee, H. C., Gregorich, S., &
shore oil industry. Journal of European Industrial Training, Wilhelm, J. A. (1990, May). How effective is cockpit resource
19(9), 23–27. management training? Exploring issues in evaluating the

Fowlkes, J. E., Lane, N. E., Salas, E., Franz, T., & Oser, R. (1994). impact of programs to enhance crew coordination. Flight
Improving the measurement of team performance: The Safety Digest, pp. 1–17.
TARGETs methodology. Military Psychology, 6, 47–61. Helmreich, R. L., & Foushee, H.C. (1993). Why crew resource

Fowlkes, J. E., Lane, N. E., Salas, E., Oser, R. L., & Prince, C. (1992). management? Empirical and theoretical bases of human factors
TARGETs for aircrew coordination training. In Proceedings of the in aviation. In E. L. Wiener, B. G. Kanki, & R. L. Helmreich
14th Interservice/Industry Training Systems and Education (Eds.), Cockpit resource management (pp. 3–45). San Diego,
Conference (pp. 344–352). San Antonio, TX: National Security CA: Academic.
Industrial Association. Helmreich, R. L., & Merritt, A. C. (1998). Culture at work in avia-

Freeman, C., & Simmon, D.A. (1991). Taxonomy of crew resource tion and medicine: National, organizational, and professional
management: Information processing domain. In R. S. Jensen influences. Aldershot, England: Ashgate.
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th Annual International Symposium Helmreich, R. L., Merritt, A. C., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1999). The evo-
on Aviation Psychology (pp. 391–397). Columbus: Ohio State lution of crew resource management training in commercial avi-
University. ation. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 9, 19–32.

Geis, C. E. (1987). Changing attitudes through training: A formal Helmreich, R. L., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1987). Evaluating cockpit
evaluation of training effectiveness. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), resource management training. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Pro-
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Aviation ceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Aviation
Psychology (pp. 392–398). Columbus: Ohio State University. Psychology (pp. 440–446). Columbus: Ohio State University.

Goldsmith, T., & Kraiger, K. (1997). Structural knowledge assess- Helmreich, R. L., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1991). Outcomes of crew
ment and training evaluation. In J. Ford, S. Kozlowski, resource management training. International Journal of
K. Kraiger, E. Salas, & M. Teachout (Eds.), Improving training Aviation Psychology, 1, 287–300.
effectiveness in work organizations (pp. 19–46). Mahwah, NJ: Helmreich, R. L., Wilhelm, J. A., Gregorich, S. E., & Chidester, T. R.
Erlbaum. (1990). Preliminary results from the evaluation of cockpit

Goldstein, I. L. (1993). Training in organizations: Needs assess- resource management training: Performance ratings of flight-
ment, development, and evaluation (3rd ed). Monterey, CA: crews. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 61,
Brooks/Cole. 586–589.

Grau, J. Y., & Valot, C. (1997). Evolvement of crew attitudes in Helmreich, R. L., Wilhelm, J. A., Klinect, J. R., & Merritt, A. C.
military airlift operations after CRM course. In R. S. Jensen & (2001). Culture, error and crew resource management. In 
L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International E. Salas, C. A. Bowers, & E. Edens (Eds.), Improving team-
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 556–561). Columbus: work in organizations: Applications of resource management
Ohio State University. training (pp. 305–331). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Gregorich, S. E. (1993). The dynamics of CRM attitude change: Hofstede, G. (1988). McGregor in southeast Asia. In D. Sinha &
Attitude stability. In Proceedings of the 7th International H. Kao, Sr. (Eds.), Social values and development: Asian per-
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 509–512). Columbus: spectives (pp. 304–314). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ohio State University. Holt, R. W., Boehm-Davis, D. A., & Hansberger, J. T. (1999).

Gregorich, S. E., Helmreich, R. L., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1990). Evaluating the effectiveness of ACRM using LOE and line-
Structure of cockpit management attitudes. Journal of Applied check data. In R. S. Jensen, B. Cox, J. D. Callister, & R. Lavis
Psychology, 75, 682–690. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on

Gregorich, S. E., & Wilhelm, J. A. (1993). Crew resource manage- Aviation Psychology (pp. 273–278). Columbus: Ohio State
ment training assessment. In E. L. Wiener, B. G. Kanki, & University.
R. L. Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit resource management (pp. Hörmann, H. J., Goeters, K. M., Maschke, P., & Schiewe, A.
173–198). San Diego, CA: Academic. (1995). Implementation and initial evaluation of DLR/LH

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



TEAM TRAINING IN THE SKIES 673

CRM-training. In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Pro- Maurino, D. E. (1999). Safety prejudices, training practices, and
ceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Aviation CRM: A mid-point perspective. International Journal of
Psychology (pp. 591–596). Columbus: Ohio State University. Aviation Psychology, 9, 413–427.

Howard, S., Gaba, D., Fish, K., Yang, G., & Sarnquist, F. (1992). Merritt, A. C., & Helmreich, R. L. (1995a). CRM in 1995: Where
Anesthesia crisis resource management training: Teaching to from here? In B. J. Hayward & A. R. Lowe (Eds.), Applied
anethesiologists to handle critical incidents. Aviation, Space, aviation psychology: Achievement, change, and challenge.
and Environmental Medicine, 63, 763–770. Proceedings of the 3rd Australian Aviation Psychology Sym-

Ikomi, P. A., Boehm-Davis, D. A., Holt, R. W., & Incalcaterra, K. A. posium (pp. 111–126). Aldershot, England: Avebury Aviation.
(1999). Jump seat observations of advanced crew resource Merritt, A. C., & Helmreich, R. L. (1995b). Culture in the cockpit:
management (ACRM) effectiveness. In R. S. Jensen, B. Cox, A multi-airline study of pilot attitudes and values. In Pro-
J. D. Callister, & R. Lavis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th ceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Aviation
International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 292–297). Psychology (pp. 676–681). Columbus: Ohio State University.
Columbus: Ohio State University. Morey, J. C., Grubb, G., & Simon, R. (1997). Towards a new mea-

Incalcaterra, K. A., & Holt, R. W. (1999). Pilot evaluations of ACRM surement approach for cockpit resource management attitudes.
programs. In R. S. Jensen, B. Cox, J. D. Callister, & R. Lavis In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 478–483).
Aviation Psychology (pp. 285–291). Columbus: Ohio State Columbus: Ohio State University.
University. Mudge, R. W. (1983). Cockpit management training for the profes-

Irwin, C. M. (1991). The impact of initial and recurrent cockpit sional pilot. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd
resource management training on attitudes. In R. S. Jensen Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 165–172). Columbus:
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Ohio State University.
Aviation Psychology (pp. 344–349). Columbus: Ohio State Naef, W. (1995). Practical application of CRM concepts: Swissair’s
University. human aspects development program (HAD). In R. S. Jensen

Jackson, D. L. (1983). United Airlines’ cockpit resource manage- & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International
ment training. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 597–602). Columbus:
International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 131–137). Ohio State University.
Columbus: Ohio State University. Nullmeyer, R. T., & Spiker, V. A. (in press). The importance of

Jentsch, F., & Bowers, C. A. (1998). Evidence for the validity of crew resource management behaviors in mission performance:
PC-based simulations in studying aircrew coordination. Inter- Implications for training evaluation. Military Psychology.
national Journal of Aviation Psychology, 8, 243–260. Orlady, H. W., & Foushee, H. C. (1987). Cockpit resource manage-

Jentsch, F., Bowers, C. A., & Holmes, J. B., (1995). The acquisition ment training (Tech. Report NASA CP-2455). Moffett Field,
and decay of aircrew coordination skills. In R. S. Jensen & CA: NASA Ames Research Center.
L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International Predmore, S. C. (1991). Microcoding communication in accident
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 1063–1068). Colum- investigation: Crew coordination in the United 811 and United
bus: Ohio State University. 232. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th International

Kayten, P. J. (1993). The accident investigator’s perspective. In Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 350–355). Columbus:
E. L. Wiener, B. G. Kanki, & R. L. Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit Ohio State University.
resource management (pp. 283–314). San Diego, CA: Aca- Prince, C., Brannick, M., Prince, C., & Salas, E. (1997). The mea-
demic. surement of team process behaviors in the cockpit: Lessons

Kirkpatrick, D. L. (1976). Evaluation of training. In R. L. Craig learned. In M. T. Brannick, E. Salas, & C. Prince (Eds.), Team
(Ed.), Training and development handbook: A guide to human performance assessment and measurement: Theory, methods,
resources development (pp. 18.1–18.27). New York: McGraw- and applications (pp. 289–310). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hill. Prince, C., Oser, R., Salas, E., & Woodruff, W. (1993). Increasing

Komich, J. (1997). CRM training: Which crossroads to take now? hits and reducing misses in CRM/LOS scenarios: Guidelines
In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th for simulator scenario development. International Journal of
International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. Aviation Psychology, 3, 69–82.
541–546). Columbus: Ohio State University. Prince, C., & Salas, E. (1999). Team processes and their training in

Kraiger, K., Ford, J. K., & Salas, E. (1993). Application of cogni- aviation. In D. Garland, J. Wise, & D. Hopkins (Eds.), Hand-
tive, skill-based, and affective theories of learning outcomes to book of aviation human factors (pp. 193–213). Mahwah, NJ:
new methods of training evaluation. Journal of Applied Erlbaum.
Psychology, 78, 311–328. Robertson, M. M., Taylor, J. C., Stelly, J. W., & Wagner, R. (1995).

Kraiger, K., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (1995). Measuring A systematic training evaluation model applied to measure the
knowledge organization as a method for assessing learning dur- effectiveness of an aviation maintenance team training pro-
ing training. Human Performance, 37, 804–816. gram. In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of

Lassiter, D. L., Vaughn, J. S., Smaltz, V. E., Morgan, B. B., Jr. & the 8th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp.
Salas, E. (1990). A comparison of two types of training inter- 631–636). Columbus: Ohio State University.
ventions on team communication performance. In Proceedings Rollins, M. L. (1995). A descriptive study of crew resource manage-
of the Human Factors Society 34th Annual Meeting (pp. ment attitude change. In N. Johnston, R. Fuller, & N. McDonald
1372–1376). Santa Monica, CA: Human Factors and Ergo- (Eds.), Aviation psychology: Training and selection. Proceed-
nomics Society. ings of the 21st Conference of the European Association for

Leedom, D. K., & Simon, R. (1995). Improving team coordina- Aviation Psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 45–50). Aldershot, England:
tion: A case for behavioral-based training. Military Psychology, Avebury Aviation.
7, 109–122. Salas, E., Bowers, C. A., & Edens, E. (Eds.) (2001). Improving

Margerison, C., Davies, R., & McCann, D. (1987). High-flying teamwork in organizations: Applications of resource manage-
management development. Training and Development Journal, ment training. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
41(2), 38–41. Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (2001). The science of training: A

Maschke, P., Goeters, K. M., Hörmann, H. J., & Schiewe, A. decade of progress. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 471–499.
(1995). The development of the DLR/Lufthansa crew resource Salas, E., Fowlkes, J. E., Stout, R. J., Milanovich, D. M., & Prince, C.
management training program. In N. Johnston, R. Fuller, & (1999). Does CRM training improve teamwork skills in the
N. McDonald (Eds.), Aviation psychology: Training and selec- cockpit? Two evaluation studies. Human Factors, 41, 326–343.
tion. Proceedings of the 21st Conference of the European Salas, E., Prince, C., Bowers, C., Stout, R., Oser, R. L., & Cannon-
Association for Aviation Psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 23–31). Bowers, J. A. (1999). A methodology for enhancing crew
Aldershot, England: Avebury Aviation. resource management training. Human Factors, 41, 161–172.

Maurino, D. E. (1994). Cross-cultural perspectives in human fac- Salas, E., Rhodenizer, L., & Bowers, C. A. (2000). The design and
tors training: Lessons from the ICAO Human Factors Program. delivery of CRM training: Exploiting available resources.
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 4, 173–181. Human Factors, 42, 490–511.

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



674 Winter 2001 – Human Factors 

Schiewe, A. (1995). On the acceptance of CRM-methods by pilots: Vandermark, M. J. (1991). Should flight attendants be included in
Results of a cluster analysis. In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan CRM training? A discussion of a major air carrier’s approach
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on to total crew training. International Journal of Aviation
Aviation Psychology (pp. 540–545). Columbus: Ohio State Psychology, 1, 87–94.
University. Wiener, E. L., Kanki, B. G., & Helmreich, R. L. (Eds.). (1993).

Silverman, D. R., Spiker, V. A., Tourville, S. J., & Nullmeyer, R. T. Cockpit resource management. San Diego, CA: Academic.
(1997, December). Team coordination and performance dur- Wilhelm, J. (1991). Crew member and instructor evaluations of
ing combat mission training. Paper presented at the 19th line orientated flight training. In R. S. Jensen (Ed.), Pro-
Annual Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation and Edu- ceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Aviation
cation Conference, Orlando, FL. Psychology (pp. 362–367). Columbus: Ohio State University.

Simmon, D. A. (1997). How to fix CRM. In R. S. Jensen & Yamamori, H., & Mito, T. (1993). Keeping CRM is keeping the
L. A. Rakovan (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International flight safe. In E. L. Wiener, B. G. Kanki, & R. L. Helmreich
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 550–553). Columbus: (Eds.), Cockpit resource management (pp. 399–420). San
Ohio State University. Diego, CA: Academic.

Simpson, P., & Wiggins, M. (1995). Human factor attitudes. In Young, J. P. (1995). Using group dynamics to reinforce CRM con-
B. J. Hayward & A. R. Lowe (Eds.), Applied aviation psychology: cepts in a collegiate course. In R. S. Jensen & L. A. Rakovan
Achievement, change, and challenge. Proceedings of the Third (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on
Australian Aviation Psychology Symposium (pp. 185–192). Aviation Psychology (pp. 1189–1191). Columbus: Ohio State
Aldershot, England: Avebury Aviation. University.

Smith, G. M. (1994). Active learning strategies in undergraduate
CRM flight training. In N. Johnston, R. Fuller, & N. McDonald Eduardo Salas is program director at the Institute
(Eds.), Aviation psychology: Training and selection. Pro- for Simulation and Training and program coordina-
ceedings of the 21st Conference of the European Association tor and professor in the Psychology Department at
for Aviation Psychology (pp. 17–22). Aldershot, England: the University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida.
Avebury Aviation. He received his Ph.D. in industrial/organizational

Spiker, V. A., Nullmeyer, R. T., Tourville, S. J., & Silverman, D. R.
(1998). Combat mission training research at the 58th special psychology in 1984 at Old Dominion University,
operations wing: A summary (Tech. Report AL-HR-TR-1997- Norfolk, Virginia.
0182). Mesa, AZ: U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory.

Spiker, V. A., Silverman, D. R., Tourville, S. J., & Nullmeyer, R. T. C. Shawn Burke is a research associate at the
(1998). Tactical resource management effects on combat mis- Institute for Simulation and Training, University of
sion training performance (Tech. Report AL-HR-TR-1997- Central Florida. She received her Ph.D. in industrial/
0137). Mesa, AZ: U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory. organizational psychology in 2000 at George Mason

Stout, R. J., Salas, E., & Fowlkes, J. E. (1996, September). The effi- University, Fairfax, Virginia.
cacy of enhancing team performance in complex environments.
In E. Salas & R. J. Stout (Cochairs), The science and practice Clint A. Bowers is director at the Team Performance
of enhancing teamwork in organizations. Symposium conduct- Laboratory and an associate professor in the Psy-
ed at the 104th Annual Meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Toronto, Canada. chology Department at the University of Central

Stout, R. J., Salas, E., & Fowlkes, J. E. (1997). Enhancing team- Florida. He received his Ph.D. in clinical and com-
work in complex environments through team training. Group munity psychology in 1987 at the University of
Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 1(2), 169–182. South Florida, Tampa, Florida.

Stout, R. J., Salas, E., & Kraiger, K. (1997). The role of trainee
knowledge structures in aviation team environments. Inter- Katherine A. Wilson is a graduate student in the
national Journal of Aviation Psychology, 7, 235–250. Human Factors and Applied Experimental Doctoral

Taggart, W. R. (1994). Crew resource management: Achieving Program at the Institute for Simulation and Train-
enhanced flight operations. In N. Johnston, N. McDonald, & 
R. Fuller (Eds.), Aviation psychology in practice (pp. 309–339). ing, University of Central Florida. She received her
Aldershot, England: Ashgate. B.S. in aerospace studies in 1998 at Embry-Riddle

U.S. General Accounting Office. (1997). Human factors: FAA’s Aeronautical University, Prescott, Arizona.
guidance and oversight of pilot crew resource management
training can be improved (GAO/RCED-98-7). Washington, Date received: December 8, 2000
DC: Author. Date accepted: May 22, 2001

Downloaded from hfs.sagepub.com at UNIV DO EST DO RIO DE JANEIRO on April 13, 2015



UNIVERSIDADE FEDERAL DO ESPÍRITO SANTO 
CENTRO TECNOLÓGICO 

PROGRAMA DE PÓS-GRADUAÇÃO EM ENGENHARIA CIVIL 
ÁREA DE CONCENTRAÇÃO EM TRANSPORTES 

 
 
 
 
 

RENATO ARMANI AGUIAR 
 
 
 
 
 

  

 

Estudo do Impacto da Ampliação de Berço e de Área de 
Pátio no Aumento da Capacidade Operacional de uma 

Base de Apoio Offshore 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
VITÓRIA-ES 

2013



RENATO ARMANI AGUIAR 
 
 

 

Estudo do Impacto da Ampliação de Berço e de Área 
de Pátio no Aumento da Capacidade Operacional de 

uma Base de Apoio Offshore 
 

Dissertação submetida ao curso de 
Mestrado em Engenharia Civil do 
Programa de Pós-Graduação em 
Engenharia Civil, da Universidade Federal 
do Espírito Santo, como requisito 
necessário para a obtenção do título de 
Mestre em Engenharia Civil – Área de 
concentração em Transportes. 

 
 
 
 

Orientador: Prof. Dr. Rodrigo de Alvarenga Rosa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VITÓRIA-ES 
2013 

ii 
 






Ficha Catalográfica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Dados Internacionais de Catalogação-na-publicação (CIP) 
(Biblioteca Setorial Tecnológica,  

Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, ES, Brasil) 
 

  
 Aguiar, Renato Armani, 1977- 
A283e Estudo do impacto da ampliação de berço e de área de pátio 

no aumento da capacidade operacional de uma base de apoio 
offshore / Renato Armani Aguiar. – 2013. 

 117 f. : il. 
  
 Orientador: Rodrigo de Alvarenga Rosa. 
 Dissertação (Mestrado em Engenharia Civil) – Universidade 

Federal do Espírito Santo, Centro Tecnológico. 
  
 1. Métodos de simulação. 2. Logística naval. 3. Logística. 4. 

Áreas portuárias. 5. Portos. I. Rosa, Rodrigo de Alvarenga. II. 
Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo. Centro Tecnológico. III. 
Título. 

  
 CDU: 624 
  

 
 

iv 
 



Dedicatória 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A meus pais, Ademar e Elza, pelo exemplo de vida, amor 
e honestidade. 

À minha esposa Ludmila e meu filho Lucas, pela 
paciência e compreensão, referências em minha vida. 

A meus irmãos Fernando e Rafael pelo apoio. 
 

v 
 



Agradecimentos 
 

Agradeço a Deus por permitir mais esta conquista em minha vida. 

Aos professores e colegas do PPGEC/UFES pelos momentos de aprendizado 
e convívio. 

Ao Professor Dr. Adelmo Bertolde e a Professora Dr.ª Teresa Cristina J. 
Carneiro, pela disponibilidade e participação na banca examinadora dessa 
dissertação. 

Ao apoio da Petrobras que por várias vezes mostra ser uma empresa 
comprometida com desenvolvimento de seus funcionários, incentivando o 
crescimento da ciência e da produção científica nacional.  

Aos colegas da Petrobras, por meio das gerências regionais de Transporte 
Marítimo, Operações Portuárias e Coordenações, os quais participaram 
ativamente deste trabalho, de forma a contribuir para seu êxito. Deixo meu 
agradecimento especial a Marcelli, Viviane, Waldinéia e Luis Cláudio, uma 
equipe de qualidades sem igual, a qual tenho orgulho em fazer parte.   

Agradeço ao orientador e amigo Profº Dr. Rodrigo de Alvarenga Rosa, o qual 
foi fundamental para esta conquista, fazendo jus ao seu papel de orientador, 
indicando sempre os caminhos mais simples onde eu não enxergava estradas, 
e dando força e motivação nos momentos mais difíceis. 

Em especial, agradeço a minha família, minha mãe Elza, meu pai Ademar, meu 
avô Orlando e meus irmãos Fernando e Rafael pela compreensão e apoio.  

Agradeço minha esposa Ludmila pelo seu carinho, incentivo e amor 
incondicional, ao compreender e superar todos os momentos dessa jornada. E 
meu filho Lucas, presente de Deus, ao qual deixo a mensagem para nunca 
desistir sem antes lutar, buscando sempre superar todos os obstáculos, a fim 
de alcançar seus objetivos, por mais distantes que pareçam estar, pois o prazer 
da vitória supera todo esforço. 
 
Muito obrigado 

vi 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Mais importante que a vontade de vencer,  
é a coragem de começar. 

 
Roger Stankewski 

vii 
 



RESUMO 
 
 
No cenário competitivo mundial os portos sempre desempenharam um papel 
de destaque, atuando como elemento propulsor para o desenvolvimento das 
empresas e das regiões onde estão inseridos. Neste contexto também estão 
incluídos os portos de apoio offshore que prestam serviços de apoio às 
unidades marítimas (plataformas e sondas), atuando como elo logístico na 
cadeia produtiva de óleo e gás. Por sua vez, o setor portuário que, no Brasil 
passou por um longo período sem investimentos em infraestrutura começa a 
apresentar as marcas negativas daquele tempo, com o crescimento da 
demanda por serviços de apoio, as empresas têm sofrido com a escassez de 
bases portuárias. Logo, o investimento em infraestrutura apresenta-se como 
uma solução tardia para este anunciado problema e que desponta como 
fundamental para evitar um apagão logístico offshore. Assim, este estudo tem o 
objetivo de avaliar o impacto da ampliação da infraestrutura nos indicadores de 
desempenho utilizados num terminal de apoio offshore. Buscando responder 
ao objetivo proposto, utilizou-se a ferramenta de simulação a fim de se estudar 
a melhor opção para o investidor aplicar recursos seja em berços ou no 
aumento da área de pátio. Os resultados mostram que, embora o senso 
comum indique que o aumento de berços aumenta a capacidade operacional, 
neste caso o aumento de área, para o terminal analisado, apresentou melhores 
resultados operacionais, sendo a melhor opção para investimento em 
infraestrutura.  
 
 

ABSTRACT 
 
In the global competitive landscape ports have always played a prominent role, 
acting as a driving element for the development of enterprises and regions 
where they are inserted. In this context also includes the logistics offshore ports 
who provide support services to maritime units (platforms and rigs), acting as a 
link in the supply chain logistics of oil and gas. In turn, the port sector in Brazil 
has undergone a long period without investments in infrastructure begins to 
show the negative marks that time, with the growth in demand for support 
services, companies have suffered from the lack of bases port. Therefore, 
investment in infrastructure is presented as a solution for this late problem and 
announced that emerges as crucial to avoid a blackout offshore logistics. Thus, 
this study aims to evaluate the impact of infrastructure expansion in the 
performance indicators used in a terminal offshore support. Seeking to respond 
to the proposed objective, was used the simulation tool in order to study the 
best option for the investor is to invest resources in berths or increasing the 
patio area. The results show that although the common sense indicate that the 
increase in operating capacity increases cots, in this case the increase in area 
for the terminal analysis showed better operating results, and the best option for 
investment in infrastructure. 
 
 
 
 

viii 
 



LISTA DE FIGURAS  
 
Figura 1 – Evolução da tecnologia em águas profundas. ................................... 4 

Figura 2 – Localização do terminal offshore. ...................................................... 9 

Figura 3 – Principais Bases Portuárias Offshore para atendimento às Regiões 

Sul-Sudeste ...................................................................................................... 12 

Figura 4 – Bases portuárias para atendimento às Bacias do ES e Campos .... 12 

Figura 5 – Esquema Simplificado do Sistema Logístico Offshore .................... 14 

Figura 6 – Layout do terminal ........................................................................... 14 

Figura 7 – Fluxo logístico de recebimento e saída de produtos no terminal .... 20 

Figura 8 – Processo de movimentação de cargas. .......................................... 20 

Figura 9 – Processo de unitização de cargas................................................... 21 

Figura 10 – Processo de pré-embarque das cargas. ....................................... 21 

Figura 11 – Processo de programação de cargas. ........................................... 22 

Figura 12 – Processo de embarque das cargas. .............................................. 24 

Figura 13 – Processo de movimentação de cargas. ........................................ 25 

Figura 14 – Movimentação de cargas numa operação portuária de apoio 
offshore ............................................................................................................ 26 

Figura 15 – Cadeia Logística de Petróleo. ....................................................... 30 

Figura 16 – Fluxo de processos para atendimento da Logística de apoio 
offshore. ........................................................................................................... 30 

Figura 17 – Principais embarcações de atendimento as unidades marítimas .. 37 

Figura 18 – Embarcação de apoio em condições adversas. ............................ 38 

Figura 19 – Atendimento de supply boat a uma unidade marítima .................. 39 

Figura 20 – Esquemático Conceitual de Simulação. ........................................ 44 

Figura 21 – Simplificação do Modelo Conceitual do Sistema ........................... 56 

Figura 22 – Representação Conceitual do Recebimento de Cargas ................ 58 

Figura 23 – Representação do Modelo Conceitual do Embarque de Cargas .. 59 

Figura 24 – Processo de chegada e cadastramento de carretas ..................... 62 

Figura 25 – Processo de chegada de barcos e balsa de diesel ....................... 63 

Figura 26 – Direcionamento dos barcos e balsa para o porto .......................... 63 

Figura 27 – Processo operacional de diesel no dolpim .................................... 64 

Figura 28 – Processo de recebimento de cimento ........................................... 65 

Figura 29 – Processo de recebimento de tubos ............................................... 66 

ix 
 



Figura 30 – Processo operacional no píer 3 ..................................................... 67 

Figura 31 – Processo operacional no píer 3 - continuação .............................. 68 

 

x 
 



LISTA DE TABELAS 

 
Tabela 1 – Identificação dos Principais Equipamentos Disponíveis no Terminal
 ......................................................................................................................... 10 

Tabela 2 – Infraestrutura Portuária Disponível no Terminal ............................. 10 

Tabela 3 – Classificação dos portos quanto a sua função ............................... 32 

Tabela 4 – Classificação de Portos Proposta pela UNCTAD ........................... 33 

Tabela 5 – Distribuições de Probabilidade adotadas no Modelo ...................... 76 

Tabela 6 – One-Sample T – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para dados reais
 ......................................................................................................................... 77 

Tabela 7 – One-Sample T – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para 5 replicações
 ......................................................................................................................... 78 

Tabela 8 – Valores Reais Médios versus Resultados do Modelo ..................... 78 

Tabela 9 – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança das variáveis de Processo .......... 79 

Tabela 10 – Identificação dos cenários propostos no modelo .......................... 81 

Tabela 11 – Análise de sensibilidade das variáveis de saída a partir da 
comparação dos cenários propostos ................................................................ 83 

Tabela 12 – Critério de pontuação adotado na matriz de priorização .............. 89 

Tabela 13 – Matriz de priorização das variáveis de saída do modelo .............. 90 

Tabela 14 – Critério de pontuação adotado na matriz de priorização .............. 90 

Tabela 15 – Resultado da classificação dos cenários por priorização ............. 91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xi 
 



LISTA DE GRÁFICOS 
 
Gráfico 1 – Movimentação de Cargas de Apoio Offshore por Terminal em 2012
 ......................................................................................................................... 11 

Gráfico 2 – Produção de Óleo, LGN e Gás Natural – Brasil e Exterior ............ 28 

Gráfico 3 – Histograma de Chegada de Carretas ............................................ 71 

Gráfico 4 – Percentuais de Chegada por Tipo de Carga .................................. 72 

Gráfico 5 – Resumo Estatístico para Chegada das Carretas ........................... 72 

Gráfico 6 – Total de Barcos que Chegaram no Terminal ................................. 73 

Gráfico 7 – Percentual de Chegadas por Tipo de Barco .................................. 73 

Gráfico 8 – Resumo Estatístico para Chegada de Barcos ............................... 74 

Gráfico 9 – Distribuição Lognormal Estimada pelo Métodos de Mínimos 
Quadrados........................................................................................................ 74 

Gráfico 10 – Tempo Médio de Atracação nos Berços por Tipo de Barco ......... 75 

Gráfico 11 – Tempo Médio de Atracação nos Berços ...................................... 75 

Gráfico 12 – Ocupação Médio dos Berços ....................................................... 80 

Gráfico 13 – Comparativo entre nº de barcos atendidos e taxa de ocupação dos 
berços .............................................................................................................. 84 

Gráfico 14 – Comparativo entre a chegada de carretas e seu tempo de 
permanência no porto ...................................................................................... 85 

Gráfico 15 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação, cargas recebidas e 
embarcadas ...................................................................................................... 86 

Gráfico 16 – Taxa de ocupação dos berços e os tempos de permanência de 
carretas e embarcações ................................................................................... 87 

Gráfico 17 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação ............................................. 88 

Gráfico 18 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação ............................................. 88 

Gráfico 19 –  Priorização das variáveis de saída ............................................. 91 

 

xii 
 



LISTA DE ABREVIATURA E SIGLAS 
 
A.P.I – American Petroleum Institute  

ANP – Agência Nacional do Petróleo, Gás Natural e Biocombustíveis 

AHTS – Ancor Handling and Tug Supply – embarcação de reboque e manuseio 

de âncoras, que possui elevada manobrabilidade destinada à operação e apoio 
marítimo offshore.  

Árvore de Natal – Conjunto de acessórios e válvulas usados para controlar a 
velocidade de produção de petróleo. 

ATP – Ativo de Produção 

BOE – Barrel of Oil Equivalent 

CNEN – Comissão Nacional de Energia Nuclear 

DOWNSTREAM – Atividades de refino do petróleo bruto, tratamento do gás 
natural, transporte e comercialização/distribuição de derivados 

EAM – Embarcação de Apoio Marítimo 

E&P – Exploração e Produção 

ESLINGA – Aparelho feito de aço, corrente ou cabo, com que se prendem 
objetos que se quer içar ou arriar a bordo de embarcações 

FPSO – Floating Production, Storage and Offloading – Navio equipado com 

sistemas de processamento, armazenamento e transferência de petróleo. 

FSO – Floating, Storage and Offloading - Navio equipado com sistemas de 

armazenamento e transferência de petróleo. 

HINTERLAND – corresponde a uma área geográfica servida por um porto e 
conectada a este por uma rede de transportes. Trata-se, portanto, da área de 
influência de uma cidade portuária, que por concentrar significativa atividade 
econômica, pode concentrar uma rede de centros urbanos menores. 

LINGADA – A porção de objetos que a linga levanta de uma vez 

NORMAM – Norma da Autoridade Marítima 

xiii 
 



PSV – Plataform Supply Vessel – embarcação de apoio offshore, usado no 

apoio às plataformas de petróleo, geralmente transportam suprimento e 
materiais diversos: cimento, tubos, lama, salmoura, água doce, óleo, granéis 
etc. 

RISER – Coluna de ascensão – porção vertical de uma linha de escoamento 
para transporte de óleo/gás natural do poço até a plataforma. Dutos flexíveis 
que ligam as linhas submarinas à plataforma de produção. 

RT – Requisição de Transporte 

TRAQUITANA – Trata-se de um cavalete motorizado utilizado para bobinar 
carreteis especiais que atendem as especificações operacionais específicas. 
Seu acionamento pode ser hidráulico, elétrico ou pneumático. 

UEP – Unidade Estacionária de Produção 

UM’S – Unidades Marítimas 

UNCTAD - United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 

UNITIZAÇÃO – Reunir cargas de naturezas diversas num só volume, para fins 
de transporte. 

UPSTREAM – Atividades ligadas a exploração e produção de hidrocarbonetos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xiv 
 



SUMÁRIO 
 
1. INTRODUÇÃO ........................................................................................................ 1 

1.1. Contextualização ........................................................................................................ 2 

1.2. Objetivo ........................................................................................................................ 5 

1.3. Hipótese ....................................................................................................................... 5 

1.4. Estruturação do Trabalho .......................................................................................... 6 

2. DESCRIÇÃO DO PROBLEMA ............................................................................. 8 

2.1. Principais Características do Terminal .................................................................... 8 

2.2. Movimentação de cargas para unidades marítimas ........................................... 20 

3. REFERENCIAL TEÓRICO ................................................................................. 28 

3.1. Logística de Suprimento de Óleo e Gás ............................................................... 29 

3.2. Definição e Classificação de Portos e Terminais Portuários ............................. 31 

3.3. Transporte Marítimo ................................................................................................. 33 

3.3.1 Embarcações de Apoio Offshore - Supply Boats ........................................ 34 

3.3.2.Terminais de Apoio Offshore ................................................................................ 38 

3.4. Capacidade Operacional e Indicadores de Desempenho em Terminais 
Portuários............................................................................................................................... 39 

3.5. Simulação Computacional e Modelagem de Processos .................................... 42 

3.5.1. Definições .......................................................................................................... 42 

3.5.2. Objetivo da Simulação e da Modelagem de Sistemas ............................... 43 

4. REVISÃO BIBLIOGRÁFICA ............................................................................... 47 

4.1. Aplicação da Simulação em Terminais Marítimos .............................................. 47 

5. METODOLOGIA ................................................................................................... 51 

6. DESCRIÇÃO DO MODELO................................................................................ 54 

6.1. Formulação e Análise do Problema ...................................................................... 54 

6.2. Planejamento do Projeto ......................................................................................... 55 

6.3. Formulação do Modelo Conceitual e Tradução do Modelo ............................... 56 

6.3.1. Modelo Computacional .................................................................................... 61 

6.4. Coleta de Informações e Dados ............................................................................. 69 

6.5. Análise Estatística dos Dados Coletados ............................................................. 70 

6.6. Verificação e Validação ........................................................................................... 77 

6.7. Proposição e Execução dos Cenários .................................................................. 79 

7. ANÁLISE E RESULTADOS ................................................................................ 82 

7.1. Análise de Sensibilidade ......................................................................................... 82 

7.2. Análise do sistema a partir dos cenários propostos ........................................... 83 

xv 
 



8. CONCLUSÃO........................................................................................................ 93 

REFERÊNCIA .............................................................................................................. 96 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xvi 
 



1. INTRODUÇÃO 
 
Os portos sempre desempenharam um papel importante no desenvolvimento 
do comércio internacional, com grandes implicações nas economias das 
regiões onde se inserem. Para Gaur (2005), a globalização que decorre da 
intensificação do comércio e da movimentação de mercadorias entre os países 
sustenta o desenvolvimento do transporte marítimo e também dos portos 
conferindo-lhes grande importância. Por sua vez o comércio internacional, 
principalmente de grandes distâncias, só é possível devido a evolução do 
transporte marítimo.  
 
Na visão logística os portos passaram a ser pontos estratégicos para o 
desenvolvimento da cadeia de suprimento do comércio exterior, devido à 
presença de diversos atores na área portuária. Os portos são considerados 
como peças importantes na cadeia logística internacional, uma vez que são os 
nós mais críticos nesta rede. Os portos formam um elo vital na cadeia de 
comércio global, portanto, a eficiência da operação portuária é fundamental 
para o perfeito funcionamento da cadeia logística internacional (Kennedy, et al., 
2011). 
 
No Brasil, a atividade portuária sempre exerceu um importante papel seu no 
desenvolvimento, visto que, historicamente o comércio brasileiro iniciou-se a 
partir do seu litoral, que possui cerca de 7.367 km de costa voltada para o 
Oceano Atlântico. O setor portuário, no Brasil, é caracterizado como o segundo 
mais importante, após o setor rodoviário, representando um dos modais mais 
importantes para a indústria e para a logística no país (Spiegel, et al., 2011).  
 
Basicamente, os portos são áreas onde existem instalações para atracação ou 
ancoragem de navios e onde há equipamentos para a transferência de 
mercadorias de navios para a terra ou do navio para outro navio (Alderton, 
2008). Por sua vez, portos são considerados como entidades complexas e 
dinâmicas, podendo ser bastante específicos, o que aumenta ainda mais seu 
nível de complexidade. Os portos podem ser bastante específicos a depender 
das atividades que serão ali executadas, neste caso, são considerados como 
terminais portuários. No Brasil a atividade petrolífera, em particular, vem se 
desenvolvendo num ritmo acelerado e impulsionando a atividade portuária, 
demandando novos investimentos, sobretudo, em Terminais de Apoio offshore.  
 
Diante deste cenário estratégico nacional, haja vista, que a maior concentração 
de petróleo está no mar, somado às novas descobertas do pré-sal, houve a 
necessidade, por parte das empresas petrolíferas na identificação de 
alternativas portuárias visando garantir o atendimento das operações num 
horizonte de médio prazo e a necessidade de quantificação de ganhos a partir 
de melhorias na eficiência da operação da logística offshore.  
 
A logística de apoio offshore, de acordo com Kaiser (2010), em virtude da 
natureza e do aumento da escala das atividades marítimas, tem sua demanda 
aumentada, uma vez que esta atividade é criticamente importante para o 
sucesso da operação de óleo e gás.  

1 
 



 
Assim, a atividade portuária como qualquer outra atividade econômica, é uma 
fonte de geração de receitas, sobretudo de retorno financeiro para seus 
investidores. Dessa forma, os custos portuários estão entre as principais 
variáveis na determinação sobre, como e onde investir em um terminal 
portuário, uma vez que os custos portuários estão diretamente relacionados ao 
valor final do transporte marítimo, que por sua vez são influenciados pela 
eficiência dos terminais, acarretando numa maior ou menor competitividade do 
terminal e de seus usuários. 
 
Neste sentido, a correta identificação e o acompanhamento dos indicadores de 
produtividade dos portos são importantes balizadores no momento de decidir 
onde aplicar os recursos numa possível ampliação ou implementação de um 
novo porto, uma vez que a adequação da infraestrutura e a aquisição de 
equipamentos portuários exigem pesados investimentos e longos prazos de 
retorno e construção. 
 
Nesse aspecto a engenharia pode dar sua contribuição, de maneira a fornecer 
ferramentas que auxiliem na tomada de decisão para novos investimentos, 
sobretudo na aplicação das técnicas voltadas para simulação de processos, 
uma vez que para desenvolver seu planejamento estratégico, uma empresa 
deve possuir seus processos bem estruturados, sob controle e que possam ter 
suas modificações previstas de forma rápida e efetiva.  
 

1.1. Contextualização 
 
As atividades de exploração e produção de petróleo são, em sua maioria, muito 
complexas e altamente especializadas necessitando de pesados investimentos 
em pesquisa e desenvolvimento. A indústria do petróleo é um dos setores que 
mais tem registrado avanços tecnológicos nos últimos tempos, sobretudo no 
segmento upstream. Historicamente no mundo a industrialização do petróleo 
iniciou a partir de 1859 e atualmente, o dinamismo experimentado pelo setor, 
fez com que novas tecnologias evoluíssem, de tal maneira que modernas 
técnicas de sísmica indicam com grande precisão, a localização mais provável 
das bacias petrolíferas. (Cardoso, 2005). 
 
No Brasil o avanço desse setor foi resumido por Cardoso (2005) em quatro 
fases distintas, a saber:  
 
• a primeira e a segunda fases são marcadas por iniciativas amadoras e 
desorganizadas, os acontecimentos ocorridos até 1938, quando o Conselho 
Nacional do Petróleo - CNP foi criado, não mostram eventos relevantes sob o 
enfoque técnico e econômico. Entre 1938 e 1953, aconteceram as primeiras 
descobertas importantes no país, inicialmente no Recôncavo Baiano como 
Candeias, Água Grande entre outros, num total de doze campos.  
 
• A terceira fase é marcada pela crescente demanda por petróleo e 
derivados, o que culminou numa disputa por interesses referentes à melhor 
política a ser adotada para regular a exploração do petróleo. Em 3 de outubro 
de 1953, o então Presidente da República Getúlio Vargas assina a Lei nº 2004, 

2 
 



que institui o monopólio estatal e a criação da Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. - 
PETROBRAS para exercê-lo. Ainda nesta fase, destacam-se os avanços 
significativos na exploração em águas profundas na bacia de Campos-RJ. 
 
• A quarta fase é evidenciada com o final do monopólio estatal sobre a 
exploração do petróleo, que não resistiu às pressões externas, o qual foi extinto 
pelo Governo em novembro de 1995, quando o Brasil passa a admitir a 
presença de outras empresas para concorrer com a Petrobras. Cabe destacar 
que a Lei não pôs fim ao monopólio da União sobre o petróleo e suas 
atividades relacionadas, havendo apenas a permissão para contratar empresas 
estatais ou privadas para execução das atividades.  
 
Com a nova Lei foi criada a Agência Nacional do Petróleo – ANP, órgão 
encarregado de regular e controlar as atividades das concessionárias no país. 
Paralelamente à criação da ANP, houve a criação do Conselho Nacional de 
Política Energética – CNPE, incumbido de estabelecer a política energética 
nacional. Ainda houve a implantação do sistema de licenças, ficando a 
Petrobras nivelada às demais empresas do setor, embora com o direito sobre 
os campos em produção e as áreas com descobertas e/ou investimentos 
realizados. As demais áreas são licitadas pela ANP, tendo como base a análise 
de propostas e um programa exploratório mínimo.  
 
Na década de 80 houve os primeiros avanços significativos na produção 
offshore a partir da bacia de Campos. Atualmente, a Petrobras tem cerca de 
65% da área de seus blocos exploratórios offshore em profundidades de água 
de mais de 400 m. Em consequência, nos últimos anos, a empresa tem 
aumentado suas atividades de perfuração exploratória em águas cada vez 
mais profundas. (Petrobras, 2013). A Figura 1 mostra a evolução da tecnologia 
em águas profundas nos últimos anos, onde pode ser observado o crescente 
domínio da técnica pela empresa brasileira. 
 
 
 

3 
 



 
Figura 1 – Evolução da tecnologia em águas profundas. 
Fonte: Site Petrobras (2013) 
 
Diante deste cenário estratégico para o país, onde a maior concentração de 
petróleo está no mar, a logística de apoio offshore surge como uma atividade 
complementar e vem evoluindo paralelamente com o desenvolvimento da 
produção offshore, tornando-se imprescindível para o sucesso e execução 
dessas operações.  
 
Kaiser (2010) enfatiza a importância do transporte marítimo de apoio offshore, 
em virtude dessa atividade ser fundamental para a continuidade operacional 
das operações de E&P, uma vez que sem a logística offshore é praticamente 
impossível a obtenção de sucesso nas operações de extração de óleo e gás no 
mar.  
 
Porém, apesar do desenvolvimento e do surgimento de modernos supply 
boats, guindastes e demais equipamentos portuários, de uma forma bem mais 
conservadora estão os investimentos nos terminais portuários, locais por onde 
passam grande parte de tudo que é transportado para as unidades marítimas.  
 
O investimento em infraestruturas portuárias e a intensidade do capital nos 
portos, de uma forma geral, têm sido um dos fatores que explicam diferenças 
de desempenho e de eficiência nos portos, uma vez que sem as infraestruturas 
e sem a capacidade de oferta de serviços não seriam possíveis maiores 
movimentos de embarcações ou de cargas, (Caldeirinha et al. 2011).  
 
Segundo Caldeirinha et al. (2011), um estudo realizado sobre a evolução da 
eficiência relativa e os hinterlands dos portos de Valência e Bilbao na Espanha, 
tomando como referência um período de grandes investimentos verificaram 
que nem sempre o mesmo nível de investimento em infraestruturas conduz a 
melhorias equivalentes no desempenho, exigindo o estudo de outros fatores 
relacionados com a localização, a integração nas cadeias logísticas, os 

4 
 



hinterlands, entre outros. Por sua vez, Gaur (2005) identificou seis fatores que 
afetam o desempenho do porto, entre eles o acesso marítimo, o cais, o 
terminal, a armazenagem, os serviços de valor acrescentado e a conectividade 
com o hinterland. 
 
Nesse contexto, este estudo busca contribuir para o desenvolvimento aplicado 
ao assunto a partir da simulação das operações de um terminal de apoio 
offshore de forma medir seus principais indicadores de desempenho e utilizá-
los como variáveis de apoio na tomada de decisão para investimentos futuros 
num terminal em operação. 
 
 

1.2. Objetivo 
 
Este estudo tem o objetivo de avaliar o impacto da ampliação da infraestrutura 
portuária, representada por berços e áreas de pátio de armazenagem, em uma 
base de apoio offshore utilizando a técnica de simulação discreta aplicada a 
uma base de apoio offshore localizada na região portuária da baía de Vitória-
ES. 
   
 

1.3. Hipótese  
 
Fundamentado pela teoria pesquisada, formulou-se a seguinte hipótese, para 
este estudo: 
 
Diante da possibilidade de ampliar a infraestrutura de um terminal de apoio 
offshore, a melhor opção para o investidor é investir em berços ao invés do 
aumento na área de armazenagem, considerando os indicadores de 
desempenho operacionais do terminal.  
 
Este argumento sustenta-se na influência e importância dos indicadores de 
produtividade para o desenvolvimento das condições de competitividade de 
portos e terminais, com vista a uma indústria portuária mais competitiva. 
 
Com o propósito de comprovar a hipótese formulada, serão efetuadas análises 
comparativas, utilizando-se os resultados obtidos por meios de simulação 
computacional, entre as variáveis (aumento de área de armazenagem e 
berços) e os seguintes indicadores operacionais: 
 
 
 

• Taxa de recebimento de carga no terminal: definida pela quantidade 
média, em toneladas, de carga recebida no terminal no período de 
tempo considerado. 

 
• Taxa de carga embarcada: consiste na quantidade de carga, em 

toneladas, embarcada no período de tempo considerado. 
 

5 
 



• Taxa de ocupação dos berços: valor percentual de tempo médio, em 
horas, que os berços permanecem ocupados no período de tempo 
considerado. 
 

• Tempo de atracação: tempo computado, em horas, deste a saída do 
barco no fundeio até sua liberação no porto. 
 

• Número de atracações: consiste no número de embarcações de apoio 
atendidas no terminal, no período de tempo considerado. 
 

• Total de carretas que chegam: número médio de carretas, que chegam 
ao porto por intervalo de tempo. 
 

• Tempo médio de ciclo da carreta no porto: tempo médio de 
permanência, em horas, que uma carreta aguarda no porto até sua 
liberação de saída. 
 

• Total de cargas recebidas no porto: consiste na quantidade média de 
cargas recebidas no porto via carretas, em toneladas, num intervalo de 
tempo. 

 
 

1.4. Estruturação do Trabalho 
 
 
Este trabalho foi estruturado e será apresentado conforme a sistematização a 
seguir: 
 
Capítulo 1 – Introdução: apresenta a formulação do problema e as questões 
chave a serem respondidas pelo estudo, é feita uma breve contextualização do 
setor portuário aplicado a exploração e produção, abordando também os temas 
que sustentam a escolha do assunto. 
 
Capítulo 2 – Descrição do Problema: contempla uma apresentação de um 
terminal de apoio offshore, bem como de seus processos e demais fatores 
operacionais da cadeia logística offshore, a fim de melhor entender a operação 
a ser estudada. 
 
Capítulo 3 – Referencial Teórico: contextualiza os assuntos pertinentes ao 
escopo do trabalho, a saber: produtividade em terminais portuários, 
modelagem e simulação computacional, buscando identificar em literatura 
correlata argumentos que contribuam para o trabalho. 
 
Capítulo 4 – Revisão Bibliográfica: apresenta uma revisão da literatura sobre 
sistemas e processos de simulação aplicados a área , bem como temas 
correlatos necessários ao embasamento deste trabalho.  
 
Capítulo 5 – Neste capítulo será apresentada a metodologia abordada e 
aplicada ao desenvolvimento do estudo. 

6 
 



 
Capítulo 6 – Modelo Proposto: apresenta o estudo efetuado e o princípio de 
modelagem do problema, definindo as premissas, limitações e regras 
assumidas na construção do modelo. 
 
Capítulo 7 – Análise e Resultados: apresenta os resultados dos obtidos 
considerando os cenários propostos. 
 
Capítulo 8 – Conclusão: apresenta as conclusões do presente estudo. 
 
E, finalmente, são apresentadas as referências bibliográficas dos principais 
trabalhos consultados para elaboração desse estudo. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 



2. DESCRIÇÃO DO PROBLEMA 
 
Este capítulo apresenta a operação de um terminal de apoio offshore e 
descreve as principais características do terminal analisado, incluindo suas 
operações.  
 
 As operações de apoio offshore na região sul-sudeste estão distribuídas 
basicamente entre as bacias do Espírito Santo, Campos e Santos e 
correspondem às atividades de transporte e armazenagem de cargas por meio 
de embarcações de apoio para realização de serviços de Exploração e 
Produção nas UM´s. 
 
De acordo com Petrobras (2009), sob a ótica logística estas operações podem 
ser consideradas bastante complexas, envolvendo a movimentação de cargas 
dos mais diversos tipos e pesos, embarcações com diferentes especialidades, 
regras de atendimento, restrições operacionais e de SMS (Segurança, Meio 
Ambiente e Saúde). Além disso, este sistema está sujeito a uma série de 
variáveis de elevada incerteza, tais como: condições meteorológicas, riscos 
operacionais e ambientais nas UM´s, conjuntura macroeconômica, inovação 
tecnológica, entre outras. 
 
Dessa forma os responsáveis pela logística das empresas que realizam 
atividades de E&P devem estar previamente preparados para mudanças 
bruscas de cenário operacional e ter capacidade suficiente para atendimento a 
demanda por cargas e serviços, quando esta ocorrer, uma vez que segundo 
Petrobras (2009) o custo de falta é significativamente maior que o custo de 
atendimento. 
 

2.1. Principais Características do Terminal 
 
O terminal em estudo teve o inicio de suas operações a partir do ano de 2001, 
quando houve a assinatura de um contrato com a Petrobras, cujo escopo era 
limitado ao apoio de equipamentos, pessoal, uso do píer, abastecimento de 
água, pátio de armazenagem e utilização das instalações administrativas. A 
partir desta primeira experiência, houve um segundo contrato, onde foi 
ampliado o escopo dos serviços relacionado no contrato anterior, no qual foram 
incluídos: apoio a infraestrutura das operações offshore, carregamento de 
tubos, carregamento de contêineres, carregamento de graneis sólidos e 
líquidos, gerenciamento de resíduos e disponibilidade área mínima de pátio 
dedicada às operações da Petrobras.  
 
Na Figura 2 está em destaque  a área do terminal estudado, localizado na foz 
do Rio Aribiri no município de Vila Velha-ES na zona de porto organizado da 
baía de Vitória. O acesso ao terminal pode ser feito por meio de dois modais: 
Marítimo, via canal de acesso do Porto de Vitória e Rodoviário, pelas rodovias 
BR 101/262 – Rodovia Carlos Lindenberg e Estrada de Capuaba. 
  

8 
 



 
Figura 2 – Localização do terminal offshore. 
Fonte: Google Earth 
 
 
O terminal possui uma área total de aproximadamente 55.000 m² destinadas a 
suas operações, na qual ocorrem as principais operações logísticas 
necessárias ao atendimento solicitado pelas unidades marítimas. O cais possui 
dimensões que possibilitam a atracação de até três embarcações, sendo que 
as principais de embarcações atendidas são do tipo PSV e AHTS, e ainda 
possui um dolphim para operações de recebimento de diesel marítimo.  
Atualmente, estão disponíveis para operação: guindastes, empilhadeiras, 
carretas e uma traquitana, que auxiliam na movimentação de cargas. Em 
relação a armazenagem, o terminal dispõe de um galpão coberto e área de 
pátio aberto, além de balança rodoviária, local para manutenção de 
empilhadeira e guindastes, estacionamento e área administrativa. 
 
As Tabelas 1 e 2 indicam as principais infraestruturas disponíveis no terminal. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 

Rio A
ribiri



Tabela 1 – Identificação dos Principais Equipamentos Disponíveis no Terminal 
 

Equipamentos Capacidade de Carga

300 ton
125 ton

Guindastes 100 ton
90 ton
70 ton
30 ton
20 ton

Empilhadeiras 10 ton
7 ton
4 ton

Extensivas
Carretas Internas Comuns

Pranchas - 4 eixos
Traquitana -

Balança Rodoviária 100 ton  
Fonte: Pesquisa de campo do autor  

 
 

Tabela 2 – Infraestrutura Portuária Disponível no Terminal 
 

Infraestrutura Dimensões Unidade

berço 1
Cáis berço 2 280 m

berço 3
Dolphim 30 m

Área Portuária ~ 40.000 m²
Galpão 1000 m²  

Fonte: Pesquisa de campo do autor 
 
 
Este terminal, de acordo com relatórios operacionais da Petrobras, referentes 
ao ano de 2012, é o terceiro em movimentação de cargas de apoio offshore no 
Brasil conforme mostrado no gráfico 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 



Gráfico 1 – Movimentação de Cargas de Apoio Offshore por Terminal em 2012 
 

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0
Macaé-RJ Vitória-ES Rio-RJ Ubu-ES Itajaí-SC  

           Fonte: Petrobras (2013) 
 
 
Devido a sua localização estratégica este porto assume grande importância 
dentro do contexto de exploração e produção, sobretudo no atendimento às 
bacias do Espírito Santo e Campos, uma vez que, junto como o Porto de 
Macaé no RJ, atende grande parte da demanda logística da Petrobras, visto 
que, a grande concentração da produção está nestas bacias. 
 
As bacias de Campos e Espírito Santo são responsáveis por cerca de 80% da 
produção nacional de hidrocarbonetos. As bacias abrangem uma área de 
aproximadamente 223 mil km² na costa dos estados do RJ, ES e BA.  
 
A Figura 3 mostra os principais terminais de apoio offshore que atendem as 
regiões sul e sudeste, enquanto que a Figura 4 apresenta de forma mais 
concentrada os portos que atendem basicamente as bacias de Campos e do 
Espírito Santo. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 

carga (mil ton)



 

Porto de 
Vitória 

Porto deUbu 

Porto de Macaé 
Porto do RJ 

Porto de Itajaí 

 
Figura 3 – Principais Bases Portuárias Offshore para atendimento às Regiões Sul-Sudeste 
Fonte: Petrobras – adaptado pelo autor 
 
 

 
Figura 4 – Bases portuárias para atendimento às Bacias do ES e Campos 
Fonte: Petrobras – adaptado pelo autor 
 
 

12 
 



Por meio deste terminal é embarcado todo tipo de suprimentos para as UM’s, 
sendo que no ano de 2012 foram movimentadas em média cerca de 14.500 
toneladas/mês de carga. Além das cargas embarcadas são desembarcados 
resíduos e cargas diversas que retornam das UM’s (backloads), este material 
de retorno, quando não tem saída imediata do terminal, fica em uma área de 
armazenamento temporário, com prazo limitado para sua retirada. 
 
Visando suprir dentro dos prazos e condições que garantam a continuidade 
operacional de cada uma das UM’s, as embarcações de apoio cumprem um 
cronograma rigoroso de atendimento e uma rota de navegação. Esta operação 
de atendimento é iniciada na própria plataforma, a qual sinaliza sua demanda 
por meio de uma solicitação de pedido (RT – Requisição de Transporte), esta 
demanda é recebida e encaminhada para a área de armazenagem ou outras 
áreas afins que irão providenciar a carga e encaminhá-las para o porto. 
 
Os materiais recebidos no terminal para embarque são originalmente 
provenientes das unidades da Petrobras, localizadas em Macaé-RJ (Parque de 
Tubos) e de Serra-ES (TIMS), além de cargas provenientes diretamente de 
terceiros. 
  
 
Dessa forma, três importantes fases são consideradas no fluxo desse 
processo:  
 

 Armazenagem 
 Terminal portuário  
 Unidades Marítimas 

 
 
Nos armazéns da Petrobras ou de terceiros, a carga permanece em estoque 
até que o pedido emitido pela UM gere a primeira ordem de transporte do 
material. A carga é encaminhada para o porto, por meio de carretas, selando o 
primeiro fluxo entre as fases do processo (Armazenagem e Terminal Portuário). 
 
No porto os atores principais do processo são a disponibilidade de berço e o 
espaço físico para recebimento das cargas. Após atracação da embarcação é 
descarregado o backload e posteriormente são carregados os suprimentos e 
na sequencia, a embarcação parte para atendimento da UM. A Figura 5 
apresenta uma simplificação do processo de movimentação de cargas. 
 
 
 

13 
 



Equipamentos, 
Reparos e 

Instrumentação e PSV
Manutenção

Bens em Geral (Carga de Convés)

Produtos Quimicos PSV
(Fluidos e Carga 

Seca)

Tubos Armazenagem

PSV

Ancoragem e Riser (Cimentos)
Terminal de 

Tratamento de 
Apoio 

Resíduos e backload
Offshore

Rancho AHTS
(Ancoragem e Riser)

Água Potável Tanque de Água Outros Barcos
(Trocas de Turma e 

Inspeções)
Cimento Silos de Cimento

Diesel
Diesel Tanque de Diesel

Fornecedores Processamento e Porto Transporte 
Armazenagem Maritimo

 
Figura 5 – Esquema Simplificado do Sistema Logístico Offshore 
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras 
 
A Figura 6 mostra uma identificação do layout do terminal, afim de ilustrar como 
se dá a movimentação das cargas desde sua chegada até seu embarque. 
 

 
Figura 6 – Layout do terminal  
Fonte: Google Earth  
 
 
A partir da numeração indicada na Figura 6, serão identificadas as áreas do 
terminal. 
 
 
 

14 
 

Suprimentos

Unidades Marítimas



1 – Portaria e Estacionamento externo de carretas 
 
A portaria é o principal ponto de acesso às dependências do terminal, onde se 
dá a entrada e saída de qualquer veículo e também de pessoas. O porto está 
inserido no sistema ISPS-Code (International Ship and Port Facílity Security 
Code), que é um Código Internacional para proteção de Navios e Instalações 
Portuárias, por isso há uma fiscalização rígida na entrada e saída do terminal, o 
que se resume em tempo de espera. 
 
O recebimento de cargas é realizado por meio de carretas, que podem ser 
contratas pela própria Petrobras, podem pertencer ao operador portuário ou 
ainda ser proveniente dos fornecedores de material. 
 
Por conta do grande volume de cargas movimentadas, a portaria opera 24 
horas, recebendo cargas a qualquer hora, inclusive finais de semana e 
feriados. 
 
Para liberação de acesso ao porto, o motorista da carreta estaciona o veículo 
em área externa ao terminal, enquanto aguarda sua liberação. O motorista 
deve identificar-se por meio de um cadastro denominado de CVP – Cadastro 
de Veículos Pesados, o qual consta informações básicas do caminhão, do 
motorista e da carga. Concluído o cadastro, o veículo é autorizado a ingressar 
no terminal. 
 
 
2 – Área Administrativa 
 
Neste local estão instalados os escritórios administrativos da Petrobras e da 
empresa que realiza a operação portuária. Pela Petrobras existem duas 
gerências distintas que são responsáveis pela fiscalização das operações 
portuárias e pelo gerenciamento da frota de caminhões e embarcações, que 
são: OPRT – Gerência de Operações Portuárias e TM – Gerência de 
Transporte Marítimo. 
 
Neste local são realizados todos os controles internos das operações, bem 
como a programação de embarques, conferência de RT´s, controle dos 
indicadores operacionais, programação de carretas, entre outras. 
 
 
3 – Área de conferência de carga e documentos  
 
 
Após a passagem pela portaria a maior parte das carretas se destina a esta 
área, pois neste local é realizada uma conferência criteriosa da carga e de sua 
documentação. 
 
Dessa forma, são realizadas duas operações distintas, a primeira é a 
conferência visual da carga, onde são conferidos itens tipo: integridade visual, 
amarração, identificação e inspeção da carga. A segunda operação é realizada 
em paralelo a primeira, por outro operador, nesta etapa são realizadas as 

15 
 



conferências dos documentos da carga, tipo: procedência, notas fiscais, RT´s. 
O operador confere a nota e verifica o destino da carga, ou seja, qual UM a 
carga se destina. 
 
Caso haja algum impedimento ou não conformidade em relação a integridade 
física da carga, esta não é aceita e retorna, não sendo permitido o seu 
desembarque. No caso de não conformidades com a documentação, a carga 
não é descarregada e o problema é avaliado, caso seja possível realizar sua 
correção no porto, esta é feita e a carga é liberada para desembarque, caso 
contrário, o caminhão retorna.  
 
 
4 – Balança Rodoviária 
 
Após liberação da carga para desembarque, as carretas são encaminhadas 
para pesagem. A balança recebe todos os caminhões que entram ou saem do 
terminal, sejam estes com ou sem carga, ou seja, as carretas são pesadas na 
chegada e na saída de forma a averiguar se o peso da carga confere com o 
descrito na nota fiscal. Para cada pesagem é emitido um ticket pela balança e 
este é anexado à documentação da carga. 
 
Após a pesagem as carretas que chegaram carregadas são posicionadas em 
fila e sua documentação é entregue ao supervisor de pátio, este é responsável 
por informar o local onde a carga será descarregada, ou seja é o responsável 
pela arrumação das cargas no pátio. 
 
Dependendo da hora do dia e de outras variáveis do processo a fila de carretas 
pode ser maior ou menor, mas é comum observar picos de demanda durante o 
dia com sua redução à noite. 
 
5 – Pré-embarque de Carga Geral 
 
Esta área possui aproximadamente 4.300 m² e é uma das principais áreas do 
terminal, considerando o grande volume de cargas gerais movimentadas. Por 
se tratar de um pré-embarque, este local é caracterizado pelo elevado giro de 
produtos, ou seja, as cargas deveriam ficar armazenadas no máximo por 48 
horas antes de serem embarcadas. Porém, foi verificado que existem cargas 
que ficam armazenadas por até 15 dias, dificultando a organização do pátio e, 
sobretudo impedindo que novas cargas sejam descarregadas, acarretando 
problema de falta de espaço físico. 
 
Existem delimitações no piso com a indicação das UM´s que serão atendidas, 
logo o supervisor de pátio ao receber a carreta com a documentação da carga, 
verifica seu destino e direciona a carreta para descarregar no local indicado, 
facilitando assim o processo de posterior embarque. 
 
Em função da disposição física do terminal esta área também é utilizada como 
armazenamento temporário de risers e torpedos uma vez que estes 
equipamentos possuem dimensões e peso elevados e são de difícil 

16 
 



movimentação, acabam por vezes ocupando a área por longos períodos 
agravando a busca por área livre no terminal. 
 
6 – Pré-embarque – Armazém Coberto 
 
Este galpão possui cerca de 1.500 m² de área e sua utilização é destinada à 
produtos que não podem ficar expostos às intempéries, geralmente 
equipamentos eletrônicos não unitizados, bags com graneis, entre outros. 
 
 
7 – Área de Manutenção e Apoio 
 
Esta área é de uso exclusivo do operador portuário, trata-se de uma área 
utilizada para manutenção e estacionamento dos equipamentos portuários, 
quais sejam: guindastes e empilhadeiras. 
 
 
8 – Pré-embarque Carga Geral 
 
Esta área é uma continuidade da área descrita no ítem 5, com a exceção do 
armazenamento de riser, existe uma disponibilidade de aproximadamente 
2.400 m² destinada a carga geral. Busca-se dividir nestas áreas todo o estoque 
UM´s.  
 
Parte desta área também é destinada como área de armazenamento 
temporário para backload, neste caso equipamentos e outros materiais que 
retornam das UM´s, cujo destino pode ser os fornecedores originais ou a 
própria Petrobras. Após a chegada desses produtos, o proprietário da carga é 
avisado e tem o prazo de 24 horas para providenciar sua remoção.  
 
 
9 – Área de Recebimento e Triagem de Resíduos  
 
Parte do backload que é desembarcado é composto por resíduos, estes 
produtos são classificados segundo a NBR 10004 e sua destinação e 
tratamento deve estar em conformidade com a legislação ambiental.  
 
Portanto, foi delimitada uma área de cerca de 1.100 m² onde os resíduos, após 
desembarcados, são destinados para uma primeira separação. No caso de 
resíduos oleosos estes são bombeados para tanques e posteriormente são 
destinados a outra empresa para tratamento. 
 
É consenso entre a operação que esta é uma área nobre do terminal, e poderia 
ser utilizada para armazenamento de cargas, e a operação de triagem dos 
resíduos sendo realizada em outro local. Porém, foi explicado que por questões 
contratuais o esta operação deve ser realizada neste local. 
 
10 – Pré-embarque Equipamentos de Ancoragem  
 

17 
 



Esta área possui aproximadamente 5.000 m² e é destinada ao armazenamento 
de cargas pesadas ou de grande porte, sobretudo: amarras, âncoras, bóias, 
árvores de natal, riser, torpedos, entre outras. 
 
Esta área foi escolhida para armazenar este tipo de carga, pela sua 
proximidade com o píer 3, minimizando a distância de transporte, uma vez que 
alguns destes equipamentos, por exemplo as estacas torpedo, necessitam ser 
montados antes de embarcar. Demandando também área livre para patolar os 
guindastes e movimentar as peças. 
 
11 – Pré-embarque para Tubos 
 
Esta área possui aproximadamente 2.500 m² e serve para estocagem de tubos 
que se destinam ou retornam das UM´s. Os tubos são materiais de grande 
relevância para as atividades de E&P, uma vez que fazem a ligação do poço 
perfurado com a plataforma.  
 
Os tubos possuem diversos comprimentos e diâmetros, mas permitem em sua 
armazenagem a possibilidade de empilhamento. Mas a capacidade de 
empilhamento é variável para cada tipo de tubo, normalmente as pilhas são 
feitas com altura entre 3 e 5 tubos. 
 
12 – Pré-embarque Equipamento de Ancoragem  
 
Esta área é uma continuidade da área descrita no item 10 e ainda recebe 
backload de ancoragem que ficam armazenados neste local. 
 
13 – Pré-embarque de Produtos Químicos 
 
Esta área compreende a armazenagem dos materiais químicos destinados as 
UM´s, é uma área com cerca de 760 m² contida e com piso impermeável uma 
vez que os tipo de carga requer cuidados especiais na sua movimentação e 
armazenagem. 
 
Esta área segue os mesmos critérios e restrições operacionais das áreas 
anteriores, apenas fisicamente uma área menor. 
 
14 – Tanques Diesel 
 
Nesta área estão instalados os tanques de óleo diesel marítimo para 
abastecimento das embarcações de apoio. 
 
A tancagem de diesel possui 1.500 m³ de capacidade com linhas que 
alimentam os 3 píeres e o dolphim. O carregamento desses tanques é 
realizado por meio de bombeio reverso por uma balsa que carrega diesel 
marítimo no termina de Tubarão e transporta até o dolphim, onde atraca e 
bombeia para os tanques. Posteriormente, este combustível será novamente 
bombeado para abastecer os supply boats. Cabe destacar, que a operação de 
abastecimento de óleo diesel é uma operação exclusiva, ou seja quando a 

18 
 



embarcação está recebendo diesel, nenhuma outra operação de carga ou 
descarga é realizada naquele barco. 
 
 
15 – Tanque de Água Potável 
 
Nesta área estão instalados os tanques de água potável para abastecimento 
das embarcações de apoio. 
 
O tanque de água possui 2.000 m³ de capacidade e é abastecido diretamente 
pela concessionária de água local. Similar a estrutura de óleo diesel, com 
linhas que abastecem os píers, as tomadas de água são independentes e 
podem operar em conjuntos com as demais operações de embarque ou 
desembarque. 
 
16 – Área para Produtos Químicos 
 
Atualmente, este local está destinado para recebimento de embalagens 
(tanques) de produtos químicos vazios.  Ou seja, cargas de backload de 
produtos químicos, que ficam aguardando serem retiradas pelos respectivos 
proprietários. 
 
Berços de Atracação  
 
17 – Dolphim: berço destinado à atracação de barcaça para abastecimento de 
óleo diesel, eventualmente pode receber pequenas embarcações para 
realização de trocas de turma. 
 
18 – Píer 3: berço dedicado às operações de ancoragem, possui um traquitana 
instalada na ponta o píer, que apoia na embarque de cabos e amarras para as 
embarcações tipo AHTS. Quando não está ocupado pelas operações de 
ancoragem realiza as demais operações de embarque, exceto cimento. 
 
19 – Pier 2: berço multiuso, utilizado para embarque e desembarque de 
praticamente todos as cargas do porto, exceto cimento e insumos da 
ancoragem que requerem embarque por meio da traquitana. 
 
20 – Píer 1: berço que possui  instalada uma planta de cimento. Portanto, 
tornou-se um berço dedicado à movimentação desse insumo, quando não está 
bombeando cimento para as embarcações pode operar conforme o píer 2. 
 
 
21 – Planta de Cimento 
 
O cimento é um insumo utilizado no revestimento dos poços de exploração e 
seu embarque se dá via bombeio para tanques instalados no interior das 
embarcações. Este cimento é recebido no porto por meio de carretas e 
armazenado em silos (planta de cimento), os silos existentes no terminal 
possuem capacidade total de 8.500 pes³, aproximadamente 340 toneladas.  
 

19 
 



 
Considerando a dinâmica operacional inserida no layout apresentado, 
resumidamente o fluxo pode ser representado, conforme Figura 7. 
 
  
 

 
 
Figura 7 – Fluxo logístico de recebimento e saída de produtos no terminal 
 
 

2.2. Movimentação de cargas para unidades marítimas 
 
Resumidamente, o processo de movimentação de cargas é iniciado no 
tratamento das requisições de transporte - RT´s geradas pelas unidades 
marítimas. A partir desse momento é feita a unitização das cargas que serão 
movimentadas ou no caso de cargas maiores, estas são transportadas 
diretamente para o porto, onde é realizado o pré-embarque da carga. Ao final 
da execução do processo, é realizado o embarque da carga nas embarcações 
de apoio ou desembarque das cargas oriundas UM´s. A Figura 8 indica as 
etapas de movimentação de carga até seu embarque. 
 

Realizar 
embarque 

Movimentar Unitizar Cargas Realizar pré- Realizar 
cargas para UM´s  embarque programação 
   

Realizar 
desembarque  

  
Figura 8 – Processo de movimentação de cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
Baseado nos manuais operacionais Petrobras (2007) e Petrobras (2009), serão 
descritas as atividades indicadas no fluxo acima, a saber: 
 

20 
 



Processo de unitizar cargas  para UM´s - O objetivo deste processo é garantir a 
integridade da carga e é iniciado quando a RT é solicitada pela UM, neste 
momento origina-se um novo processo de atendimento desta RT, sendo que ao 
final do processo os itens da RT são despachados para o pré-embarque. Este 
processo é realizado no retroporto, ou seja no centro de distribuição podendo 
ser em Macaé ou no TIMS. A Figura 9 representa o processo descrito. 
 
 

Unitizar cargas Cadastrar RT Coletar itens Unitizar Despachar 
  da RT embalagens itens da RT 

    
 
Figura 9 – Processo de unitização de cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
 
Realizar pré-embarque - Este processo demonstrado na Figura 10 visa 
assegurar a disponibilidade das cargas no porto, e é iniciado quando os itens 
da RT ou material são entregues no pré-embarque. Neste momento, é 
realizado o recebimento da carga no pré-embarque, o monitoramento da 
programação da carga, bem como o pré-embarque em si, e ao final da 
execução do processo, os itens da RT (cargas) serão disponibilizados para o 
embarque.  
 
 
  Realizar Pré- Recebimento da Monitorar Monitorar 

 embarque carga programação pré-

 da carga embarque 

  
Figura 10 – Processo de pré-embarque das cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
Recebimento de carga no pré-embarque – este processo busca garantir o 
recebimento da carga a ser movimentada para unidades no pré-embarque no 
tempo previsto. O processo inicia quando os itens da RT ou material (carga) é 
entregue no pré-embarque, a partir daí é analisado o documento que 
acompanha a carga para liberar o seu recebimento ou, caso necessário, 
devolver a carga. Ao final da execução do processo, a carga é conferida e caso 
seja detectada alguma anomalia a carga é devolvida. 
 
Monitorar programação de carga – o objetivo principal desse processo é 
garantir que toda carga armazenada no pré-embarque estará dentro de uma 
programação. O processo inicia após a conferência da carga. A partir daí, é 
verificada a existência de uma programação para a carga específica e, caso ela 
exista, qual o tipo de programação. Ao final da execução do processo, podem 
ser verificadas algumas situações: carga com programação dentro do prazo 
limite de embarque; carga programada fora do prazo limite para embarque com 
uma reprogramação ou solicitação de reprogramação de uma carga liberada 
para programação; e carga não programada dentro do prazo. 
 

21 
 



 Monitorar pré-embarque – Este processo tem o objetivo de assegurar a 
disponibilidade da carga no pré-embarque. O processo é iniciado a partir do 
momento que se tem acesso à programação diária e a relação de cargas 
disponíveis no pré-embarque. A partir daí é feita uma correlação das cargas 
disponíveis com as cargas programadas. Ao final da execução do processo, 
pode-se ter uma carga disponível para embarque, uma RT cancelada, uma 
solicitação para reprogramar i embarque da carga ou ainda a informação de 
que a carga programada será entregue no prazo previsto. 
 
Realizar programação - Neste processo, busca-se garantir a logística 
necessária para a distribuição das cargas. Conforme mostrado na Figura 11, o 
processo é iniciado, a partir da criação de um atendimento, este podendo ser: 
programação para transporte de cargas (suprimentos), fornecimento de óleo 
diesel ou transbordo de cargas. Após a criação deste primeiro atendimento, o 
mesmo pode ser atualizado e por fim roteirizado pelo programador de 
transporte. Quando necessário o programador de transporte pode corrigir a 
requisição liberada para programação ou tratar uma requisição já incluída no 
atendimento. 
 

Realizar Criar atendimento de Tratar requisição de 
programação transporte de cargas transporte no 
  atendimento 

Atualizar  
atendimento de 

Criar atendimento de transporte de 
transporte de óleo diesel cargas 
  

Criar atendimento de 
transbordo 
 

Roteirizar o 
Corrigir requisição liberada atendimento de 
para programação transporte 
   

 
Figura 11 – Processo de programação de cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
Criar atendimento de transporte de carga – neste processo, o principal objetivo 
é assegurar a programação das RT´s liberadas para programação. O inicio do 
processo ocorre quando a RT é liberada para programação, podendo ser 
normal ou emergência. Em seguida, seleciona-se a embarcação a ser 
programada e a data prevista de saída do porto. A saída desse processo é a 
geração de um atendimento que é impresso e entregue no porto. 
 
Atualizar atendimento de transporte de cargas – o objetivo deste processo é 
assegurar a programação das RT´s liberadas para programação após a criação 
de atendimento / programação da embarcação. O processo inicia quando a RT 
é liberada para programação e verifica-se que há um atendimento / 
programação em aberto, onde ela pode ser incluída. Para RT´s de 
desembarque é feito uma verificação da área de convés disponível para a 

22 
 



unidade solicitante e, caso não haja área de convés disponível, a RT não é 
programada naquele momento. Por outro lado as RT´s de embarque ou 
desembarque que tem área de convés disponível são inseridas o atendimento / 
programação que pode ser disponibilizado para embarque ou enviado para o 
comandante, caso a embarcação já esteja cumprindo a programação ou 
atendimento fora do porto. 
 
Criar atendimento de transporte de óleo diesel – Visa assegurar a programação 
do fornecimento de óleo diesel para as UM´s. O processo inicia quando o 
cliente abre um registro solicitando óleo, a partir desse momento é criada uma 
RT de fornecimento e identificada uma embarcação viável para ser 
reprogramada, em seguida pode-se criar uma nova programação, para 
embarcações que estão abastecendo, ou atualizar uma programação existente, 
para embarcações aguardando programação. Ao final da execução do 
processo é gerado ou atualizado o atendimento que é enviado ao comandante 
da embarcação. 
 
Criar atendimento de transbordo – assegura a programação de transbordo 
entre as UM´s. O processo inicia quando a RT de transbordo são liberadas 
para programação, são verificadas, as embarcações disponíveis para 
realização da operação. Emitindo-se ao final um atendimento ou uma 
atualização de atendimento ao comandante embarcação. 
 
Tratar requisição de transporte no atendimento – assegura o atendimento das 
requisições de transporte programadas que não serão transportadas. Quando 
há uma solicitação de tratamento de uma RT que já foi programada, é feita 
uma verificação do tipo de tratamento que deve ser dado para a requisição, em 
seguida pode-se cancelar, liberar para programação ou suspender a RT, 
observando nesta o tratamento dado. Por fim caso haja necessidade o 
atendimento/programação é roteirizado e disponibilizado para o comandante da 
embarcação. 
 
Roteirizar atendimento de transporte – visa garantir o cumprimento da 
programação de acordo com o melhor roteiro, considerando custo e 
atendimento as RT´s até a data mais tarde definida pelo cliente. O processo é 
iniciado quando a programação está concluída e não será mais alterada antes 
da saída da embarcação, por fim o atendimento é roteirizado e disponibilizado 
ao comandante da embarcação.  
 
Corrigir requisição liberada para programação – objetiva dar tratamento às 
RT´s liberadas que não serão programadas. O processo inicia quando há uma 
solicitação de alteração da RT já liberada para programação, neste momento, é 
verificado o tipo de tratamento que será dado para RT, podendo-se cancelar, 
mudar o status ou alterar itens, de acordo com as informações contidas na 
solicitação de alteração.  
 
Realizar Embarque - Visa garantir o embarque das cargas, o processo é 
iniciado com o planejamento da operação portuária de acordo com a chegada 
das embarcações no porto. A operação portuária pode ser de 
descarregamento, quando necessário, ou de carregamento de convés e acordo 

23 
 



com a programação. Após o carregamento a embarcação é liberada para 
seguir o roteiro pré-definido. Este processo está ilustrado na Figura 12 abaixo. 
 
 

Realizar Planejar Carregar Liberar 
embarque operação do convés embarcação 
 Porto    

 
Figura 12 – Processo de embarque das cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
Planejamento e carregamento das embarcações - Ao designar uma 
Embarcação de Apoio Marítimo - EAM para a entrega de determinada carga, o 
setor de Transporte Marítimo leva em consideração, dentre outros, os 
seguintes aspectos, visando à segurança da operação: 
 

• Características e limitações da EAM; 
• Tipo da carga (peso, volume e forma); 
• Características e restrições operativas dos guindastes das UM, caso 

haja; 
• Condições meteorológicas esperadas; 
• Destinatário; 
• Roteiro: Cargas destinadas às últimas UM´s não devem atrapalhar ou 

interferir no fornecimento para as primeiras; 
• Tipo de UM: navio sonda, FPSO, FSO, SS, entre outras; e 
• Localização da UM. 

 
Para tal, é necessário que as UM, ao efetuarem a RT informem as restrições 
que possam vir a afetar a operação, tais como: restrições nos guindastes, nas 
comunicações, no treinamento/qualificação do pessoal, etc. Após a designação 
da EAM e sua atracação no terminal, é informado ao comandante a relação de 
carga a ser embarcada, seu destino e o roteiro que deverá ser seguido. 
Também deverão ser fornecidos a previsão meteorológica e o posicionamento 
das bóias cegas, UM´s e monobóias. (Petrobras, 2007). 
 
Ao receber estas informações o comandante é iniciado o plano de estiva da 
carga no convés. O plano de estiva deve retornar à equipe de terra em tempo 
hábil, de modo a possibilitar um embarque rápido e seguro. 
 
Embarque das Cargas - O embarque da carga seca é feito pelos guindastes do 
cais, de acordo com o plano de estiva, elaborado pela EAM, em seguida equipe 
de convés da EAM, faz o controle do carregamento. Neste momento a 
documentação é conferida e os contêineres, cestas, bags, skids e suas 
eslingas são inspecionadas. 
 
Transporte de Cargas Diferenciadas - O transporte de tubos, risers e 
equipamentos de ancoragem, merece atenção diferenciada, com a devida 
preparação do convés para seu carregamento, onde a sequência de retirada 
junto a UM deve ser previamente conhecida para que sejam evitadas 
passagens desnecessárias sobre a carga, passando pelo posicionamento da 

24 
 



EAM de maneira que minimize o efeito das vagas no balanço, até a lingada 
final executada pelo pessoal do convés. 
 
Liberar embarcação – este processo tem como objetivo disponibilizar para a 
embarcação toda a documentação necessária para a entrega da carga 
embarcada. O processo inicia quando a programação roteirizada é enviada 
para a embarcação, constando horário de saída desta. Em seguida a 
programação é atualizada pelo comandante da embarcação com os dados do 
carregamento, assinado e devolvido para a administração do porto. Por fim é 
feito o apontamento da embarcação e inicia-se o cumprimento da 
programação. 
 
Realizar desembarque - este processo, conforme mostrado na Figura 13, visa 
garantir a correta distribuição e destinação da carga desembarcada.  
 

Encaminhar 
carga para 
Petrobras 

Realizar Descarregar Transferir  
desembarque convés para 
  retroporto 

 Encaminhar 
carga para 
contratadas 
  

 
Figura 13 – Processo de movimentação de cargas.  
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2009). 
 
 
Este processo inicia-se com o descarregamento das cargas provenientes das 
UM´s do convés da embarcação, em seguida são transferidas para o retroporto 
onde são encaminhadas para seus proprietários (Petrobras ou empresas 
contratadas). 
 
Em resumo os principais recursos utilizados para movimentação de carga são 
guindastes, empilhadeiras e caminhões, basicamente existem duas áreas 
destinadas à armazenagem das cargas, denominadas de retroárea e pré-
embarque, sendo que a primeira é utilizada para armazenamento temporário 
das cargas antes de seguir para o pré-embarque que é o local onde as cargas 
são embarcadas. Há a necessidade também de espaço no armazenamento 
para as cargas que retornam da embarcação, chamadas de backloads, cujo 
tempo de permanência no terminal deve ser o mínimo possível de forma a não 
comprometer a operação das cargas destinadas ao embarque. A Figura 14 
mostra um fluxo esquemático da operação com cargas num terminal de apoio 
offshore. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 Atendimento do pedido da UM 

(Unidade Marítima) 
 
 

Distribuição 
  Recebimento de Envio de embarcações para UM 
  carga de backload 
  
  Carregamento das embarcações 
 Entrada de carga na 

retroárea 
Progra mação 
de car gas do Entrada de carga no pré-embarque 

term inal Envio de carga para o 

 armazém 
Pré-embarque 

  
 Retroárea 
  Carregamento 
 Alocação de cargas nas carretas  Expedição 

 Coleta de Carga 
 (picking) 

 Unitização  
Estoque 

  
  Estocagem/ 
 Entrada de carga no armazém Armazenagem 
  
 
 
 Pedido de compra 

 
 Gestão de Pedido de reserva 
 estoque Processamento 
 de pedidos 

Reserva 
 
 Unidade Demanda 
 operacional  UM 
  
 
 
Figura 14 – Movimentação de cargas numa operação portuária de apoio offshore 
Fonte: Adaptado de Caulliraux et al. (2010, p.33) 
 
 
A partir da Figura 14 pode-se ter uma visão mais estruturada do 
processamento e da movimentação de cargas dentro de um terminal de apoio 
offshore. O fluxo é iniciado a partir da necessidade gerada pela UM, onde o 
pedido é processado, ou seja, entra na programação de carga do terminal ou a 
demanda é processada pela área de compras para posteriormente entrar no 
estoque e então na programação de carga do terminal.  
 

26 
 



Diante dos cenários operacionais apresentados percebe-se, claramente, que 
em função de um aumento no volume de cargas movimentadas, a geração de 
informações e documentos são aumentados na mesma proporção, podendo 
ocasionar filas, atrasos, falta de espaço para armazenagem etc., o que gera 
uma consequente sobrecarga na capacidade operacional do terminal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 



3. REFERENCIAL TEÓRICO 
 
 
Neste capítulo busca-se, entre outras informações, apresentar a inserção das 
atividades de apoio offshore na cadeia de logística de óleo e gás. 
 
Entre as atividades necessárias à exploração e produção de petróleo no mar, 
Spiegel et al. (2011) destacam a logística upstream e downstream, sendo que a 
primeira refere-se as operações de apoio as UM´s e a segunda a segunda às 
atividades desenvolvidas para levar o combustível ao consumidor final.  
 
Diante de um anunciado crescimento, considerando o destaque que vem sendo 
dado a partir das discussões sobre o potencial do pré-sal, as empresas 
começaram a esbarrar nas limitações da infraestrutura portuária nacional, uma 
vez que as operações offshore, em função do grande número de atividades, 
vêm demandando um número cada vez maior de suprimento, que por sua vez 
são transportados por embarcações que demandam infraestrutura portuária 
específica para operarem. 
 
Para melhor ilustrar esse cenário de crescimento, o gráfico 2 apresenta a 
produção de óleo e gás da Petrobras nos anos de 2009 e 2010, e mostra uma 
estimativa para os anos seguintes, indicando uma visão clara de crescimento 
de produção, o que consequentemente impulsiona os demais elos da cadeia 
logística.  
 
 

Gráfico 2 – Produção de Óleo, LGN e Gás Natural – Brasil e Exterior 
 

 
Fonte: Petrobras – PNG 2011-16 
 
 
 

28 
 



3.1. Logística de Suprimento de Óleo e Gás 
 
Segundo Ballou (2006) a logística trata da criação de valor – valor para os 
clientes e fornecedores da empresa, e valor para todos que têm nela interesses 
diretos. Uma gestão logística eficiente interpreta cada atividade na cadeia de 
suprimentos como contribuinte do processo de agregação de valor 
 
A cadeia de suprimentos do petróleo no Brasil caracteriza-se por ser 
extremamente complexa, possuindo uma grande quantidade de unidades 
operacionais (refinarias), um sistema de transportes abrangente (dutos, 
terminais, navios) e uma ampla área de atuação no mercado, desde a extração 
do petróleo até a distribuição dos derivados, passando pela importação e 
exportação de petróleo e subprodutos. (Lord, 2010).  
 
Ao mesmo tempo, é explicado por Lord (2010) que existe ainda uma grande 
variação de complexidade urbana e industrial do mercado consumidor, com 
demanda bastante variada de tipo e qualidade de produtos, prazos, frequência, 
local e quantidade de entrega. A política de maximizar a produção de petróleo 
e de derivados fortalece ainda mais a necessidade de se ter uma cadeia 
logística integrada e otimizada.  
 
Assim, além de atuar como produtoras de petróleo de e derivados, as 
empresas do setor também atuam como grandes consumidoras de outros tipos 
de matérias-primas e serviços de diversas naturezas, possuindo para isso uma 
vasta rede de fornecedores e prestadores de serviços.  
 
É fato que a cadeia logística de suprimento de óleo e gás merece destaque, 
processo que une mercado, refinarias, negociantes e produtores e é visto como 
um difícil e complexo comércio de transporte e estocagem. Neste sentido, Aas 
et al.. (2009) comentam que um importante desafio da logística upstream é o 
suporte às operações a um custo eficiente. 
 
Como o petróleo é um produto nobre e de grande importância para a economia 
mundial e fonte de energia das mais viáveis do ponto de vista econômico, a 
dependência dos países em relação a sua produção é considerável e gera 
grandes impactos nas economias quando há variações dos seus preços. 
Assim, a cadeia de suprimentos de petróleo, com seus modos de transporte e 
suas estruturas de apoio em terra, formam um sistema logístico complexo que 
está sujeito a vários riscos operacionais, legais e de mercado, que podem 
afetar o nível de serviço.  
 
A cadeia logística de suprimento de óleo e gás no Brasil é composta 
basicamente pelo transporte Marítimo e dutoviário, recebimento e 
armazenamento pelos terminais e transferência destes para as refinarias. Uma 
vez que petróleo está nos tanques, considera-se que produto está entregue. 
(Sousa, 2007). 
 
Conforme ilustrado na Figura 15, as atividades da cadeia logística do petróleo 
podem ser subdivididas nos seguintes grupos: 
 

29 
 



• Carregamento do navio para o porto; 
• Viagem do porto de carregamento para o terminal; 
• Descarregamento no terminal; e 
• Armazenamento no terminal e transferência do terminal para a refinaria. 

 

 
Figura 15 – Cadeia Logística de Petróleo.  
Fonte: Spiegel et al. (2011) 
 
Considerando apenas a cadeia de suprimentos atrelada ao apoio às operações 
offshore, que é foco deste estudo, pode-se extrair da cadeia representada na 
Figura 15 e analisar a situação a partir da Figura 16, onde é destacada a 
logística de atendimento às UM´s dentro universo de exploração e produção. 
 
 
 Cadeia Logística do Petróleo 
 
 
 Exploração Desenvolvimento da Produção Refino Distribuição 

Produção 
 
 
 
 
 Logística de Apoio Offshore 
 
 

Estudo e Interpretação Sondagem Delimitação Obtenção e Desenvol. da Produção 
 Otimização de Exploratória Análise de Produção  
 Reservatórios  dados 

 Principais processos dentro das atividades de Exploração & Produção 
 
Figura 16 – Fluxo de processos para atendimento da Logística de apoio offshore. 
Fonte: Adaptado de Sousa (2007) 
 
 

30 
 



Aas et al.. (2009) definem a logística offshore como sendo o suprimento de 
sondas de perfuração e unidades de produção com os suprimentos 
necessários ao seu funcionamento.  
 
Analisando a Figura 16 fica evidente o campo de atuação da logística de apoio 
offshore, considerando que a área de E&P (exploração e produção) é 
subdividida em exploração, desenvolvimento da produção e produção, tem-se 
outras subdivisões, que representam etapas fundamentais até a obtenção do 
óleo e/ou gás ao final do processo. Para cada uma dessas atividades, em 
maior ou menor grau de intensidade, diversos recursos são utilizados (supply 
boats, barcos de sísmica, plataformas, sondas, entre outros) os quais são 
igualmente dependentes de suprimentos, equipamentos e infraestrutura 
portuária para que possam realizar suas atividades. 
 
 

3.2. Definição e Classificação de Portos e Terminais Portuários  
 
Uma definição geral para porto é apresentada por Alderton (2008), como sendo 
um abrigo natural ou artificial para os navios, munido de instalações 
necessárias ao embarque e desembarque de mercadorias e de passageiros.   
 
Bichou e Gray (2005) definem porto como uma instalação em que a 
transferência de cargas e de passageiros, assim como a manutenção de 
embarcações são garantidas. Comentam ainda que outras definições são 
atribuídas às atividades portuárias, que vão além da movimentação de cargas, 
armazenamento e elos logísticos, com o objetivo de incluir as atividades 
relacionadas a empresas que participam do comércio marítimo. 
 
Goes Filho (2012) apresenta em seu estudo que os portos apresentam 
algumas características principais em comum, a saber: 
  

• Facilidade de acessos terrestres; 
• Profundidades adequadas aos navios que a eles se destinam; 
• Instalações de acostagem para os navios; 
• Facilidades para movimentação de carga; 
• Abrigo para os navios; 
• Áreas de estocagem adequadas para a carga que se destinam a 

atender. 
 
De forma geral, a Tabela 3 sugere uma classificação de como portos podem 
ser distribuídos quanto a sua função e suas características principais: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 



Tabela 3 – Classificação dos portos quanto a sua função 
 

Tipos Profundidade Equipamentos Caract. Principais 
(m) 

Carga Geral 10 a 12 Guindastes e empilhadeiras Armazéns e pátios 
Militares 8 a 11 Equipamentos de Amplas saídas 

reparo/diques secos marítimas 
Pesca 6 a 9 Frigoríficos e fábricas de Ampla extensão de 

gelo acostagem 
Minérios e 20 a 24 Correias transportadoras, Amplas áreas de 

Fertilizantes recuperadoras/carregadeiras estocagem/acostagem 
de navio e viradores de contínua ou 

vagão descontínua  
Petroleiros e 25 a 27 Instalações de Acostagem 

Produtos bombeamento/oleodutos descontínua 
Químicos 

Fonte: Adaptado de Goes Filho (2012) 
 
Outra classificação é proposta pela UNCTAD (2002), a qual descreve que os 
portos podem ser classificados de acordo com as gerações de 
desenvolvimento na qual, as funções, as atividades e as estruturas 
organizacional, operacional, institucional e gerencial diferem enormemente. De 
acordo com esta classificação, existem três gerações, que são determinadas 
pelo desenvolvimento das políticas e da estratégia portuária, pelas diferenças 
de escopo das atividades e pelo nível de expansão e de integração, a saber: 
 
1ª geração até 1960 – nesta geração os portos desenvolviam simplesmente 
atividades de conexão entre os sistemas de transporte terrestre e marítimos e 
as principais atividades e investimentos nos portos visavam exclusivamente a 
movimentação e o armazenamento de cargas. 
 
2ª geração de 1960 até 1980 – os portos são caracterizados pelo trabalho em 
conjunto das entidades governamentais e da autoridade portuária. As 
atividades desenvolvidas nos portos desta geração vão além das operações 
tradicionais, agregando diversas ações que passaram a ser realizadas no porto 
e em sua área de influência, como a embalagem e identificação das cargas e 
também a distribuição física. Esta geração marca o início do gerenciamento 
dos serviços portuários direcionado ao consumidor, mas ainda sem maiores 
preocupações com relacionamento de longo prazo. 
 
3ª geração após 1980 – esta geração é marcada pelo rápido desenvolvimento 
do transporte de contêineres e o surgimento dos sistemas de transporte 
intermodais. As atividades de produção e transporte passaram a ser articuladas 
para formar uma rede de abrangência internacional. 
 
Com o avanço da informática e do desenvolvimento de novas pesquisas, Silva 
(2010), destaca uma nova tendência na organização e gerenciamento dos 
grandes portos e constatou o surgimento de uma quarta geração de portos, 
também já proposta pela UNCTAD. Ou seja, portos dotados de agilidade 
gerencial e operacional, interligados por modernos sistemas de informação e 
controle. 
 

32 
 



A Tabela 4 apresenta de forma mais sintetizada as quatro gerações propostas 
pela UNCTAD. 
 

Tabela 4 – Classificação de Portos Proposta pela UNCTAD 
 

Classificação dos Portos Principais Funções Desenpenhadas 
1ª Geração Acessos marítimos, transferências de 

mercadorias, armazenagem e entrega ao 
navio. 

2ª Geração Atividades de primeira geração, acrescidas 
de:  

• Atividades industriais e comerciais; e 
• Centro e serviços portuários. 

3ª Geração Atividades de segunda geração, acrescidas 
de: 

• Estruturação da comunidade 
portuária; 

• Fortalecimento de vínculos entre 
Porto-Cidade-Usuários; 

• Serviços extra-portuários; 
• Estrutura de Sistemas de Informação; 
• Centro de Logística. 

 
4ª Geração Atividades de terceira geração, acrescidas de: 

• Zonas de processamento industriais; 
• Clusters ou condomínios portuários-

industriais; 
• Redes de negócios 

Fonte: Adaptado de Ferreira (2012)  
 
Uma evolução considerada muito importante na área portuária é a 
transformação do porto em plataforma logística. Para Ferreira (2012) essa é 
uma mudança que tem como finalidade concentrar as atividades, tornando a 
distribuição otimizada e, como resultado, gerar uma redução de custos 
logísticos.  
 
 

3.3. Transporte Marítimo 
 
A principal função do transporte marítimo é promover a ligação entre regiões 
produtoras e consumidoras de insumos e produtos. Isso inclui transporte de 
matérias primas tais como minério, óleo bruto, carvão, grãos e insumos para a 
produção agrícola, bem como produtos manufaturados, desde as regiões 
produtoras até os centros consumidores. 
 
De acordo com Assis (2012), o transporte marítimo sempre desempenhou um 
papel fundamental no comércio internacional, e envolve, nos dias de hoje uma 
extensa rede com inúmeras rotas marítimas. Todavia, deve ser observado que 
o transporte marítimo é apenas uma parte da cadeia logística que liga terminais 
portuários, centros de armazenagem e transbordo, bem como outros modais de 
transporte: dutos, rodovias, ferrovias e hidrovias. 
 

33 
 



O processo de globalização, segundo Mendes (2007), levou à redefinição das 
cadeias de suprimento, fazendo do transporte marítimo um elo vital para a 
garantia do abastecimento dos elementos da cadeia. 
 
A principal vantagem do modal marítimo, de acordo com Saraceni (2006), é a 
sua capacidade individual de transportar, em grandes quantidades, quaisquer 
cargas, sólida ou líquida, sejam essas embaladas, unitizadas ou a granel. 
Neste caso, proporciona elevada economia de escala quando são cobertas 
grandes distâncias. 
 
A indústria do petróleo possui um perfil comum às demais indústrias de 
extração mineral, onde as fontes estão geralmente distantes dos centros de 
consumo, muitas vezes em outro continente. Portanto, os grandes volumes 
movimentados, o valor relativamente baixo do óleo, tornam o uso do modal 
marítimo quase obrigatório para o transporte de petróleo e derivados, 
(Saraceni, 2006). 
 
O transporte marítimo de cargas vem deixando de ser uma questão de 
importância secundária e puramente operacional para entrar de forma definitiva 
no centro das discussões e decisões estratégicas. 
 
No tocante ao apoio logístico offshore, a tecnologia desenvolvida para lidar 
com o ambiente de exploração marítimo baseava-se em duas estratégias: 
manter os equipamentos em terrenos firmes ou deslocá-los às áreas alagadas. 
Neste caso, foram utilizadas desde aterros até embarcações, estruturas 
flutuantes e estruturas marítimas fixas. Esta segunda estratégia levou à criação 
de ilhas artificiais ou plataformas de trabalho nas quais pudessem ser 
instalados os equipamentos de perfuração, coleta e transporte do petróleo. E 
com o distanciamento dos poços da costa foram necessárias novas tecnologias 
para a criação de infraestruturas cada vez mais auto-suficientes capazes de 
tornar as unidades marítimas dependentes apenas das atividades de 
suprimentos, (Mendes, 2007) 
 
Em qualquer terminal é fundamental que haja uma interação harmônica entre 
os diferentes modais de transporte de modo que um não atrapalhe a eficiência 
do outro. Neste sentido Shein (2010) argumenta que não é suficiente investir 
apenas nas embarcações, nos equipamentos de movimentação, pessoal e 
informatização se também não ocorrerem progressos nos outros modos de 
transporte e na infraestrutura de escoamento. 
 
Shein (2010) comenta que a tendência dos portos tem sido a crescente busca 
da redução de custos e de burocracias, visando a uma melhoria da rotação das 
cargas e de navios no porto, com a integração em cadeias logísticas e a 
concentração da gestão de terminais portuários de vários portos em grandes 
grupos de operadores. 
 

3.3.1 Embarcações de Apoio Offshore - Supply Boats 
 
De acordo com Aas et al.. (2009), para assegurar uma produção contínua as 
instalações offshore precisam de suprimento regular e o único meio de realizar 

34 
 



esta tarefa é fazendo uso das embarcações de apoio, que por sua vez 
representam um elevado custo na cadeia  logística offshore. Aqueles autores 
ainda comentam que usualmente estas embarcações são alugadas pelas 
companhias de petróleo e na prática é destas empresas a responsabilidade 
pela programação e roteirização dos supply boats, o que não ocorre na 
Petrobras, onde a própria empresa programa e informa os pontos de entrega 
das cargas. 
 
Por sua vez as embarcações de apoio, de acordo com Aneichyk (2009), têm a 
função primária de transportar suprimentos para as plataformas e outras 
estruturas offshore. Estas embarcações transportam cargas dos terminais de 
apoio até as instalações e estas cargas/suprimentos são divididas em duas 
categorias:  
 

• Carga de convés (deck cargo) - são tubos, equipamentos e cargas em 
contêineres, que são transportadas no convés da embarcação; e 

• Graneis (bulk cargo) – podem ser uma variedade de produtos 
transportados em tanques separados abaixo do convés. 

 
Neste sentido, Mattos (2009) salienta que dependendo das características da 
operação as embarcações são utilizadas em diferentes etapas da atividade 
petrolífera. As embarcações empregadas no apoio marítimo offshore devem 
possuir grande capacidade de manobra, visando posicionamento próximo as 
unidades atendidas. Devido a essa necessidade recursos foram incorporados a 
estas embarcações: Hélices e lemes gêmeos (menor diâmetro na curva de 
giro), Bow thruster (propulsor lateral de proa), sistema de lemes independentes 
(posicionamento dos lemes em qualquer ângulo), Stern thruster (propulsor 
lateral de popa), central de manobras computadorizadas (manobras realizadas 
por “joystick”) e o Dynamic Position (Posicionamento Dinâmico).  
 
Apresenta-se a seguir a classificação das embarcações usadas comumente no 
mundo para atendimento às operações offshore. 
 

1. Navio de Suprimento a Plataforma (PSV – Plataform Supply Vessel) – 
embarcações que transportam óleo combustível, água potável, produtos 
químicos, água industrial, tubulações e ferramentas especiais. 

 
2. Navio de Suprimento (SV – Supply Vessel) – navio de apoio a 

plataforma menor que o PSV. 
 

3. Reboque e Manuseio (AHTS – Anchor Handling Tug Supply) – 
Embarcação que medem cerca de 110 metros de comprimento e 
potência (HP) de 6.000 a 20.000, atuam como rebocador, manuseio de 
âncoras e transportes de suprimentos (tubos, água doce, óleo, lama, 
salmoura, cimento, peças, etc.). 

 
4. Combate a Incêndio e SOS (Fire Fighting) – São basicamente 

embarcações que possuem bombas e canhões de incêndio com 
capacidade de aplicar jatos à vazão de 9.000 m³ de água por hora, para 

35 
 



atender em caso de emergência, as solicitações de socorro e incêndio 
em plataformas e/ou embarcações. 

 
5. Estimulação de Poços (Well Estimulation Vessel) - São embarcações 

dotadas de “plantas” para aplicação de injeção de agentes químicos, 
visando monitorar e melhorar a produtividade dos poços e linhas em 
operação. 

 
6. Lançamento de Linha (PLSV – Pipe Laying Support Vessel) – São 

embarcações que lançam e recolhem linhas no mar, utilizadas para 
conectar as plataformas a sistemas de produção de petróleo. 

 
7. Passageiro (CB – Crew Boat) - Embarcação utilizada para trocas de 

turmas nas plataformas, incluindo embarcações de alta velocidade. 
 

8. Suporte às Operações de ROV – Veículo de Operação Remota (RSV – 
ROV Support Vessel) – São embarcações equipadas com sistemas de 
posicionamento dinâmico, além de outras instalações utilizadas nas 
operações com veículo de operação remota. 

 
9. Suporte a Mergulho (DSV – Diving Support Vessel) – São embarcações 

de apoio às operações de mergulho de “superfície” ou saturado, dotados 
de vários equipamentos especiais (sino de mergulho, câmaras de 
saturação, guinchos especiais etc). 

 
10. Embarcação suporte a derramamento de óleo (OSRV – Oil Spill 

Recovery Vessel) – Utilizado no combate ao derramamento de óleo 
dotado de especificações que permitem trabalhar na mancha de óleo, 
em atmosfera onde a evaporação do petróleo produz gás natural, por 
isso é dotado de sistemas elétricos blindados para evitar a produção de 
faíscas. Possui equipamentos para recolher o óleo derramado e 
armazenar num tanque a bordo. A capacidade de combater o 
derramamento pode ser criada num PSV ou AHTS.  

 
A Figura 17 apresenta as principais embarcações de apoio que atendem às 
demandas das unidades marítimas. Cabe destacar nesta Figura a presença de 
um navio aliviador próximo a plataforma, o qual tem por objetivo esgotar o óleo 
produzido pela plataforma e levá-lo a terra para processamento. Esta etapa, 
porém faz parte da cadeia produtiva de escoamento do petróleo, conforme já 
evidenciado anteriormente no subitem 2.1. 
  
 
 
 

36 
 



 
 
Figura 17 – Principais embarcações de atendimento as unidades marítimas 
Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (2010) 
 
 
Em relação às condições de mar, operações de carga e descarga entre uma 
embarcação e uma unidade marítima são operações que dependem 
fundamentalmente das condições do tempo. O tamanho de onda significante 
(SWH – Significant wave heigth) é a medida usada para quantificar as 
condições do tempo para operações de suprimento, (Aneichyk, 2009). A SWH 
é definida pela altura média de um terço da crista da maior onda, por questões 
de segurança e pelas características das embarcações, não são permitidas 
operações de carga e descarga quando SWH excede a 4 metros. A Figura 18 
apresenta um exemplo de uma embarcação de apoio em condições de mar 
adversas. 

 
 
 

37 
 



 
 
 Figura 18 – Embarcação de apoio em condições adversas.  

Fonte: Aneichyk (2009, p.15) 
 

3.3.2.Terminais de Apoio Offshore 
 
Considerando o estudo a partir de uma atividade portuária, faz-se necessário 
uma breve distinção entre terminais portuários e portos. Segundo Silva et al. 
(2010) um porto é definido como um local onde uma embarcação recebe ou 
deixa suas cargas ou passageiros, já um terminal de apoio offshore consiste de 
uma área de atracação capaz de garantir o carregamento dos mais diversos 
tipos de carga em embarcações distintas que transportam simultaneamente 
diferentes tipos de carga acondicionadas de formas variadas.  
 
Assim, a principal diferença entre um terminal de apoio offshore e um porto é o 
fato do primeiro ser um elo da cadeia de suprimentos de Exploração e 
Produção, com o objetivo de minimizar o risco de rompimento da cadeia de 
suprimentos para as unidades marítimas, enquanto que o segundo é um nó de 
um sistema de transporte multimodal. 
 
As operações de apoio offshore caracterizam-se principalmente pelo 
carregamento e descarregamento de itens de suprimento e equipamentos para 
plataformas e sondas. De forma geral as cargas são compostas por granéis 
sólidos e líquidos, cargas gerais, água, fluidos especiais, produtos químicos 
materiais de ancoragem, linhas flexíveis e alimentos, (Silva, 2010). 
 
A Figura 19 apresenta embarcações de apoio marítimo prestando atendimento 
a uma unidade marítima de perfuração de poço. 
 
 

38 
 



 
Figura 19 – Atendimento de supply boat a uma unidade marítima 

Fonte: Lima (2008, p.2) 
 
 

3.4. Capacidade Operacional e Indicadores de Desempenho em Terminais 
Portuários 

 
De acordo com Brito (2007), capacidade é o volume que um sistema é capaz 
de atingir em um período específico de tempo. A criticidade de um 
planejamento de capacidade aumenta em função do tempo necessário para 
implementar uma expansão. Se a capacidade de uma operação pode ser 
ampliada em poucos dias, uma planejamento para os próximos 5 anos pode 
ser desnecessária, porém para ampliações que exijam meses ou anos, como 
as ampliações portuárias, planejar o aumento dessa capacidade passa ser 
fundamental. 
 
No entanto, para Wilker (2010) o desequilíbrio entre a capacidade e a demanda 
pode trazer consequências econômicas desastrosas para a organização. 
Sendo que o desafio é harmonizar, em todos os níveis, o grau de capacidade 
produtiva com o nível de demanda a ser atendida com o menor custo possível, 
sendo assim, fundamental o planejamento e controle da capacidade produtiva. 
 
Por sua vez, para Petrobras (2009), no contexto portuário offshore referente às 
embarcações de apoio, é considerada capacidade das embarcações, o tempo 
disponível em dias para atendimento às UM´s, que é o ciclo de viagem, 
descontados os tempos de navegação, tempos entre UM´s e tempos no porto. 
 
Quanto a classificação de capacidade, Wilker (2010) destaca que, esta pode 
ser classificada em: capacidade instalada, de projeto, efetiva ou de carga e 
realizada.  
 
 

39 
 



• Capacidade instalada: É a quantidade máxima que um sistema produtivo 
pode produzir ininterruptamente desconsiderando as perdas. Portanto, é 
a capacidade produtiva obtida numa jornada de trabalho de 24 horas 
ignorando as paradas para manutenção e perdas decorrentes de erros 
de programação da produção.  

 
• Capacidade disponível ou de projeto: refere-se à capacidade máxima de 

um sistema produtivo numa jornada de trabalho sem considerar as 
perdas envolvidas.  

 
• Capacidade efetiva ou de carga: capacidade efetiva é a capacidade 

disponível subtraídas das perdas planejadas dessa capacidade. As 
perdas planejadas são: setups (tempo de preparação), manutenções 
preventivas, auditorias da qualidade, trocas de turnos, intervalos de 
operações, etc. 

 
• Capacidade realizada: é a capacidade real em determinado período. Ou 

seja é a capacidade resultante da subtração das perdas não planejadas 
da capacidade efetiva. As perdas não planejadas são: ausência de 
matéria-prima, funcionários, energia, máquinas; deficiências de 
qualidade, manutenção corretiva, etc. 

 
Em relação aos indicadores de desempenho operacional estes representam 
características de produtos e processos, que são utilizados para controlar e 
melhorar a qualidade do desempenho destes ao longo do tempo, Arruda et al. 
(2008). Os indicadores de desempenho viabilizam a busca da melhoria 
contínua da qualidade dos produtos e serviços e da produtividade da empresa, 
elevando a satisfação dos clientes, sua competitividade e ainda sua 
participação no mercado. 
 
Segundo ANTAQ (2003) o desempenho portuário é o resultado dos 
procedimentos operacionais das instalações portuárias, no carregamento e 
descarga de mercadorias e no atendimento aos navios e veículos terrestres. A 
produtividade é importante para o planejador portuário, pois é por meio desta 
informação que ele determinará se o porto necessita de mais infraestrutura 
para atendimento da demanda. 
 
De acordo com ANTAQ (2003) os indicadores de desempenho medem: 
 

• a intensidade de carga de trabalho, dada pelas quantidades 
movimentadas ou pelo volume de atendimentos realizados;  

 
• a eficácia ou o grau em que o serviço atende aos padrões estabelecidos 

de adequação, suficiência e fidelidade aos objetivos, consideradas as 
demandas dos usuários e clientes;  

 
• a eficiência, medida através da produção ou grau de produtividade na 

oferta do serviço, em termos de rapidez ou velocidade e presteza;  
• a qualidade: entendida como satisfação, confiança e segurança do 

serviço ao cliente, atendendo suas necessidades e desejos;  

40 
 



 
• a economicidade, dada pelo nível dos preços dos serviços, 

possibilitando sua comparação com outros portos e a análise evolutiva, 
inclusive no que se refere à variação dos diversos componentes com os 
preços totais. 

 
Os indicadores de desempenho, de acordo com a ANTAQ (2003) têm por 
finalidade a avaliação da qualidade dos serviços ofertados e da satisfação dos 
clientes-usuários. Possibilitando avaliar o relacionamento entre a qualidade dos 
serviços com a satisfação das necessidades e desejos dos usuários. 
 
Os indicadores de desempenhos possuem, entre outras, as seguintes 
características: 
 

• Estão expressos em unidades de medida das mais significativas para 
aqueles que irão utilizá-los, servindo para fins de avaliação de 
resultados ou para subsidiar a tomada de decisão; 

 
• São compostos de um número ou percentual para indicar a magnitude 

(quanto) e de uma unidade de medida, que dá ao número ou percentual 
um significado (o quê); 

 
• Servem para detectar causas e efeitos de ações operacionais e 

administrativas; 
 

• Permitem qualificar os serviços em cada porto, fazer comparações 
evolutivas de desempenho de cada terminal ou conjunto de berços, a 
comparação entre terminais e conjuntos de berços de um mesmo porto, 
ou entre portos distintos, possibilitando monitorar a evolução do 
processo, com o estabelecimento de benchmark. 

 
 
Para Spiegel et al. (2011) a eficiência de um porto deve minimizar a 
permanência da embarcação, ou seja, a soma da atracação, tempo de 
operação e liberação do navio. Esta eficiência seria ainda avaliada de acordo 
com o desempenho operacional, a infraestrutura existente e o grau de 
segurança vinculado à operação.  
 
Em relação ao desempenho operacional Spiegel et al. (2011) identificam que a 
taxa de carga e descarga depende dos seguintes fatores:  
 

• Tipo de carga; 
• Tipo e tamanho da embarcação; 
• Disponibilidade e tamanho da equipe de estivadores; 
• Grau de mecanização; e  
• Métodos utilizados na manipulação de cargas. 

 
 
Neste sentido, a compreensão dos indicadores relativos aos portos e terminais 
demanda um conhecimento preliminar do espaço econômico em que o porto 

41 
 



está inserido, ou seja, o seu ambiente externo, que é caracterizado segundo 
ANTAQ (2003), pela descrição dos fluxos de comércio ou do mercado dos 
portos concorrentes e das possibilidades de crescimento industrial entre outras. 
 

3.5. Simulação Computacional e Modelagem de Processos 
 
O objetivo deste item é apresentar alguns conceitos relativos ao campo da 
simulação. As definições são apresentadas segundo a visão de diversos 
autores, porém é sabido que estes conceitos não são únicos. Entretanto, os 
conceitos apresentados são considerados essenciais para o desenvolvimento 
deste estudo.  
 

3.5.1. Definições 
 
A técnica de simulação de acordo com Machado e Yonamine (2003) envolve a 
criação de modelos para representar partes de sistemas das mais variadas 
áreas do conhecimento, de forma comprovar hipóteses por meio de testes no 
modelo, mediante cenários possíveis, reduzindo os custos e os riscos de testes 
de campo envolvendo a operação real desses sistemas. 
 
Para Pinho et al. (2009) o uso da modelagem constitui para os gestores de 
processo uma importante ferramenta para embasar a tomada de decisão. A 
identificação das variáveis do modelo e o grau de complexidade e robustez que 
o modelo deve apresentar são questões cujas respostas não são simples. 
Neste sentido, para efetivamente auxiliar no processo de tomada de decisão, a 
etapa da modelagem deve ser executada da melhor forma possível. 
 
Uma das primeiras definições de modelagem é criticada por Pidd (1996) pela 
sua simplicidade, ou seja, quando Ackoff e Sacieni publicaram em 1968 seu 
trabalho sobre fundamentos da pesquisa operacional, definiram simulação 
como sendo uma “representação da realidade”, porém tal definição ignora o 
motivo pelo qual o modelo está sendo construído. Uma vez que a pessoa que 
está modelando deve ter em mente os objetivos do modelo, para não deixar 
escapar partes importantes da realidade e ao final concluir que a modelagem 
de nada serviu. 
 
Assim Pidd (1996), a partir de suas pesquisas, apresenta uma evolução das 
definições sobre o que vem a ser um modelo. “Um modelo é uma 
representação da realidade projetado para algum propósito definido”. Esta 
definição também é criticada por estar incompleta, uma vez que não 
contextualiza a modelagem dentro da administração. Neste sentido, Pidd 
(1996) gerou uma nova definição: “Um modelo é uma representação da 
realidade que é planejada para ser usada por alguém no entendimento, 
mudança, gerenciamento e controle desta realidade”. É lembrado neste caso 
que um modelo nunca será igual a realidade, pois caso contrário, teríamos 
duas realidades e não um modelo, logo, a partir dessa premissa Pidd (1996) 
gera uma nova definição: “Um modelo é uma representação de parte da 
realidade vista pelas pessoas que desejam usá-la para entender, mudar, 
gerenciar e controlar aquela parte da realidade”.  

42 
 



 
Por fim, Pidd (1996) propõe um refinamento desta definição, uma vez que um 
modelo envolve a percepção, na qual, muitos de nós movimentamos a vida 
com um conjunto de considerações que formam nosso arranjo mental, o que 
leva a portar modelos mentais informais do mundo. No entanto, estas 
considerações pessoais não cabem num modelo de tomada de decisão 
gerencial, com isso chegou-se a seguinte definição: “Um modelo é uma 
representação externa e explícita de parte da realidade vista pela pessoa que 
deseja usar aquele modelo para entender, mudar, gerenciar e controlar parte 
daquela realidade”. 
 
No entanto, outros autores utilizam conceitos diversos para definir modelos de 
simulação. Para Chwif e Medina (2006), um modelo de simulação é uma 
abstração da realidade, que se aproxima do verdadeiro comportamento do 
sistema, mas sempre mais simples que o sistema real. 
 
Gottfried (1984) define simulação como sendo uma atividade por meio da qual 
se pode obter inferências a respeito do comportamento de um sistema, por 
meio de um modelo correspondente, cuja relação de causa e efeito são as 
mesmas que ocorrem no sistema em estudo. 
 
Banks et al.. (1998) descrevem um modelo como sendo uma representação de 
um sistema real. Porém, imediatamente, surge uma preocupação sobre limites 
ou fronteiras do modelo que supostamente representam o sistema. Neste caso, 
os autores acrescentam que o modelo deve ser complexo o suficiente para 
responder às questões levantadas, mas não muito complexo. 
 
Freitas Filho, (2008) por sua vez considera como completa a definição que 
simulação é o processo de projetar um modelo computacional de um sistema 
real e conduzir experimentos com este modelo com o propósito de entender 
seu comportamento e/ou avaliar estratégias para sua avaliação. 
 
Kelton et al.. (2007) descrevem que a simulação refere-se a uma ampla 
coleção de métodos e aplicações para imitar o comportamento de sistemas 
reais, geralmente em um computador com o software apropriado. 
 
Obviamente que as definições acima não são exaustivas, os autores e 
estudiosos desse assunto buscam a cada dia complementa-las e torna-las 
mais completas, adequando cada um a sua necessidade de estudo. 
 

3.5.2. Objetivo da Simulação e da Modelagem de Sistemas 
 
A simulação é um dos diversos métodos existentes utilizados para estudar e 
analisar sistemas, o qual não compreende somente a construção do modelo, 
mas todo o método experimental. Para Freitas Filho (2008), a simulação 
computacional permite os estudos sejam desenvolvidos sobre sistemas que 
ainda não existem, levando ao desenvolvimento de projetos eficientes antes 
que qualquer mudança física tenha sido iniciada. 
 

43 
 



De acordo com Pinho et al.. (2009) a modelagem pode ser usada para um 
melhor entendimento e representação uniforme da empresa; suporte ao projeto 
de novas partes da organização ou até para apoiar o controle e monitoramento 
das operações da empresa. 
 
A técnica de simulação e seus conceitos básicos são, em geral, facilmente 
compreensíveis e justificáveis, para todos os envolvidos no processo de 
tomada de decisão. Para Freitas Filho (2008), em contraste com modelos de 
otimização, um modelo de simulação é executado ao invés de resolvido. As 
diferenças dessas duas abordagens implicam que o modelo simulado permite 
análises quase que a todo instante, à medida que novas indagações sobre o 
comportamento do sistema são criadas. 
 
Quanto a aplicação, o campo da simulação é muito amplo, Cwhif e Medina 
(2006) dividem em dois grandes setores as áreas de aplicação, a saber: 
manufatura e serviços. Por sua vez Freitas Filho (2008) sugere que modelos de 
simulação possam ser aplicados a inúmeros sistemas, entre eles: sistemas de 
produção; sistemas de transportes e estocagem; sistemas computacionais; 
sistemas administrativos e sistemas de prestação de serviços diretos ao 
público. 
 
Machado e Yonamine (2003) descrevem que como em outras abordagens de 
modelagem, a simulação computacional é utilizada pelo seu reduzido custo 
quando comparada com a mudança física direta, que pode impactar em 
retrabalhos com perdas muito grandes. Portanto, a idéia básica é ter uma 
ferramenta para auxílio a tomada de decisão, isto é , a simulação busca ser 
uma base para inferir questões do tipo what if. Neste sentido a Figura 20 
mostra o conceito de simulação como base para experimentação. 
 
 

Input Modelos de Output 

Simulação 

Experimentação e 
Retroalimentação  

 
 
Figura 20 – Esquemático Conceitual de Simulação. 
Fonte: Adaptado de Machado e Yonamine (2003 p. 9) 
 
Machado e Yonamine (2003) resumem em seu trabalho, algumas 
características em relação aos sistemas na qual o uso da simulação é 
recomendado: 
 

• Dinâmicos: de uma forma geral os sistemas tendem a se comportar 
como processos estocásticos, isto é, tendem a ter um comportamento 
variável ao longo do tempo. Logo, esta variação pode estar associada a 

44 
 



fatores controláveis, que exigem um tratamento estatístico para que se 
possa simular seu comportamento. 

 
• Interativos: esse tipo de sistema possui componentes que interagem 

entre si, afetando o comportamento do sistema como um todo.  
 

• Complicados: para que seja válida uma análise por meio de uma 
ferramenta de simulação, o problema deve ser complexo, envolvendo 
um número de complicações tal que não seja trivial a resolução deste 
por técnicas mais diretas. 

 
Quanto a classificação dos modelos de simulação, Kelton e Sadowski (2002), 
apresentam em três dimensões distintas, que podem servir de auxílio para o 
pesquisador: 
 

• Estática ou dinâmica: estáticos são modelos que visam representar o 
estado de um sistema em um instante que suas formulações não 
consideram a variável tempo, enquanto que modelos dinâmicos são 
formulados para representarem as alterações de estado do sistema ao 
longo do tempo da simulação. 

 
• Discreta ou Continua: modelos discretos são aqueles em que o avanço 

da contagem de tempo na simulação se dá na forma de incrementos, na 
qual seus valores podem ser definidos em função da ocorrência dos 
eventos ou pela determinação de um valor fixo. Nestes casos só é 
possível determinar os valores das variáveis de estado do sistema nos 
instantes de atualização da contagem do tempo. Nos modelos contínuos 
o avanço do tempo na simulação dar-se-á de forma contínua, o que 
possibilita determinar os valores das variáveis a qualquer instante. 

 
• Determinística ou Estocástica: Modelos determinísticos são os que em 

suas formulações não são utilizadas variáveis aleatórias, ao passo que 
os estocásticos fazem uso de uma ou mais dessas variáveis. 

 
Guerra et al.. (2010) propõe que a simulação deve descrever o comportamento 
dos sistemas, neste sentido, comentam que as seguintes etapas são 
usualmente empregadas no desenvolvimento dos modelos de simulação de 
modo a garantir sua eficiência, a saber: 
 

• Definição do problema – é a etapa onde ocorre a definição clara das 
metas do trabalho, por que se está estudando este problema e quais 
respostas buscam-se encontrar; 

 
• Planejamento do projeto – busca-se verificar a existência de recursos 

físicos, humanos e técnicos para a execução do projeto; 
 

• Definição do sistema – nesta etapa ocorre a determinação das 
fronteiras, das restrições a serem usadas na definição do sistema e 
como este funciona; 

 

45 
 



• Formulação conceitual do modelo – nesta etapa é desenvolvido um 
modelo preliminar de forma gráfica, para definir os componentes, as 
variáveis e as interações lógicas que constituem o sistema; 

 
• Projeto experimental preliminar – é a seleção das medidas de eficiência 

que serão empregadas, os fatores a serem variados e quais dados 
precisam ser colhidos do modelo, de forma e em que extensão; 

 
• Preparação dos dados de entrada – consiste na identificação e coleta 

dos dados necessários pelo modelo; 
 

• Tradução do modelo – é a formulação do modelo em uma linguagem de 
simulação apropriada; 

 
• Verificação e validação – consiste numa das etapas essenciais do 

processo. Busca-se a confirmação de que o modelo opera da forma que 
o analista pretendia e que a saída do modelo é confiável e 
representativa de um sistema real. A verificação mostra que o programa 
se desempenhou como esperado e pretendido, fornecendo uma correta 
representação lógica do modelo.  Enquanto que a validação estabelece 
que o modelo representa de forma válida o sistema do mundo real que 
está sendo simulado; 

 
• Projeto final experimental – visa projetar experimentos que irão gerar as 

informações desejadas e determinar como cada uma das “corridas” 
especificadas no projeto serão executadas; 

 
• Experimentações – consiste em executar a simulação para gerar os 

desejados e realizar análises de sensibilidade; 
 

• Análise e interpretação – busca-se realizar inferências sobre os dados 
obtidos pela simulação; e 

 
• Implementação e documentação – é a disponibilização e aplicação dos 

dados utilizados e dos seus resultados obtidos. 
 
A simulação de modelos estocásticos apresenta, a cada execução, um dentre 
vários possíveis resultados. Para Freitas Filho (2008) a correta condução 
dessas execuções passa por todo um procedimento e tratamento estatístico 
obrigatório nesse tipo de abordagem. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46 
 



4. REVISÃO BIBLIOGRÁFICA 
 
Problemas de simulação são comuns no meio acadêmico, no tocante a 
simulação de terminais marítimos, Batista (2005) em seu trabalho cita algumas 
publicações que utilizaram linguagens de programação para esta finalidade. 
Porém, quando o tema é direcionado para a simulação aplicada à terminais de 
apoio offshore, poucos são os trabalhos encontrados na literatura acadêmica. 
Portanto, buscou-se apresentar pela bibliografia consultada, as publicações 
acadêmicas que mais se aproximaram do tema em questão. 
 

4.1. Aplicação da Simulação em Terminais Marítimos 
 
No tocante a simulação em terminais portuários, Novaes et al.. (2003) discutem 
as vantagens e desvantagens do uso de modelos de filas e simulação em 
estudo do planejamento de terminais marítimos de contêineres. É abordado 
que o modelo de filas tem sido amplamente utilizado para estimar tempos 
médios de espera de navios nos portos e a medida que o manuseio das cargas 
se torna mais especializado, a modelagem tem se tornado mais complexa. 
 
Machado e Yonamine (2003) apresentam de forma teórica a logística do 
downstream da Petrobras, com foco em fluxos de petróleo e seus derivados, 
desde a chegada de petróleos aos terminais marítimos e aos terminais 
terrestres até os pontos de vendas para distribuidoras, grandes clientes ou 
terminais de exportação. Neste estudo, é desenvolvido um modelo de 
simulação, com o uso do Arena,  representativo da região de São Paulo, onde 
são analisados os impactos nas decisões a fim de antever o comportamento do 
sistema sobre diferentes condições operacionais. 
 
Batista (2005) por sua vez busca validar um modelo de simulação aplicável à 
análise operacional de embarcações de apoio marítimo da bacia de Campos. É 
utilizado o software Arena para simular o sistema, onde a modelagem 
representa a movimentação das embarcações, quanto à operação no píer e a 
criação de filas para atracação no Terminal Alfandegado de Imbetiba, em 
Macaé-RJ. 
 
Carvalho (2006) propõe analisar as potencialidades e vantagens do uso da 
modelagem e simulação computacional em operações logísticas complexas 
como ferramenta de auxílio à tomada de decisões. O estudo foi baseado num 
estudo de caso no pólo petroquímico de Camaçari-BA, a partir do 
carregamento e expedição de caminhões com produtos graneis e embalados. 
Neste caso, a operação foi considerada complexa face ao grande de volume e 
diversidade de carregamento simultâneo, além do contra-fluxo dos caminhões 
que foi considerado um fator gerador de risco de acidente de trabalho. 
 
Christiansen et al. (2007) escrevem um capítulo sobre transporte marítimo, no 
handbook sobre pesquisa operacional e modelos de simulação. Neste capítulo 
discutem vários aspectos das operações com transporte marítimo, problemas 
associados a tomada de decisão e modelos com ênfase na roteirização e 

47 
 



previsões. Os autores apresentam uma revisão sucinta da bibliografia do tema 
e concluem que relatórios de pesquisa sobre cadeia de suprimento marítima na 
literatura são escassos. Com relação a cadeia de óleo, os autores apresentam 
três tipos de modelos: (a) crude supply – modelos para geração ótima em 
tempo curto para previsões de suprimento de óleo cru; (b) tanker lightering – 
modelos de transferência com petroleiros; e (c) petroleum products distribution 
– modelo de simulação desenvolvido para análise de distribuição de produtos 
pelo mar. 
 
Brito (2007), no entanto, apresenta de forma conceitual como a simulação 
computacional pode ser utilizada como ferramenta em um estudo de análise de 
capacidade. São destacados os desafios do processo de planejamento 
estratégico de capacidade nas organizações, além do exemplo da aplicação da 
simulação em uma planta de derivados de petróleo a partir do seu processo 
produtivos até a expedição por meio de um porto de carga geral, onde são 
indicadas restrições quanto ao número máximo de navios que podem ser 
atracados e carregados ao mesmo tempo. 
 
Mendes (2007) aborda um problema de roteirização e programação de 
veículos, incorporando uma nova restrição operacional, aplicado às operações 
de apoio a exploração e produção de petróleo offshore. Neste caso, mais de 
uma embarcação é requerida para executar suas tarefas de reboque e 
lançamento de linhas ancoragem. A programação é orientada para 
minimização dos custos variáveis da operação e dos custos associados ao 
nível de serviço no atendimento. Para tanto o problema é modelado por meio 
do algoritmo branch and cut  acoplado às heurísticas de busca em vizinhança 
local branching e variable neighborhood seach. 
 
O porto de Sevilha, considerado no estudo de Cortés et al. (2007), é um porto 
fluvial localizado no rio Guadalquivir, no sul da Espanha, e é o único porto 
fluvial espanhol. O estudo enfatizou a simulação do transporte de mercadorias, 
processo esse que começa com o movimento por meio de todo o estuário do 
rio e termina com as embarcações que chegam ao porto, onde a logística de 
operações de carga e descarga acontece. A simulação apresentada no 
trabalho é realizada com o software Arena e considera todos os tipos de cargas 
existentes no porto de Sevilha: contâineres, cereais, cimentos, sucata, ferro, 
aço e fertilizantes. Foi simulada a navegação pelo estuário do Guadalquivir, o 
bloqueio, as bacias e as docas do porto, bem como as atividades logísticas nos 
berços. Após testar vários cenários, pôde-se afirmar que as instalações do 
porto de Sevilha permitem lidar com a entrada de fluxos logísticos, com 
exceção de dificuldades momentâneas no tráfego de contêineres. 
 
Hamacher et al.. (2008), apresentam um modelo de programação matemática 
para o planejamento estratégico da cadeia de petróleo no Brasil. O modelo 
contemplou as refinarias e suas unidades de processos, as propriedades dos 
petróleos e derivados, a logística nacional, incluindo os sistema dutoviário e 
comercialização. O modelo foi aplicado a uma rede logística composta por 
terminais terrestres e marítimos, bases de distribuição primárias e secundárias 
e dutovias. 
 

48 
 



Com o propósito de analisar a operação do Porto do Rio Grande, Lemke (2008) 
apresentou seu estudo a partir da simulação com o uso do software Arena. A 
dissertação foi desenvolvida em vários terminais dentro do complexo portuário 
de Rio Grande com o objetivo de comparar os resultados obtidos pela técnica 
de Teoria de Filas com a técnica de simulação, onde foram analisados os 
intervalos de chegada e os tempos de atendimento das embarcações. 
 
Wanke (2008) realizou análise das estatísticas de espera de navios e nos 
custos totais de sobrestadia sob diferentes aspectos de alocação de 
ancoradouro e prioridades de fila, através da utilização da simulação com 
Arena, com o propósito de redução dos custos de demurrage (demora ou 
retenção no porto, de um navio mercante, além do tempo especificado).  
 
Barros et al.. (2009) investigam o problema da alocação de navios a berços no 
complexo industrial portuário marítimo de São Luis. Foi desenvolvido um 
modelo matemático formalização do problema utilizando-se uma heurística 
baseada em simulated annealing e as soluções foram derivadas a partir de 
ferramentas de programação linear. 
 
Aas et al. (2009) baseiam seus estudos nas operações de apoio offshore no 
Mar do Norte, onde afirmam que as companhias petrolíferas estão 
gradualmente dando mais foco à otimização de sua logística upstream. 
Entretanto, relatam a existência de poucas pesquisas nesta área e 
argumentam que deve ser dado mais atenção a um elevado elemento de custo 
da cadeia de suprimento offshore, as embarcações de apoio. No estudo os 
autores, analisaram os supply vessels como meio de transporte de cargas 
realizando uma análise da logística baseada no seu uso na Noruega. 
 
Os trabalhos apresentados por Ignácio e Neves (2009) e Silva et al. (2010) tem 
características muito similares ao deste estudo, pois apresentam o uso da 
simulação no dimensionamento da capacidade de um terminal portuário. Sendo 
que os primeiros abordaram um porto operando com cargas pesadas, minério 
de ferro, produtos siderúrgicos e carvão, enquanto os demais apresentam um 
modelo de simulação discreta empregado como ferramenta de apoio à tomada 
de decisão e ao diagnóstico de operações do Terminal Alfandegado de 
Imbetiba.  
 
Kaiser (2010) propõe desenvolver uma metodologia estruturada para 
quantificar o número de embarcações de apoio offshore e partidas de barcos 
de tripulação para atividades no Golfo do México. A rede logística é modelada 
como um sistema determinístico linear que não varia com o tempo e 
implementado usando um modelo de entradas e saídas. 
 
Pant et al.. (2011) descrevem o efeito adverso no fluxo de mercadoria inter-
regional que resultam em desordem interna no porto de Catoosa em 
Oklahoma-EUA. Os autores fizeram uma integração de dois modelos, um 
baseado nos riscos da inoperabilidade multiregional, o outro nas operações 
portuárias de chegada de mercadorias, descarga, separação e distribuição. 
Cada modelo gerou três cenários de desordem no porto e forneceram medidas 
de impacto das indústrias que usavam as instalações internas do porto. 

49 
 



 
Sun et al. (2012) abordam a importância de terminais de contêineres para a 
atual economia. Segundo os autores, terminais portuários de contêineres são 
nós essenciais nas redes de transporte de cargas marítimas. Por essa razão, a 
eficiência operacional desses terminais na movimentação de contêineres 
desempenha um papel crucial em uma economia mundial globalizada. 
Utilizando como justificativa a importância dos terminais de contêineres, o 
trabalho afirma que modelos e algoritmos foram desenvolvidos para tratar 
problemas de decisão naqueles terminais de forma a melhorar sua eficiência 
operacional. Estas ferramentas de apoio à decisão são normalmente utilizadas 
separadamente para fins específicos. Logo, o objetivo do trabalho foi 
apresentar uma plataforma de simulação geral, nomeado MicroPort, que visa 
proporcionar um sistema de modelagem integrada e flexível para a avaliação 
da capacidade operacional e da eficiência de diferentes modelos de terminais 
de contêineres. 
 
Neste sentido Carteni e Luca (2012) explanam sobre a diferença entre as 
abordagens de otimização e simulação quando se trata de um terminal de 
contêineres e as vantagens que a abordagem de simulação possui. Os autores 
apresentam o objetivo do trabalho, que foi mostrar diferentes modelos de 
simulação de eventos discretos para um terminal de contêineres. O foco 
principal foi sobre qual seria a melhor abordagem para simular a duração do 
tempo das atividades de movimentação de cargas e que nível de detalhe deve 
ser perseguido com relação a diferentes horizontes de planejamento que um 
tomador de decisão tem que enfrentar. Toda a simulação foi realizada no 
software Witness. 
 
Com base no levantamento bibliográfico, até o momento, percebe-se que 
poucos trabalhos foram desenvolvidos voltados para área de apoio offshore. 
Sendo que a grande maioria dos trabalhos tem como foco o desenvolvimento 
de modelos para simulação do tempo de espera e alocação nos berços em 
portos. 
 
No entanto, não foram encontrados até o momento trabalhos que buscam a 
atender ao mesmo e objetivo e hipótese deste estudo, qual seja, avaliar a 
melhor opção para investimentos em terminais de apoio offshore a partir da 
avaliação de seus indicadores de despenho. 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 



5. METODOLOGIA  
 
A metodologia de pesquisa é definida por Rodrigues (2007) como um conjunto 
de abordagens, técnicas e processos utilizados pela ciência para formular e 
resolver problemas de aquisição objetiva do conhecimento, de uma maneira 
sistemática. 
 
A metodologia é um dos pontos que mais requer atenção na elaboração de um 
trabalho científico, pois o autor necessita informar claramente como, quando e 
em que condições os procedimentos foram seguidos, informando ainda o 
período e o local da realização da pesquisa. De forma a permitir ao leitor 
reconstituir o processamento dos métodos empregados, sendo sintético, claro 
e preciso. 
 
Para desenvolvimento deste estudo e buscando responder aos objetivos 
propostos, os procedimentos metodológicos serão, basicamente, divididos em 
cinco fases: 
 

a. Revisão da literatura sobre os temos pertinentes a este trabalho, tipo: o 
gerenciamento da cadeia de suprimentos, o transporte marítimo, a 
logística de apoio offshore e o processo de simulação, onde serão 
investigados e analisados materiais disponíveis em publicações, 
dissertações, teses, periódicos especializados e websites, além de 
pesquisas anteriores realizadas no meio acadêmico referentes ao tema 
em questão; 

b. Levantamento do problema, onde será realizado um estudo empírico, 
sendo utilizado o método do estudo de caso, baseado em entrevistas e 
coleta de dados sobre a operação do terminal de apoio offshore em 
estudo, uma vez que para se obter os dados da simulação é necessária 
uma busca exploratória para entendimento da operação e criação do 
modelo;  

c. Elaboração, validação, teste e criação de cenários do modelo de 
simulação; 

d. Consolidação dos dados dos cenários simulados e avaliação do melhor 
tipo de investimento a ser considerado no porto; e 

e. Análise dos resultados e conclusão do estudo. 
 

No estudo desenvolvido por Rodrigues (2007), uma pesquisa científica pode 
ser dividida nas seguintes modalidades: 
 

• Pesquisa de campo - É a observação dos fatos tal como ocorrem. Não 
permite isolar e controlar as variáveis, mas perceber e estudar as 
relações estabelecidas. 

• Experimental - Objetiva criar condições para interferir no aparecimento 
ou na modificação dos fatos, para poder explicar o que ocorre com 
fenômenos correlacionados. 

• Bibliográfica - Recupera o conhecimento científico acumulado sobre um 
problema. 

51 
 



 
Rodrigues (2007), ainda relaciona os objetivos de cada modalidade de 
pesquisa: 
 
Pesquisa exploratória 
 

• Proporcionar maior familiaridade com o problema 
• Levantamento bibliográfico ou entrevistas 
• Pesquisa bibliográfica ou estudo de caso 

 
Pesquisa descritiva 
 

• Fatos são observados, registrados, analisados, classificados e 
interpretados, sem interferência do pesquisador 

• Uso de técnicas padronizadas de coleta de dados (questionário e 
observação sistemática) 

 
Pesquisa explicativa 
 

• Identificar fatores determinantes para a ocorrência dos fenômenos 
• Ciências naturais (método experimental); ciências sociais (método 

observacional). 
 
De forma complementar, Marangoni (2010, p. 61) relata em seu trabalho que a 
pesquisa exploratória tem o objetivo de “explorar ou fazer uma busca em um 
problema ou em uma situação para prover critérios e maior compreensão”. 
 
Neste sentido, este trabalho tem natureza exploratória uma vez que há 
necessidade de maior conhecimento sobre a operação do terminal, além disso, 
há a dificuldade em obter dados e estudos específicos na literatura acadêmica 
que abordam diretamente este assunto. 
 
Assim, a modalidade de pesquisa é justificada por não terem sido encontrados 
muitos estudos que abordem o tema central deste trabalho, qual seja, a 
simulação de um terminal de apoio offshore. O que se observa na literatura são 
trabalhos que abordam terminais de contêineres, granéis, minérios e óleo.  
 
Para a realização de trabalhos acadêmicos, segundo Rodrigues (2007), quanto 
à forma de abordagem, as pesquisas podem ser divididas em quantitativas e 
qualitativas. 
 
A abordagem qualitativa, de acordo com Marangoni (2010), o modelo 
qualitativo, pode ser empregado em pesquisas cujo objetivo seja a descrição 
da complexidade de um fenômeno, analisar a influência mútua entre as 
variáveis, compreender os processos e verificar o comportamento dos 
indivíduos no sistema. 
 
Já a análise quantitativa, para Campomar (1991), procura-se encontrar 
medidas em populações e quando, por limitação de recursos, isso não se torna 
diretamente possível, procura-se encontrar essas medidas por meio de 

52 
 



inferência estatística, usando-se amostras de população e testes paramétricos 
ou não-paramétricos de inferência. 
 
Rodrigues (2007) resume os objetivos da forma de abordagem de uma 
pesquisa em: 
 

Pesquisa quantitativa 
 

• Traduz em números as opiniões e informações para serem classificadas 
e analisadas  

• Utilizam-se técnicas estatísticas 
 
Pesquisa qualitativa  
 

• É descritiva  
• As informações obtidas não podem ser quantificáveis 
• Os dados obtidos são analisados de forma indutiva 
• A interpretação dos fenômenos e a atribuição de significados são 

básicas no processo de pesquisa qualitativa 
 
Assim, este estudo terá como base o uso compartilhado das duas abordagens 
metodológicas, por um lado será necessário utilizar análise qualitativa para 
obtenção de informações sobre a operação do terminal e por outro lado, a 
análise quantitativa será necessária para determinação dos tempos e 
capacidades que abastecem os indicadores operacionais do terminal. 
 
Logo, para obtenção das informações inerentes a operação portuária será 
utilizada a técnica de Estudo de Caso, que é definida por Yin (2001, p. 32) 
como, uma investigação empírica que investiga um fenômeno contemporâneo 
dentro de seu contexto da vida real, especialmente quando os limites entre 
fenômeno e o contexto não estão claramente definidos, podendo haver mais 
variáveis de interesse do que pontos de dados. 
 
Portanto, neste trabalho, o método de estudo de caso se aplica visto a 
necessidade de obter informações pertinentes à operação do terminal 
portuário, onde serão realizadas coletas de dados operacionais para obtenção 
de dados e parâmetros para a elaboração do modelo de simulação.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 



6. DESCRIÇÃO DO MODELO 
 
 
A representação de um modelo a partir da simulação computacional, de acordo 
com Freitas Filho (2008) deve ser efetuada conforme as etapas descritas no 
item 3.5.2 do presente trabalho, com o propósito de atribuir maior consistência 
e organização ao estudo efetuado. 
 
Então, a seguir serão apresentadas as etapas do estudo onde é analisado o 
cenário que representa a realidade atual do porto estudado. Neste trabalho 
essa “realidade” será tratada como “cenário atual” e apresentado o modelo de 
simulação construído para representa-lo. Nesta parte do trabalho será 
realizada a validação do modelo computacional, para que se tenha um bom 
nível de certeza de que ele consegue representar a realidade, com o objetivo 
de verificar como o cenário atual irá comportar-se diante do aumento do 
número de berços e do aumento de área de armazenagem. 
 
 

6.1. Formulação e Análise do Problema 
 
O crescente aumento da demanda por serviços logísticos na indústria do 
petróleo no Brasil vem impactando diversos elos da cadeia de suprimentos, 
neste sentido, o terminal estudado também vem sofrendo impactos em sua 
rotina operacional, uma vez que o aumento na quantidade de cargas 
movimentadas gera um considerável aumento no número de caminhões e 
barcos, além de demandar mais áreas para armazenagem dessas cargas. 
 
O presente trabalho pondera sobre cinco distintos cenários que serão 
modelados utilizando simulação computacional. Cada um deles é detalhado e 
analisado de acordo com as etapas propostas na metodologia constante em 
Freitas Filho (2008). 
 
Considerando o fluxo de movimentação de cargas de um terminal portuário sob 
a ótica de processo produtivo, pode-se identificar como dois possíveis 
“gargalos” o tempo de permanência dos barcos no berço e o total de carga 
movimentada no terminal. Estas variáveis merecem atenção, pois estão 
atreladas às medidas de desempenho e consequentemente refletem os 
resultados financeiros do porto. 
 
Portanto, o objeto de estudo é o fluxo operacional no porto, desde o momento 
do recebimento da carga até o momento em que a carga é liberada e 
embarcada. 
 
Basicamente, as principais respostas buscadas neste estudo dizem respeito a 
verificação da melhor opção de investimento no caso de uma ampliação do 
porto, considerando as opções de aumentar o número de berços ou aumentar 
a área de armazenagem. 
 

54 
 



Para execução do trabalho foi considerada a premissa que de acordo com o 
fluxo atual de operação no terminal, este possui condições de aumentar sua 
oferta de berços em mais 1 (uma) unidade e também aumentar sua oferta de 
área de armazenagem em até 40 %. 
 
O presente estudo foca somente o processo de recebimento e movimentação 
de cargas dentro do porto, além das cargas recebidas das embarcações 
(backload), abastecimento de água e diesel dos barcos. Logo, o trabalho não 
contempla o processo de atendimento às UM´s, referente as rotas das 
embarcações, origem e destino das cargas e os procedimentos de tratamento 
das cargas fora da área portuária. 
 
 

6.2. Planejamento do Projeto 
 
 
O presente estudo considera cinco distintos cenários independentes que serão 
modelados por meio de simulação computacional.  
 
O modelo inicial representa o cenário atual. Seu objetivo é a comprovação de 
que os resultados obtidos no modelo real podem ser repetidos no modelo 
simulado. A validação deste cenário será comprovada por meio de 
confrontação dos resultados obtidos no modelo simulado com os resultados 
obtidos na coleta de dados. Dessa forma, após a validação, quando se tem a 
confiança de que o modelo computacional reflete a realidade, pode-se realizar 
experimentos que fornecerão informações cujo resultados serão utilizados nas 
conclusões do estudo. 
 
O segundo modelo simula a possibilidade de ampliação de um berço no 
terminal mantendo a atual área de recebimento de cargas. Nele é verificado o 
impacto nos indicadores de desempenho do porto, e consequentemente, qual o 
reflexo na capacidade de atendimento. Por sua vez, o terceiro modelo relata o 
modelo anterior com o acréscimo de uma linha extra para abastecimento de 
diesel, ou seja, permitindo que mais de uma embarcação possa realizar essa 
operação simultaneamente. O cenário quatro reflete a proposta de aumento de 
área de armazenagem em 20%, mantendo o número atual de berços. Por fim o 
cenário cinco extrapola a possibilidade real de aquisição de área contigua ao 
terminal e propõe um aumento de 40% na área de pátio original. 
 
Dessa forma após o detalhamento de cada modelo serão apresentados os 
resultados comparativos, buscando subsídios para identificação de qual 
cenário oferece a melhor opção de investimento. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 



6.3. Formulação do Modelo Conceitual e Tradução do Modelo 
 
 
A Figura 21 apresenta um diagrama com o resumo do modelo elaborado. Nele 
são apresentadas as variáveis que serão consideradas como entrada do 
sistema bem como as variáveis resultantes. 

 
Figura 21 – Simplificação do Modelo Conceitual do Sistema 
 
As principais variáveis de entrada são: 
 

1. Chegada de Carretas – esta variável representa o intervalo de tempo 
entre a chegada de uma carreta e sua passagem pela portaria do porto. 
 

2. Chegada de Barcos – esta variável representa o intervalo de tempo 
entre chegadas das embarcações no fundeio. 
 

3. Chegada de Balsas de Diesel – representa o intervalo de tempo entre as 
chegadas da balsa para abastecimento dos tanques de diesel do 
terminal. A balsa somente atraca no dolphim e durante seu 
descarregamento são permitidas todas as operações no porto. 
 

4. Tipo de Barco – as embarcações são carregadas de acordo com sua 
finalidade. Embarcações tipo AHTS são utilizadas para cargas especiais 
(ancoragem) e atracam no píer 3, por sua vez barcos tipo PSV podem 
atracar em qualquer píer que esteja livre (1, 2 ou 3), assim como os 
barcos classificados como outros. Por sua vez, barcos tipo PSV que 
carregam cimento, somente podem atracar no píer 1 em função da 
localização dos silos cimento. Somente é abastecida, com diesel, uma 
embarcação por vez e quando este barco estiver sendo abastecido não 
poderá ser efetuada outra operação simultânea de carregamento 
naquele barco. 
 

5. Carga Recebida no Porto – as cargas foram classificadas em: cimento, 
produtos químicos, carga geral, ancoragem/cargas especiais e tubos. 
Carretas que chegam vazias ao terminal, para buscar backload são 
classificadas como sem carga. 

 

56 
 

EntradaSaída



 
As principais variáveis resultantes do sistema são: 
 

1. Quantidade de Barcos Atendidos – informa a quantidade de barcos 
atendidos mensalmente no porto, somando-se os atendimentos aos 3 
berços e dolphin. 
 

2. Taxa de Ocupação do Píer – informa o percentual do tempo em que os 
berços permaneceram ocupados por alguma operação portuária. 
 

3. Total de Carga Embarcada – informa o total de carga, em toneladas, que 
foi embarcada de acordo com o tipo de carga classificada. 
 

4. Tempo de ocupação dos Berços – informa o tempo médio que a 
embarcações permaneceram atracada aguardando seu processo de 
carregamento. 
 

5. Tempo de Ciclo das Carretas – Informa o tempo médio que as carretas 
permanecem dentro da área do porto. 
 

6. Total de Carretas que chegaram – Informa o total de carretas que 
chegaram ao porto. 
 

7. Total de cargas recebidas no porto – informa a quantidade total de 
cargas que chegaram no porto. 

 
 
O terminal funciona initerruptamente 24 horas/dia em três turnos de trabalho, e 
o recebimento das carretas obedece a ordem de chegada das mesmas. 
Constatou-se que no período entre 06 horas da manhã e 22 horas ocorre a 
chegada de carretas, ou seja, havendo maior taxa de utilização dos recursos 
nesse período. De qualquer forma, para o modelo, foi considerada a 
movimentação nas 24 horas do dia, num período de 4 meses, abrangendo 
aproximadamente 100% das carretas recebidas no porto. 
 
As carretas chegam de forma aleatória independente do tipo de carga, ao 
chegar ao porto o caminhoneiro estaciona fora do terminal e se encaminha a 
portaria para realização do CVP – Cadastro de Veículos Pesados, que é uma 
ficha cadastral para identificação do carro, da carga e do motorista. Na 
sequencia o motorista, já cadastrado, segue para entrada no terminal, seguindo 
para conferência da carga, pesagem e posterior descarregamento. 
 
As cargas depois de conferidas e pesadas são encaminhadas para seu local de 
armazenagem, organizado por tipo de carga. Quando há falta de espaço na 
área a carreta aguarda liberação de área ou descarrega em outro local, ficando 
esta ação a critério do supervisor de pátio. Após descarga da carreta, o 
motorista verifica se haverá carregamento de backload, em caso afirmativo ele 
recolhe o produto pesa e sai do porto, caso contrário, pesa a carreta vazia e 
sai. 
 

57 
 



A Figura 22 representa um fluxo esquemático do recebimento de cargas via 
carretas, que é composto pelas seguintes etapas. 
 

 
 

Figura 22 – Representação Conceitual do Recebimento de Cargas 
 

• Chegada da carreta – esta etapa se inicia com a chegada do caminhão 
na portaria do porto. Nesta fase os motoristas aguardam na ordem de 
chegada para cadastramento do veículo e carga. Mesmo no caso de 
veículos pré-cadastrados, o processo é necessário, porém mais ágil. 

 
• Cadastro de Veículos Pesados – CVP – o tempo desta operação é 

calculado a partir do preenchimento do cadastro até a liberação de 
acesso. Cabe ressaltar que o não é considerado nesta etapa a fila para 
entrada no porto. 
 

• Conferência da Carga – nesta etapa são realizadas duas atividades de 
forma paralela: a conferência física da carga, onde é avaliada a 
integridade da embalagem e das condições de transporte; e a 
conferência documental, onde é feita a verificação de nota fiscal, RT´s e 
demais documentos referentes à carga. O tempo deste processo é a 
soma das duas atividades, uma vez que a carga só é liberada quando os 
dois processo são executados com êxito. 
 

• Pesagem – neste processo as carretas são pesadas para conferência do 
peso da carga, e também para verificação do total de carga recebida no 
terminal. O tempo computado para este processo é iniciado a partir do 
momento que a carreta sobe na balança até sua saída total. 

58 
 



 
• Descarga no Pátio – nesta etapa a carga é direcionada para uma área 

específica de acordo com o tipo de carga e computado seu peso no 
estoque. O tempo desta etapa é considerado a partir da liberação da 
carreta pela balança até o descarregamento da varga, incluindo a fila de 
espera aguardando área de pátio. 
 

• Carrega Backload – o tempo desse processo é computado a partir do 
posicionamento da carreta na área de carregamento até o carregamento 
completo. 
 

 
As etapas descritas são executas de forma sequencial, ou seja, a etapa 
seguinte somente inicia após a conclusão da anterior. 
 
Contudo, de maneira complementar a Figura 23 representa o fluxo 
esquemático do embarque de cargas nas embarcações de apoio, que é 
composto pelas seguintes etapas. 
 
 
 

Chegada dos 
Barcos e Balsa

Liberação do 
Canal de Acesso

Aguarda liberação 
do píer

Descarrega 
Backload

Operações de Carga, 
Abastecimento e 

Inspeção

Abastecimento de 
Diesel

Liberação da 
Embarcação

Saída do Barco

 
 

Figura 23 – Representação do Modelo Conceitual do Embarque de Cargas 
 
 

• Chegada de Barcos e Balsa – esta etapa se inicia com a chegada das 
embarcações no fundeio e da solicitação de acesso da balsa. Nesta fase 

59 
 



as embarcações sinalizam sua chegada ao porto e aguardam sinal 
atracação.  

 
• Liberação do Canal de Acesso – este tempo é computado com base nos 

tempos entre a chamada da embarcação e a chegada o Pilot (prático de 
navegação) a bordo do barco. O tempo de permanência no fundeio é a 
soma dos tempos entre a chegada do barco ao fundeio e a liberação do 
canal de acesso, após a liberação do píer o qual o barco irá atracar. 
 

• Aguarda Liberação do Píer – trata-se do tempo que a embarcação 
aguarda para atracar, ou seja é o tempo de fila para atracação. 
 

• Desembarque de backload – é o tempo necessário para descarregar 
cargas de retorno das UM´s. Cerca de 60% das embarcações 
desembarcam algum tipo de backload. Esta etapa é sempre realizada 
antes de qualquer outra operação, salvo abastecimento de diesel, que 
pode ser realizado antes, a depender da disponibilidade da linha de 
abastecimento e do estoque no tanque. 
 

• Operações de Carga, Abastecimento e Inspeção – são operações 
distintas, com tempos distintos, estes tempos são computados a partir 
da chegada da carga ao pré-embarque, para operação de embarque de 
carga. No caso do abastecimento de água potável para o barco, este é 
realizado de forma simultânea aos demais processos, quanto a atividade 
de inspeção, é o tempo gasto para que sejam feitas as vistorias 
periódicas nos barcos (inspeção da ANVISA, Capitania dos Portos, 
Petrobras etc). 
 

• Abastecimento de Diesel – é o tempo computado deste a ocupação da 
linha de abastecimento até a sua liberação. Esta etapa ocorre de forma 
única para cada barco, ou seja, no porto só há possibilidade de 
abastecer apenas um barco por vez e o barco que está sendo 
abastecido, pode por questões de segurança operacional, somente 
realizar esta operação.   Cerca de 40% dos barcos que atracam no porto 
já chegam abastecidos com diesel, uma vez que realizam esta operação 
numa monobóia localizada na costa sul do ES. 
 

• Liberação da Embarcação – este tempo é computado entre o término 
das operações de carga/descarga e abastecimentos e a efetiva saída da 
embarcação do píer. 

 
 
De forma análoga à etapa de recebimento de carga, as etapas com as 
embarcações são executas de forma sequencial, ou seja, a etapa seguinte 
somente inicia após a conclusão da anterior, exceto para a operação de 
abastecimento de água que ocorre de forma paralela a outras operações. 
 
 

60 
 



6.3.1. Modelo Computacional 
 
 
Para o desenvolvimento desse modelo foi utilizado o software Arena 10.0 – 
versão profissional disponível na Universidade Federal de Espírito Santo – 
UFES. 
 
Assim, o desenvolvimento do modelo inicialmente foi proposto para simular a 
situação real do terminal, e posteriormente foram alteradas algumas de suas 
variáveis para representar os demais cenários. 
 
Logo, o modelo foi desenvolvido em etapas de maneira a facilitar e simplificar o 
entendimento do fluxo do processo portuário, sendo este dividido em 15 
subprocessos, a saber: 
 

1. Chegada e recebimento de carretas 
2. Conferência de cargas e documentos 
3. Pesagem 
4. Movimentação de cimento 
5. Armazenagem de tubos 
6. Armazenagem de produtos químicos 
7. Armazenagem de carga geral 
8. Armazenagem de cargas especiais (ancoragem e risers) 
9. Fornecimento e movimentação de água 
10. Chegada das embarcações no fundeio 
11. Operação de diesel no dolphim 
12. Operação no píer 1 
13. Operação no píer 2 
14. Operação no píer 3 
15. Processo de backload e retirada de resíduos 

 
No modelo, de forma geral, foram criadas quatro entidades, carretas, barcos, 
água e balsa de diesel, com intervalos de chegada representados pelas 
seguintes distribuições estatísticas apresentadas adiante na Tabela 5. 
 
A Figura 24 representa a primeira parte do modelo, onde são criadas as 
carretas que simulam os materiais que chegam e que saem do porto. 
 

61 
 



sinaliza_cimento

chegada_carretas

0      

sinaliza_sem_carga CVP - Cadastro de Veículos Pesados

Chegadas de
Carretas na

Portaria
Cadastro_CVP

sinaliza_pquimico
define_carga

Chegada de Carretas      0

0 
El s e

8 .2
7 .4 sinaliza_tubos
9 .8 Station_portaria
4 7 .7
1 8 .2

sinaliza_cgeral

liberacao_portaria

sinaliza_ancoragem Route_conferencia_br

 
 

Figura 24 – Processo de chegada e cadastramento de carretas 
 
No tocante à chegada de carretas, após o bloco create foi introduzido um bloco 
record, cuja finalidade foi realizar a contagem das entidades que chegam ao 
sistema. Na sequencia foi utilizado um decide para realizar a separação por 
tipo de carga em relação aos percentuais de carga transportada no porto, com 
base nos históricos levantados, no Gráfico 4 são apresentados os percentuais 
utilizados. 
 
Em seguida, foram utilizados blocos assign com o objetivo de promover a 
identificação das carretas por tipo de carga, logo foram inseridos dois atributos: 
carretas.peso e carretas.origem. Sendo que o primeiro indica a distribuição 
estatística que representa os pesos das cargas nas carretas e o segundo o tipo 
de carga transportada. Ao final de cada processo são utilizados blocos route, 
ou seja roteadores, que direcionam a entidade para outro local dentro do 
processo. 
 
Na continuação do modelo, a Figura 25 apresenta dois blocos create que 
indicam respectivamente a chegada dos barcos ao fundeio e chegada da balsa 
de diesel. 

62 
 



vaga cimento pier1?

barco_cimento
chegada_barcos

0      

vaga pier3?
define hora de barco_ahts

Station_fundeio
chegada no

fundeio

define pier livre
barco_psv

Chegadas de
barco no fundeio E l s e

Re s Ut i l (p i e r1 ) = =  0
Re s Ut i l (p i e r2 ) = =  0
Re s Ut i l (p i e r3 ) = =  0

C hegada de B arcos no Fundeio
define_barco

0 Aguard pier livre
outros_barcos

El s e
1 0 .5 5
9 .3 8 0      
4 8 .7 4 T ru e

Define Peso Diesel Peso Balsa
chegada balsa Diesel

diesel Dolphim livre?
balsa_diesel

0           0 F a l s e

 
 

Figura 25 – Processo de chegada de barcos e balsa de diesel 
 
Nesta etapa do processo, foram utilizados os blocos hold, cuja finalidade é 
manter a entidade em uma fila até que uma dada condição seja atendida, neste 
caso a condição é que haja píer livre para atracação dos barcos ou da balsa, e 
após a liberação do píer foi utilizado um bloco delay, afim de representar o 
tempo de percurso entre o fundeio e o píer e por fim as entidades são 
direcionadas aos processos de carga e descarga nos respectivos berços de 
atracação, figura 26. 
 

Aguard Lib
Canal e Pratico tempo_no_fundeio1 Route_pier1

1

Aguard Lib
Canal e Pratico

2 Route_pier2
tempo_no_fundeio2

Aguard Lib
Canal e Pratico

3 tempo_no_fundeio3 Route_pier3

Route_dolphim
Aguard Lib

Canal
 

 
Figura 26 – Direcionamento dos barcos e balsa para o porto 

 

63 
 



As expressões utilizadas para atendimento das condições de ocupação dos 
recursos berços são: 
 

• ResUtil(pier1) ==  0 
 

• ResUtil(pier2) ==  0 
 

• ResUtil(pier3) ==  0 
 

• ResUtil(pier1) == 0 || ResUtil(pier2) == 0 || ResUtil(pier3) == 0 
 

• ResUtil(dolphim) == 0 
 

Estas condições foram consideradas juntamente com a aplicação de blocos 
decide uma vez que nem todas as embarcações atracam em todos os berços. 
Por exemplo, as embarcações de cimento somente carregam no pier1 e as 
embarcações que irão carregar cargas especiais (ancoragem e risers) somente 
atracam no pier3, por sua vez todas as demais cargas podem utilizar os 3 
berços, quando estiverem vazios. E a balsa de diesel só atraca no dolphim, que 
tem dedicação exclusiva para esta operação. 
 
A Figura 27 indica a operação de abastecimento de óleo diesel nos tanques em 
terra do terminal portuário. 
 
 

tqdiesel tem
P ier Ocupado _espaco? abastece_tq_diesel

S tation_dolphim Dolphin Num de Barcos
Recebmto Atendidos

mensal de diesel Dolphin

Abastecer
Define hora Tqdiesel

atracacao dolphin Tempo do Barcos Saida da Barcos
Pier Livre_Dolphin Atracado Dolphin Dolphin

     0 0       
Figura 27 – Processo operacional de diesel no dolpim 

 
 
Neste processo, foi considerada a possibilidade de abastecer o tanque de 
diesel do terminal e uma embarcação em ações simultâneas. Por sua vez, não 
é possível abastecer duas embarcações ao mesmo tempo. Logo, a linha de 
diesel só é ocupada uma única vez. 
 
As demais etapas do modelo referem-se ao recebimento e movimentação de 
cargas no porto e a operação de carga e descarga nas embarcações. A Figura 
28 indica o processo de recebimento de carreta com cimento. 
 

64 
 



Station_cimento

abastec imento da
planta de c imento

Ocupa Planta
Cimento      0

atualiza_volume Recebmto mensal
planta_c imento de c imento

Silo_tem_espaco?

Libera Planta
Cimento

Route_retorna_balanca
define_carreta_saida

 
 

Figura 28 – Processo de recebimento de cimento 
 
 
Neste processo cabe ressaltar a utilização dos blocos seize e release para 
ocupação e liberação da planta respectivamente, assim como a utilização do 
bloco route ao final do processo. Neste caso a utilização do route foi 
considerada em todos os processos após a descarga das carretas, uma vez 
que as carretas são pesadas na chegada ao porto carregadas e antes da saída 
vazias. A atualização do volume do silo é feita pela seguinte expressão: 
 

• silo_cimento + carretas.peso 
 
Onde: silo_cimento é uma variável criada para representar o volume do silo e a 
carretas.peso representa o total de carga que a entidade carretas está 
transportando. Logo a cada pessagem de uma entidade o volume do silo é 
acrescido do valor correspondente ao peso da carreta, até o volume máximo do 
nível do silo, definido pelo bloco hold na seguinte expressão: 
 

• silo_cimento + carretas.peso < 360 
 
Na qual o valor 360 representa a capacidade máxima de armazenagem do silo. 
 
Dentre os dados levantados sobre as demais cargas dois foram fundamentais 
para elaboração do modelo, quais sejam a distribuição estatística dos pesos e 
dasa dimensões das cargas. Dessa forma foi possível inserir tais informações 
no modelo e nos moldes da expressão usada para atualização do peso no silo 
de cimento, foi feita a atualização do pátio com os pesos e a área ocupada 
para cada carga. A Figura 29 representa o recebimento de tubos no porto. 
 

65 
 



Estoque no Pátio (ton)
Station_tubos 0 . 0 0

descarrega_tubo Route_retorna_balanca1

     0 0      
True

atualiza_area sai ou carrega backload?
define_carreta_saida1

disponivel e
tem_espaco_patio estoque

     0 Fa ls e

Area ocupada Tubos (m²)

0.00
Route_backload1

 
 

Figura 29 – Processo de recebimento de tubos 
 
 
Esta mesma configuração foi aplicada às demais cargas, a saber: carga geral, 
produtos químicos, cargas especiais e backload oriundo das embarcações. 
Apesar de o modelo realizar o controle das variáveis peso e área, para a 
descarga e a armazenagem dos materiais, somente a variável área foi 
relevante, uma vez que esta variável foi determinante neste processo, ou seja 
se não houvesse área de pátio disponível não seria possível descarregar e a 
carreta aguardaria na fila. A expressão utilizada no bloco hold que promoveu o 
controle da variável área foi: 
 

• area_tubo + carretas.area < 2533 
 
Sendo que a variável área_tubo representa a área de pátio ocupada e 
carretas.area é o atributo da entidade carretas que é somado à área_tubo a 
cada passagem de uma  entidade, até o limite de 2533, que representa a área 
disponível para a armazenagem de tubos. 
 
Para os demais materiais foram utilizadas as seguintes expressões: 
 

• area_Pquimico + carretas.area <730 
 

• area_Cgeral + carretas.area < 4255 
 

• area_Ancoragem + carretas.area < 4913 
 
Cabe destacar que a área total do porto é de 40.000 m², incluindo edificações, 
arruamento interno, píeres, tanques e áreas de armazenagem. 
 
No caso de backload não houve a necessidade de controle de área, pois o 
processo para descarga das cargas de retorno é prioritário, independente do 
local onde serão armazenadas. Pois, é obrigatória a retirada dessa carga para 
novos embarques.  
 
Diante da necessidade de retirar o backload da área o porto, ao final da 
descarga das carretas, é feito uma checagem sobre a necessidade de 
transportar backload, logo uma carreta que chegou com material poderá sair 
carregada com backload. Assim, ao final do processo foi inserido um bloco 

66 
 



decide, para avaliar a existência de estoque de backload, a seguinte condição 
foi proposta: 
 

• Estoque_Backload - carretas.backload >= 0 
 
Onde o Estoque_Backload é uma variável que representa o estoque das 
cargas de retorno que chegaram pelas embarcações, por sua vez 
carretas.blackload é um atributo da entidade carretas, com a informação dos 
pesos transportados. 
 
Após o recebimento das cargas no terminal foram considerados os consumos 
dessas cargas, ou seja, seu embarque para atendimento às unidade marítimas. 
As Figura 30 e 31 apresentam o processo operacional modelado para o pier3, 
que será utilizado para representar o fluxo modelado para os demais píeres. 
 
 

0      
T ru e define_backload

Descarregar backload Pier3? Pier3 Define ArmTemp
backload Pier3

Station_pier3

     0 F a l s e

Pier Ocupado P ier3
Consumo de

0      Inspecao e troca Agua Pier3
Barco para Insp e Troca deT ru e de turma Pier3

Turma Pier3?
     0

Define hora Barco Recebe
atracacao Pier3      0 F a l s e Movimentar Barco Recebe Carga

0      Carga no Patio Cargas da Anc Ancoragem
T ru e

Barco da Ancoragem P ier3? para Pier3 Pier3 Pier3

     0
     0

0           0 F a l s e movimentacao Carrega barco
Barco Chegou com DieselT ru e de carga ate Barco Recebe Pier3

pier3 Cargas Pier3
Pier3

0      
T ru e      0

diesel ou carga 3?      0
     0 F a l s e

define barco com
diesel Pier3      0 F a l s e

 
 

Figura 30 – Processo operacional no píer 3 
 
 
O processo operacional nos píeres ocorre a partir da chegada da embarcação, 
neste momento foi utilizado um bloco seize para ocupar o recurso píer. A 
embarcação pode chegar ao porto já abastecida de combustível (tanque cheio) 
ou necessitando de abastecimento, portanto um bloco decide foi utilizado para 
separar os barcos, foi verificado que 60% das embarcações necessitam 
abastecer no porto. Cabe destacar, que por questões de segurança 
operacional, quando ocorre uma operação de abastecimento de diesel 
nenhuma outra é realizada em paralelo naquela embarcação, ou seja o tempo 
de permanência do barco é consideravelmente aumentado na utilização do 
recurso píer.  
 
No terminal existe uma única linha de diesel para atender aos três píeres, 
dessa forma se o barco ao atracar necessitar de abastecimento e outra 
embarcação estiver utilizando a linha de abastecimento, o barco que chegou 

67 
 



por último inicia o processo de carregamento de materiais deixando o 
abastecimento de diesel para o fim do processo. 
 
Na sequencia do processo, antes e iniciar o carregamento de materiais é feita 
nova verificação sobre a necessidade de descarregamento de backload, sendo 
que foi verificado que 60% da embarcações trazem cargas de retorno.  
 
Finalizado o processo de backload, é feita uma verificação sobre qual tipo de 
embarcação está atracada, para definição do tipo de carga que será 
embarcada e dos recursos que serão utilizados. 
 
 

0      
True 0      

Barco carregado Pier3? True
Barco abastecido Pier3?

Pier Livre_Pier3
     0 False

     0 False

pes o embarc ado
pier3

Tempo do Barc o
Atrac ado pier3

Consome D iesel
no Tq Pier3

Abas tece com
Dies el Pier3 Num de Barcos

Atendidos  Pier3

Verifica Estoque      0 Saida de Barcos
TqDiesel Pier3 Pier3

0       
 
 

Figura 31 – Processo operacional no píer 3 - continuação 
 
 
Tanto no processo de carregamento, quanto no abastecimento de diesel e 
água, para todo material que é embarcado é realizado o seu consumo no 
estoque, seja na área de pátio ou nos tanques. 
 
O embarque dos produtos é feito em função da área disponível no convés da 
embarcação, considerando que os barcos transportam vários tipos de cargas, 
também há uma variação da quantidade de cada tipo de produto que foi 
embarcado. 
 
Para exemplificar uma embarcação que recebe apenas cargas especiais, seu 
carregamento obedece as seguintes expressões: 
 

• Tq_agua - barcos.consagua 
 

• area_Ancoragem - barcos.area 
 

68 
 



• Est_Ancoragem - barcos.embarque  
 

• tq_diesel - barcos.consdiesel 
 
 
Onde:  
 
Tq_agua: variável que indica o volume do estoque no tanque de água; 
 
barcos.consagua: é um atributo da entidade, barcos, que representa o volume 
de água consumido pela embarcação; 
 
area_Ancoragem: variável que representa a área ocupada no pátio de 
estocagem com cargas especiais (ancoragem e riseres); 
 
barcos.area: atributo da entidade, barcos, que representa o total de área 
ocupada no convés da embarcação pelo material de ancoragem; 
 
Est_Ancoragem: variável que representa peso dos produtos embarcados 
(cargas especiais) no convés do barco; 
 
barcos.embarque: atributo da entidade, barcos, que representa o total de carga 
embarcado; 
 
tq_diesel: variável que indica o volume do estoque no tanque de diesel. 
 
barcos.consdiesel: atributo da entidade, barcos, que representa o total de 
diesel fornecido para a embarcação. 
 
 
Finalizado o processo de embarque um bloco release foi utilizado para 
liberação do recurso píer. Foram utilizados também blocos record para 
contagem do total de entidades, barcos, que passaram pelo sistema, bem 
como o tempo de ocupação do recurso píer e a quantidade embarcada de 
material. O processo é então finalizado com um bloco dispose. 
 
 

6.4. Coleta de Informações e Dados  
 
Joaquim (2005) destaca que a documentação, os registros em arquivos, as 
entrevistas, a observação direta, a observação participante e os artefatos 
físicos são importantes como fontes de evidências a serem utilizadas para a 
coleta de dados necessários ao estudo. Neste trabalho, foram utilizadas as 
seguintes fontes: relatórios mensais (sistema ERP), registros operacionais 
(planilhas eletrônicas de controle), visitas e entrevistas com funcionários do 
porto. 
 

69 
 



Para definição do fluxo do processo foram utilizados os padrões operacionais 
existentes, bem como entrevistas com os operadores e gerentes do terminal, 
além de realização do acompanhamento “in loco” de algumas operações. 
 
Os dados utilizados para elaboração do modelo são dados reais obtidos por 
meio de registros em arquivos e também por meio algumas conferências em 
campo. Essa coleta ocorreu no período de 01 de outubro de 2012 a 31 de 
janeiro de 2013. 
 
 
Em função da estrutura organizacional da empresa e da complexidade do 
processo existem no terminal além do operador portuário (empresa 
terceirizada), outras duas gerências operacionais que são responsáveis pela 
gestão do terminal e suas operações, a saber: uma gerência de operações 
portuárias e outra de transporte marítimo. Dessa forma, para obter as 
informações foi necessário envolver várias pessoas dessas gerências, pois 
uma informação de uma área precisava ser complementa com o registro de 
outra área. Somente com essa sinergia foi possível obter informações 
consistentes para realização do trabalho. 
 
Os dados constantes nos registros e relatórios, após sua compilação 
mostraram-se bem completos uma vez que tinham muitas das informações 
necessárias para elaboração do modelo, a saber: 
 

a) Berço de atracação 
b) Chegada da balsa de diesel e volume transportado 
c) Chegada de Barcos 
d) Chegada de carretas 
e) Horário de entrada e saída dos barcos e carretas 
f) Número de lingadas 
g) Ocupação do convés 
h) Peso e dimensões das cargas 
i) Peso embarcado 
j) Tempo de atracação 
k) Tipo de carga 
l) Tipo de embarcação 
m) Volumes embarcados de água e diesel 

 
 
 

6.5. Análise Estatística dos Dados Coletados 
 
Após a análise inicial e compilação dos dados, estes serão tratados com auxílio 
do software MINITAB 16 - Statistical Software. 
 
A análise dos dados, tanto da amostra coletada, como dos dados obtidos no 
modelo de simulação, será efetuada utilizando-se um nível de confiança de 
95% e, consequentemente α igual a 5%. 
  

70 
 



Dentre as variáveis analisadas a primeira refere-se a distribuição da chegada 
de carretas ao porto. As carretas são classificadas quanto ao tipo de carga que 
transportam, o gráfico 3 apresenta um histograma com os totais de carretas 
que chegaram no porto no período analisado classificados por tipo de carga. 
Cabe destacar que a descrição “backload” refere-se a chegada de carretas 
vazias. Por sua vez o gráfico 4 apresenta a distribuição percentual das 
chegada por tipo de carga. 
 
 
Ao se analisar o intervalo de confiança calculado por peso para cada tipo de 
carga apresentada no gráfico 4, percebeu-se que os pesos seguem 
distribuições diferenciadas para cada tipo de carga. Portanto, as amostras não 
possuem essa característica comum e receberam tratamento distinto. 
 
 

Gráfico 3 – Histograma de Chegada de Carretas 
 

Total de Chegada de Carretas Out/12 a Jan/13
Total por Tipo de Carga Transportada

4000

3532

3000

2000

1346

1000
729

605 648
546

0
pquimico cimento backload tubo ancoragem cgeral

Tipo de Carreta
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 

Total de Carretas



Gráfico 4 – Percentuais de Chegada por Tipo de Carga 
 

Percentual de Carretas por Tipo de Carga 
 Período: Out/12 a Jan/13

Category
pquimico pquimico
7,4% cimento

cimento backload
8,2%

tubo
ancoragem
cgeral

backload
8,7%

cgeral
47,7%

tubo
9,8%

ancoragem
18,2%

 
 
Após a identificação da melhor distribuição de probabilidade, foi realizado um 
teste de normalidade e um resumo estatístico com as informações do intervalo 
de chegada das carretas, conforme apresentado no gráfico 5. 
 
 

Gráfico 5 – Resumo Estatístico para Chegada das Carretas 
 

Intervalo de Confiança para Nº Carretas por dia
A nderson-Darling Normality  Test

A -Squared 0,58
P-V alue 0,128

Mean 54,303
StDev 13,880
V ariance 192,659
Skew ness 0,213229
Kurtosis 0,092042
N 122

Minimum 25,000
1st Q uartile 44,750
Median 53,500
3rd Q uartile 65,000

30 45 60 75 90 Maximum 98,000

95% C onfidence Interv al for Mean

51,815 56,791

95% C onfidence Interv al for Median

51,000 58,285

95% C onfidence Interv al for StDev
95 % Confidence Intervals

12,330 15,880

Mean

Median

50 52 54 56 58

 
 
 

72 
 



A segunda série de dados analisados, foi referente a a distribuição da chegada 
de embarcações. As embarcações são classificadas quanto ao tipo de serviço 
que executam, o gráfico 6 apresenta um gráfico com os totais de barcos que 
chegaram no porto no período analisado. Por sua vez o gráfico 7 complementa 
a análise com a apresentação a distribuição percentual das chegada por tipo 
de barco. 
 
 

Gráfico 6 – Total de Barcos que Chegaram no Terminal 
 

Total de Embarcações que Chegaram para Atracação
Período: Out/12 a Jan/13

300 291

250

200 187

150

100

63
56

50
23

0
DIESEL AHTS CIMENTO OUTROS PSV

Barco Tipo
 

 
 

Gráfico 7 – Percentual de Chegadas por Tipo de Barco 

Percentual de Atracações por Tipo de Barco
Período: out/12 a jan/13

Category
DIESEL DIESEL
3,7% AHTS AHTS

9,0% CIMENTO
OUTROS
PSV

CIMENTO
10,2%

PSV
46,9%

OUTROS
30,2%

 
 

73 
 

Nº de Barcos



 
Gráfico 8 – Resumo Estatístico para Chegada de Barcos 

 
Estatísticas do  Nº Chegadas de Barcos

A nderson-Darling Normality  Test

A -Squared 1,54
P-V alue < 0,005

Mean 4,8852
StDev 1,9464
V ariance 3,7884
Skew ness 0,314492
Kurtosis 0,002097
N 122

Minimum 1,0000
1st Q uartile 3,0000
Median 5,0000
3rd Q uartile 6,0000

2,4 4,8 7,2 9,6 Maximum 11,0000

95% C onfidence Interv al for Mean

4,5364 5,2341

95% C onfidence Interv al for Median

4,0000 5,0000

95% C onfidence Interv al for StDev
95%  Confidence Intervals

1,7290 2,2268

Mean

Median

4,0 4,2 4,4 4,6 4,8 5,0 5,2

 
 
 
Como é percebido no gráfico 8, o P-value é menor 0,05, significando que a 
distribuição de chegadas dos barcos não segue uma distribuição normal. Neste 
caso a melhor distribuição apresentada pelo software foi Lognormal conforme 
indicado no gráfico 9. 
 

Gráfico 9 – Distribuição Lognormal Estimada pelo Métodos de Mínimos Quadrados 
 

Dist. LogNormal Estimada por Mínimos Quadrados
LSXY Estimates-Complete Data

Table of Statistics
Probability  Density  F unction Lognormal 

Loc 1,49182
99,9

Scale 0,455199
0,2 99 Mean 4,93041

90 StDev 2,36575
Median 4,44517

50 IQ R 2,77266
0,1

Failure 122
10 C ensor 0

A D* 2,964
1

C orrelation 0,956
0,0 0,1

0 4 8 12 1 10
Nº Chegadas no Fundeio Nº Chegadas no Fundeio

Surv iv al F unction Hazard Function

100
0,45

0,30
50

0,15

0 0,00
0 4 8 12 0 4 8 12

Nº Chegadas no Fundeio Nº Chegadas no Fundeio  
 
 

74 
 

Percent PDF

Rate Percent



Os gráficos 10 e 11 apresentam, respectivamente, as médias dos tempos de 
atracação por tipo de embarcação e o tempo médio de utilização de cada 
berço. Percebe-se nesses gráficos que há uma grande variação dos dados, 
cabendo uma análise estatística cuidadosa na escolha da distribuição que 
melhor representa a distribuição desses dados. 
 
 

Gráfico 10 – Tempo Médio de Atracação nos Berços por Tipo de Barco 
 

Tempo de berço horas vs Tipo de Barco

50

40

30

20

10

0

AHTS CIMENTO DIESEL OUTROS PSV
Tipo de Barco

 
 
 
 

Gráfico 11 – Tempo Médio de Atracação nos Berços 
 

Duração média de Atracação por Berço

50

40

30

20

10

0

Dolphim Pier 1 Pier 2 Pier 3
Berço

 
 
 
 

75 
 

Tempo de berço horas Tempo de berço horas



As demais variáveis tratadas no modelo referem-se aos tempos necessários à 
execução das etapas do fluxo operacional do porto. Neste caso, após obtidos 
os dados serão calculadas, de forma análoga às duas análises anteriores,  
quais as distribuições estatísticas que melhor representam os respectivos 
dados.  
 
A Tabela 5 apresenta as distribuições estatísticas calculadas que serão 
utilizadas na elaboração do modelo referentes aos tempos de processo e 
intervalos de chegada. 
 

Tabela 5 – Distribuições de Probabilidade adotadas no Modelo 
 

Atividade Unidade Distribuição 

Abastece com Diesel Pier1 Hours LOGN(1.34, 1.75)
Abastece com Diesel Pier2 Hours LOGN(1.34, 1.75)
Abastece com Diesel Pier3 Hours LOGN(1.34, 1.75)
Abastecer Tqdiesel Hours NORM( 14.15 , 5.36 )
abastecimento da planta de cimento Hours NORM(0.73,0.07)
Aguard Lib Canal e Pratico 1 Hours LOGN( 1.96 , 3.73 )
Barco Recebe Carga Ancoragem Pier3 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
Cadastro_CVP Minutes NORM( 17.94 ,7.21 )
Carrega Barco com Cimento Pier1 Hours NORM(7.30,3.107)
Carrega Barco Pier1 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
Carrega Barco Pier2 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
Carrega barco Pier3 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
chegada balsa diesel Days TRIA( 1 , 2 , 5 )
chegada_barcos Days LOGN( 4.88 ,1.94 )
chegada_carretas Days NORM(  54.30, 13.88)
conferencia_petrobras Minutes TRIA( 20.12 , 30 , 56.32 )
correcao_NF_ou_RT Hours TRIA(  0.5, 1.05 , 3.45 )
descarrega Ancoragem Minutes NORM( 24.3 , 6.02 )
descarrega Cgeral Minutes NORM( 24.3 , 6.02 )
descarrega Pquimicos Minutes NORM( 24.3 , 6.02 )
descarrega_tubo Minutes NORM( 24.3 , 6.02 )
Inspecao e Troca de Turma Pier1 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
Inspecao e troca de turma Pier2 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
Inspecao e troca de turma Pier3 Hours JOHN( 1 , 1 , 1 , 0.041 )
libera_carga para prog_maritima Minutes TRIA( 2 , 3.5 , 7 )
movimentacao de carga ate pier3 Minutes TRIA( 24 , 32 , 34 )
Movimentar Carga do Patio para Pier1 Minutes TRIA( 24 , 32 , 34 )
Movimentar Carga do Patio para Pier2 Minutes TRIA( 24 , 32 , 34 )
Movimentar Carga no Patio para Pier3 Minutes TRIA( 24 , 32 , 34 )
pesagem_carreta Minutes NORM( 0.78 , 1.04 )
Prepara Planta de Cimento Pier1 Hours NORM(1.73,0.73)  

 
 
 

76 
 



6.6. Verificação e Validação 
 
 
Esta fase da metodologia tem por objetivo validar e verificar o modelo de 
simulação construído, este é um importante requisito para que se tenha 
confiabilidade nos resultados fornecidos pelo modelo. 
 
Porém, antes de se efetuar a comparação dos resultados, é importante definir o 
número de replicações necessárias para que os intervalos de confiança obtidos 
tenham a precisão desejada. 
 
Para Freiras Filho (2008) na definição do tamanho da amostra ou do número 
de replicações, o analista inicialmente deve determinar empiricamente um 
tamanho mínimo de replicações e executar modelo. Neste caso, verifica-se se 
o semi-intervalo de confiança obtido apresenta limites além dos desejados. 
Pode-se determinar o valor do semi-intervalo desejado ou executar o modelo 
com um número de replicações maior. Depois de obtidos os valores simulados, 
a seguinte equação deverá ser aplicada: 
 

                                    n* = [ n * (h / h*)²]                                      (6.1) 
  
Onde: 
 

 n* = a nova estimativa para n; 
 n = número de replicações já realizadas; 
 h = semi-intervalo de confiança obtido; 
 h* = semi-intervalo de confiança desejado. 

 
 
Assim, se a nova estimativa de n calculada for maior que o número de 
replicações utilizado, deve-se aumentar o número de replicações e repetir o 
processo até que se obtenha uma estimativa para n menor ou igual à utilizada. 
 
Neste sentido, aplicando-se a técnica apresentada estima-se um número de 
replicações inicial de 5 (cinco). Porém, de forma complementar à técnica de 
Freitas Filho (2008), foram utilizadas duas variáveis para validação, ao invés de 
uma, a saber: nº de chegadas de carretas e nº de chegadas de barcos no 
fundeio. 
 
Os valores iniciais desejados foram obtidos a partir dos dados reais de entrada 
no modelo, ou seja a partir das estatísticas de entrada, conforme Tabela 6, 
logo: 
 

 Tabela 6 – One-Sample T – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para dados reais 
 

Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para dados Reais
Variável Nº de dias Média Desvio Padrão Erro em relação a média Intervalo de Confiança ( 95%)

Nº Carretas por dia 122 54,3 13,88 1,26 (51,82 ; 56,79)
Nº Chegadas no Fundeio 122 4,885 2,365 0,176 (4,536 ; 5,234)  

 

77 
 



Portanto, os valores de h desejados para nº de carretas por dia e para o nº de 
chegadas no fundeio, são, respectivamente, 2,715 e 0,244, para um intervalo 
de confiança de 95% sobre a média. A Tabela 7 mostra do teste de intervalo de 
confiança para 5 replicações. 
 

Tabela 7 – One-Sample T – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para 5 replicações 
 

Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para as Variáveis de Saída
Variável Nº de replicações Média Desvio Padrão Erro em relação a média Intervalo de Confiança ( 95%)

Nº Carretas por dia 5 49,8 5,26 2,35 (43,27 ; 56,33)
Nº Chegadas no Fundeio 5 4,547 0,328 0,147 (4,139 ; 4,954)  
 
 
Aplicando-se a equação 6.1 foram obtidos os seguintes resultados de n* para 
as variáveis nº de carretas por dia e para o nº de chegadas no fundeio, 
respectivamente: 4,2 e 4,3. Neste caso como os valores obtidos para os semi-
intervalos h são menores que os valores desejados h* para as duas variáveis, 
considera-se que 5 replicações geram os intervalos desejados para as 
variáveis de interesse. 
 
Para o cálculo dos intervalos de confiança obtidos na amostra, foram utilizados 
amostras referente a 122 dias de atividades portuárias e cada replicação no 
modelo teve uma duração de 720 horas (30 dias), ou seja, a partir de 
01/10/2012 a 31/01/2013, estipulando-se um intervalo de confiança de 95%, 
que é o mesmo adotado no modelo. 
 
Considerando as principais variáveis do modelo, a Tabela 8 apresenta os 
resultados médios obtidos a partir do modelo com um intervalo de 95% de 
confiança, comparados aos resultados reais do sistema estudado. 
 

Tabela 8 – Valores Reais Médios versus Resultados do Modelo 
 

 Modelo Cenário Real
Medidas de Desempenho Unidade Dados Históricos 5 replicações

Chegada de carretas Nº carretas/dia 54,3 50,6
Chegada de barcos Nº barcos/dia 4,9 4,5

Qtd de carga movimentada ton/mês 17183,0 18418,8
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier1 % 80,0 82,9
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier2 % 75,0 75,5
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier3 % 75,0 70,4

Tempo médio Atracado Pier1 horas 11,8 12,7
Tempo médio Atracado Pier2 horas 10,8 14,1
Tempo médio Atracado Pier3 horas 9,5 12,7
Movimentação média de água m³/dia 699,4 580,0
Movimentação média de diesel m³/dia 178,9 231,6

Nº Médio de atracações (3 berços) barco/mês 155,0 137,00
Tempo médio de fundeio horas 36,6 25,20

Total de cargas recebidas no Porto ton/dia 805,1 961,40  
 
 
Na Tabela 9, pode ser percebida a importância do desvio padrão dos dados 
amostrais, a apresentação de alguns valores aparentemente discrepantes em 
relação aos dados originais, se dá ao fato destes dados históricos 

78 
 



apresentarem valores de desvio padrão elevados. Porém, esses valores estão 
dentro do intervalo de confiança estipulado, quando comparado aos dados da 
amostra. 
 
Os testes de intervalo de confiança para chegada de carretas e barcos já foi 
apresentado no item anterior. Dessa forma serão mostradas na Tabela 9 os 
testes realizados para as demais variáveis. 
 

Tabela 9 – Teste de Intervalo de Confiança das variáveis de Processo 
  

Teste de Intervalo de Confiança para as Variáveis de Processo
Variável Nº de replicações Média Desvio Padrão Erro em relação a média Intervalo de Confiança ( 95%)

Qtd de carga movimentada 5 18419 2816 1259 (14923; 21915)
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier1 5 82,9 3,66 1,64 (78,36; 87,45)
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier2 5 75,5 6,45 2,89 (67,48; 83,51)
Taxa de Ocupacao Pier3 5 70,42 6,12 2,74 (62,81; 78,02)
Tempo Atracado Pier1 5 12,656 2,183 0,976 (9,946; 15,366)
Tempo Atracado Pier2 5 14,13 4,46 2 (8,59; 19,67)
Tempo Atracado Pier3 5 12,72 2,74 1,23 (9,32; 16,13)

Movimentação de água ¹ 5 17400 0 0 (17400,0; 17400,0)
Movimentação de diesel ² 5 6948 1276 571 (5363; 8533)

Nº total de atracações 5 137 14,8 6,62 (118,63; 155,37)
Total de cargas recebida   5 28842 2210 988 (26098; 31586)
Tempo medio de fundeio 5 25,23 10,8 4,83 (11,82; 38,64)

* NOTA 1 * Por se tratar de vazão contínua de água o valor no sistema é constante (17400 m³/mês aprox. 25 m³/h que é a vazão de abastecimento do tanque pela 
concessionária.

* NOTA 2 * Neste caso o volume movimentado de diesel encontrado na simulação é em média 231,6 m³/dia, com um intervalo de confiança de (178,8 ; 284,4).  
 
Neste sentido, à luz das comparações e análises das variáveis apresentadas 
neste item, conclui-se que o modelo simulado oferece credibilidade e pode 
representar o sistema real. Assim, pode-se dar continuidade ao estudo e 
proceder com as análises do modelo com o objetivo de extrair informações 
suficientes que atendam aos objetivos propostos neste estudo. 
 
 

6.7. Proposição e Execução dos Cenários 
 
Finalizada a etapa de validação do modelo, tem-se a possibilidade de realizar 
experimentos que forneçam informações sobre as consequências em efetuar 
modificações no cenário atual.  
 
Considerando o atual cenário de crescimento de demanda por serviços de 
apoio logístico offshore, sobretudo na região sudeste do Brasil, a cerca das 
novas descobertas e continuidade de exploração dos campos existentes, as 
empresas estão cada vez mais empenhadas em ofertar estes serviços 
garantindo assim uma continuidade operacional. Dessa forma, considerando 
sempre a possibilidade de aumentar o desempenho operacional do porto, por 
meio de melhoria da infraestrutura, ou seja, no sentido de investir recursos 
onde haverá maior retorno num menor intervalo de tempo, algumas discussões 
já foram feitas referentes ao terminal estudado, porém duas serão aqui 
adotadas, a saber: 
 

• Aumentar um berço de atracação, por meio da ampliação do cais; e 

79 
 



• Aumentar a área de armazenagem (pátios), considerando a 
possibilidade de adquirir área externa contigua ao porto. 

 
Como exemplo da situação que encontra-se o terminal, o gráfico 12 mostra a 
taxa de ocupação média dos berços,  onde pode ser claramente identificada 
uma utilização acima do limite recomendado, indicando que qualquer desvio 
nas operações irá causar descontinuidade operacional na movimentação de 
cargas. 
 

Gráfico 12 – Ocupação Médio dos Berços  
 

Ocupação Média dos Berços 

90%

88%

85% 85% 85%

82% 82% 82%
80%

79%
Média de Ocupação = 76% 78%

75%

72% 73%
71%

70%
69% 69%

65%
64% 63%

60%

55%

50%
jan/12 fev/12 mar/12 abr/12 mai/12 jun/12 jul/12 ago/12 set/12 out/12 nov/12 dez/12 jan/13 fev/13 mar/13  

Fonte: Adaptado de Petrobras (Relatórios Operacionais) 
 
Na situação atual apresentada, já se percebe a necessidade de ações para 
suprir novas demandas, uma vez que a estrutura atual encontra-se no limite de 
sua utilização. Cabe destacar que a análise está sendo feita baseada nos 
dados operacionais, não sendo consideradas possíveis melhorias no sistema 
de gestão, que também podem contribuir para melhoria do processo. 
 
Neste sentido, foram desenvolvidos 5 cenários a partir do modelo proposto, a 
saber: 
 
Cenário 1 – este cenário é o próprio modelo proposto, representa o sistema 
real, ou seja, são utilizadas as mesmas distribuições e condições do sistema 
real.  
 
Cenário 2 – neste cenário foi atribuído ao sistema derivado do primeiro modelo 
um novo berço de atracação (berço 4),  totalizando 4 berços. Este novo berço 
possui as mesmas condições do berço 2, ou seja pode receber qualquer 
embarcação sem restrições. 
 
Cenário 3 – este cenário é derivado do cenário 2, ou seja o sistema possui 4 
berços de atracação, porém a este sistema foi considerada uma linha extra de 

80 
 

Taxa de Ocupação



abastecimento de diesel. Logo, é possível o abastecimento de até duas 
embarcações simultaneamente. 
 
Cenário 4 – para este cenário foi considerado a possibilidade de ampliação da 
área de armazenagem, ou seja, o pátio de armazenagem foi acrescido em 
20%. Cabe destacar que este cenário foi proposto dentro das possibilidades 
reais do sistema real, com áreas contiguas ao porto. 
 
Cenário 5 – uma possibilidade ainda existente seria adquirir áreas não 
contíguas, porém próximas ao porto. Neste caso, foi proposta uma ampliação 
de área de armazenagem de 40% em relação ao sistema real.   
 
A Tabela 10 mostra os cenários estudados e onde foram consideradas 
modificações nas variáveis de processo. 
 

Tabela 10 – Identificação dos cenários propostos no modelo 
 

Variáveis Consideradas Unidade Cenário 1 Cenário 2 Cenário 3 Cenário 4 Cenário 5

Nº de Berços unid 3 4 4 3 3
Linha de Diesel unid 1 1 2 1 1
Linha de Água unid 3 4 4 3 3
Capacidade Tq Diesel m³ 1.500 1.500 1.500 1.500 1.500
Capacidade Tq Água m³ 2.000 2.000 2.000 2.000 2.000
Área de armazenagem m² 40.000 40.000 40.000 48.000 56.000  
 
Em todos os cenários as condições de operação foram mantidas, ou seja, não 
houve alteração nos demais recursos de pátio com a premissa de avaliar 
exclusivamente o impacto da ampliação de área e do aumento de berços na 
capacidade operacional do porto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 



7. ANÁLISE E RESULTADOS  
 
Neste capítulo serão apresentados os resultados do estudo, a partir das 
técnicas de análise de sensibilidade aplicada a comparação de cenários. O uso 
da análise de sensibilidade consistirá na modificação do valor de alguns 
parâmetros do modelo, certificando, a cada alteração, o impacto sobre os 
valores das variáveis de saída. 
 
Santos (2008) destaca que em relação a validação de uma simulação, a partir 
da verificação, validação e especificação das condições de uso do modelo, 
podem ser utilizados quatro tipos de experimentações para interpretação dos 
resultados, a saber:  
  

• Análise de sensibilidade; 
• Comparação de cenários; 
• Otimização; e  
• Simulação de Monte Carlo 

 
Logo, visando garantir maior consistência na análise dos dados serão utilizadas 
técnicas consolidadas no âmbito da academia. 
 
 

7.1. Análise de Sensibilidade 
 
 
Um fator de significativa importância no sistema logístico offshore está 
relacionado ao custo por tonelada movimentada, este índice está entre os 
principais indicadores de desempenho de um terminal portuário, e é composto 
pela soma dos diversos serviços atrelados a movimentação da carga, sendo 
que no transporte marítimo, na maioria das vezes, este valor é superior aos 
custos do transporte terrestre e do armazenamento de cargas, mas não 
significando que é mais ou menos importante, uma vez que as variáveis estão 
correlacionadas entre si.  
 
Assim, é possível concluir a partir da informação acima que não basta avaliar 
as variáveis de saída de forma individual, mas sim analisar seu comportamento 
a partir das demais variáveis do sistema, evitando conclusões precipitadas que 
podem levar a tomadas de decisão errôneas. Portanto, recomenda-se que as 
análises sejam realizadas por meio da combinação de experiência, prática de 
processo e visão sistêmica.  
 
A Tabela 11 mostra os resultados do aumento no número de berços (cenários 
2 e 3) e do aumento de área de pátio (cenários 4 e 5) nas variáveis de saída do 
sistema. 
 
 
 
 

82 
 



 
Tabela 11 – Análise de sensibilidade das variáveis de saída a partir da comparação dos 

cenários propostos 
 

Informaçõs Analisadas unidade Cenario 1 Cenario 2 Cenario 3 Cenario 4 Cenario 5
Taxa de ocupação do píer % 78,3 70,2 62,1 74,0 78,8

Tempo de ciclo das Carretas no Porto h 7,9 15,4 14,1 16,0 10,6
Tempo de permanência dos barcos atracados h 13,7 15,7 12,7 10,5 12,6

Total de Cargas Recebidas no porto ton 30042,0 30609,6 34483,6 33097,0 33182,0
Total de Carga embarcada ton 18418,8 23128,0 23145,2 25896,6 20717,6
Qtd de barcos atendidos Unidade 127,2 134,8 142,8 153,2 131,0

Total de carretas que chegaram Unidade 1517,6 1612,0 1637,2 1596,4 1621,4  
 
Considerando o aumento de berço, fica evidente que as variáveis sofreram 
mudanças significativas devido ao impacto direto provocado pelo 
abastecimento de diesel, uma vez que por questões de segurança somente é 
possível abastecer uma embarcação de cada vez, e esta ao iniciar o 
abastecimento não pode realizar outra atividade de carregamento 
simultaneamente. Logo, considerando a cenário 3 com aumento de um píer, 
houve uma considerável perda nos níveis de atendimento quando comparados 
com o cenário 4, face ao compartilhamento da linha de diesel que provocou um 
grande retardo no atendimento das embarcações, provocando um aumento no 
tempo de atendimento dos barcos. 
 
Por sua vez os cenários 4 e 5 evidenciam melhorias significativas no tempo de 
atracação dos barcos acarretando um aumento no número de embarcações 
atendidas e uma taxa média de 74% de ocupação dos berços, além disso 
observa-se também um aumento nas cargas recebidas no porto e também nas 
quantidade de cargas embarcadas. 
 
A partir da estruturação feita na Tabela 8 foi possível relacionar as diversas 
variáveis com as principais partes do sistema. Essas variáveis de saída têm o 
intuito de verificar o impacto e a sensibilidade ao longo do sistema, assim 
abrangendo sua interferência nas principais etapas do processo portuário.  
 

7.2. Análise do sistema a partir dos cenários propostos 
 
Para facilitar o entendimento e a visualização das análises comparativas, as 
variáveis de saída foram analisadas de acordo com a significância de cada 
uma delas, assim foram elaborados gráficos agrupando algumas dessas 
variáveis onde foi possível extrair novas informações a cerca do 
comportamento do sistema a partir dos cenários propostos. 
 
Antes de iniciar a análise propriamente dita, é importante destacar que numa 
operação portuária, de acordo com pesquisas e entrevistas realizadas com 
profissionais experientes na área portuária, é comum uma taxa de ocupação 
ótima em torno de 75%, uma vez que este percentual permite uma ocupação 
segura dos berços sem comprometer a capacidade operacional do porto, 
considerando interrupções para pequenos reparos (guindastes, empilhadeiras, 
estrutura portuária etc), condições ambientais adversas, filas na entrada do 

83 
 



porto entre outras situações que são passíveis de ocorrer. Assim, taxas de 
ocupação acima desse percentual podem afetar a segurança, bem como a 
capacidade operacional do porto e o contrário, taxas menores de ocupação 
podem refletir numa subutilização do terminal. 
 
 
Os gráficos 13 e 14 apresentam, respectivamente, o impacto de cada cenário 
na movimentação de cargas para o carregamento marítimo e na chegada de 
cargas pelo modal rodoviário, sendo estas operações as de maior relevância 
financeira na operação do terminal. 

 
Gráfico 13 – Comparativo entre nº de barcos atendidos e taxa de ocupação dos berços 

 

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0
Cenário 1 Cenário 2 Cenário 3 Cenário 4 Cenário 5

Qtd de barcos atendidos (unid) Taxa de ocupação do píer (%)

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84 
 

Valores



Gráfico 14 – Comparativo entre a chegada de carretas e seu tempo de permanência no porto 
 

 
 
É possível observar no gráfico 13 que a quantidade de barcos atendida no 
porto, em princípio, tem uma relação direta com a taxa de ocupação dos berços 
considerando os cenários 2 e 3, uma vez que elevando-se o número de barcos 
atendidos tem-se uma menor taxa de ocupação dos berços. Porém essa 
relação direta não se repete quando é analisado o cenário 4, uma vez que 
apesar do aumento na quantidade de barcos atendidos, é percebida uma 
estabilização na taxa de ocupação dos berços em relação ao cenário 1, E por 
sua vez o cenário 5 apresenta uma elevação na taxa de ocupação com uma 
redução na quantidade de barcos atendidos .  
 
De forma complementar, o gráfico 14 apresenta o recebimento das cargas que 
chegam pelo modal rodoviário, observa-se um aumento significativo na 
quantidade recebida no porto a partir do cenário 3, esse fato é explicado pelo 
aumento da disponibilidade de berços (cenário 3) que aumenta o escoamento 
de cargas garantindo mais área no pátio, assim como nos cenários 4 e 5 o 
aumento da área de armazenagem permite maior descarga de produtos. 
Porém, também é observada uma elevação no tempo de permanência das 
carretas no porto.  
 
Tais variações nos gráficos 13 e 14 são explicadas pelo compartilhamento de 
recursos, se por um lado mais barcos estão sendo atendidos (gráfico 13), por 
outro lado mais carga está chegando, (gráfico 14) e nestes casos os recursos 
de movimentação de pátio (empilhadeiras, carretas internas e guindastes) são 
compartilhados e no modelo a preferência de atendimento se dá por ordem de 
chegada. No entanto, como a premissa desse estudo foi manter a mesma 
infraestrutura existente e visualizar o impacto apenas do aumento de berço e 
de área, não foi considerado aumentar esses recursos. 
 

85 
 



Por sua vez, buscando fazer uma análise mais sistêmica do problema as 
variáveis foram correlacionadas de forma a apresentar um panorama mais 
amplo e abrangente dos resultados obtidos na simulação. Assim, o gráfico 15 
mostra a correlação entre a taxa de ocupação dos píeres e as cargas recebidas 
e embarcadas no porto. 
 
 

Gráfico 15 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação, cargas recebidas e embarcadas 
 

40000,0 90,0
78,3 78,8

35000,0 74,0 80,0
70,2

70,0
30000,0 62,1

60,0
25000,0

50,0
20000,0

40,0
15000,0

30,0

10000,0
20,0

5000,0 10,0

0,0 0,0
Cenario 1 Cenario 2 Cenario 3 Cenario 4 Cenario 5

Taxa de ocupação do píer Total de Cargas Recebidas no porto Total de Carga embarcada
 

 
É possível perceber neste caso que nos cenários 1 e 5 as taxas de ocupação 
dos berços estão acima de 75%, indicando que os berços estão operando no 
limite da capacidade, por sua vez no cenário 3 o valor de 62% indica uma 
subutilização dos berços. Neste mesmo sentido observando os cenários 2, 3 e 
5 apesar de apresentarem aumento no recebimento de cargas, mostram 
também uma redução no volume de cargas embarcadas, indicando que as 
cargas ficam mais tempo aguardando embarque, acarretando perda de 
capacidade e consequentemente aumento da fila das carretas. 
 
Ainda pode ser verificado no gráfico 15, que em relação ao aumento da área de 
armazenagem, considerando os cenários 1, 4 e 5 percebe-se que ao analisar 
os cenários 1 e 4 há um ganho de 9,2% na movimentação de cargas recebidas 
no terminal, em função do aumento da área em 20%. Por sua vez, quando a 
área é aumentada em 40% (cenário 5) o ganho em relação ao cenário 1 é de 
9,5%.  Ou seja, praticamente não há ganho significativo de capacidade ao se 
aumentar a área de 20% para 40%. 
 
No entanto, ao analisar o gráfico 16, que apresenta a correlação entre os 
tempos de permanência das carretas e embarcações no porto e a taxa de 
ocupação dos berços, verifica-se que se por um lado em todos os cenários 
analisados os tempos de permanência das carretas no porto são aumentados, 
devido ao compartilhamento de recursos de movimentação de carga, por outro 
lado a taxa de permanência das embarcações tem considerável redução, 
sobretudo nos cenários 3, 4 e 5, tendo o cenário 4 o melhor tempo entre eles. 
 

 

86 
 

Carga movimentada  (ton)

Taxa de Ocupação dos Berços (%)



 
Gráfico 16 – Taxa de ocupação dos berços e os tempos de permanência de carretas e 

embarcações 
 

 
 
Dado que a taxa de ocupação do berço é fator crítico para um terminal 
portuário fica evidente que ao se atingir taxas ideais de ocupação dos berços, 
as unidades marítimas (plataformas e sondas) terão suas requisições 
atendidas dentro do prazo, uma vez considerando que a taxa de ocupação está 
diretamente relacionada ao número de embarcações atendidas e esta à 
capacidade operacional do terminal. Lembrando que esta é a razão de toda 
essa operação portuária, sem considerar que em função dos elevados custos 
do transporte marítimo, é fundamental reduzir ao máximo o tempo de ciclo da 
embarcação, que é a soma de todos os tempos entre a chegada ao fundeio, 
atracação/desatracação, operação portuária, atendimento a unidade marítima e 
seu retorno ao fundeio.  
 
Apesar dos tempos evidenciados no gráfico 16 referente a permanência das 
carretas, o gráfico 17 mostra que a quantidade de carretas é aumentada em 
todos os cenários, e que no cenário 4 apesar do menor crescimento, cerca de 
5% em relação ao cenário 1, foi o que apresentou a maior elevação na 
quantidade de embarcações atendidas, havendo um aumento na ordem de 
17%. 
 
Já os cenários 3 e 5 que apresentaram os maiores índices no recebimento 
mensal de carretas, não apresentaram os mesmos resultados para o 
atendimento às embarcações.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 



Gráfico 17 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação 
 

 
 
Cabe analisar a partir do gráfico 18 o comportamento de 4 variáveis de saída 
simultaneamente, dessa forma os resultados demonstram que tanto o aumento 
de área quanto o aumento no número de berços influenciam na capacidade 
operacional do porto. 
 
 

Gráfico 18 – Correlação entre taxa de ocupação 
 

40,0 1660
1.637

1640
35,0 33,1 1.621

1.612
30,0 34,5 1620

33,2
30,0 1.596

30,6 1600

25,0 1580
25,9

23,1 1560
20,0 18,4 23,1

20,7
1540

15,0 1.518 1520

10,0 1500

1480
5,0

1460

0,0 1440
7,87 15,36 14,07 16,03 10,56

Cenário 1 Cenário 2 Cenário 3 Cenário 4 Cenário 5
Tempo de ciclo (h) das carretas no porto por cenário

Total de carretas que chegaram Total de Cargas Recebidas no porto Total de Carga embarcada
 

 
Todavia, é percebida que os cenários 3 e 4 apresentaram maior influência 
positiva no modelo, tendo em vista que estes cenários corresponderam a maior 
quantidade de cargas embarcadas e a maior quantidade de carga recebida por 
carreta, ou seja quando é feita a relação carga movimentada por número de 
carretas, estes cenários apresentaram os melhores resultados. 

88 
 

Carga movimentada  (ton)

Milhares

Nº de carretas (unid)



 
Ainda é possível identificar que apesar do elevado tempo de permanência das 
carretas no porto, estes cenários despontaram a frente dos demais com 
melhores resultados na movimentação de carga, tanto no recebimento quanto 
no embarque, ficando mais evidente a importância de se analisar de forma 
sistêmica as informações e não tomar uma decisão a partir de uma análise 
pontual. 
 
Dessa forma, considerando todas as análises realizadas percebe-se que o 
cenário 4 apresenta vantagens em relação aos demais cenários. No entanto, 
para evitar conclusões precipitadas, buscou-se fundamentar ainda mais a 
decisão sobre qual o melhor cenário que atende ao objetivo proposto neste 
estudo. 
 
Assim, por meio da técnica de matriz de priorização, foi realizada junto com 
profissionais ligados a operação, que possuem notório conhecimento técnico, 
uma priorização das variáveis de saída a fim de estipular pesos a essas 
variáveis e posteriormente ranquear por nível de relevância os cenários 
modelados, gerando como resultado final o cenário que melhor atende ao 
objetivo do trabalho, podendo ou não comprovar a escolha do cenário 4 
conforme análises apresentadas. 
 
De acordo com Cristofari Júnior et al.. (2010) a priorização por preferências 
simples são geralmente conduzidas dentro de entrevistas semi-estruturadas,  
com indivíduos ou grupo de entrevistados. Neste estudo, a fim de atribuir 
valores e pesos, foram convidados técnicos operacionais e engenheiros para 
auxiliar na elaboração da matriz. Houve uma adesão de aproximadamente, 
34% do efetivo total convidado de 32 pessoas.  
 
Estes profissionais que participaram da análise foram conduzidos a estabelecer 
uma pontuação em relação à correlação entre as variáveis de saída, logo essa 
pontuação ofereceu a oportunidade de quantificar estas variáveis. A pontuação 
adotada segue a correspondência pré-estabelecida na Tabela 12. 
 

Tabela 12 – Critério de pontuação adotado na matriz de priorização  
 

Pontuação
Signatificamente mais 10

Mais 5
Igualmente 1

Menos 0,2
Signatificamente menos 0,1  

 
 
Após definição dos critérios de pontuação foi apresentado aos participantes as 
variáveis de saída, bem como a matriz a qual deveriam ser atribuídas a 
pontuação conforme consenso do grupo, a Tabela 13 apresenta a matriz de 
priorização das variáveis de saída preenchida com as pontuações atribuídas 
pelo grupo. 
 

89 
 



Tabela 13 – Matriz de priorização das variáveis de saída do modelo  
 

 
 
Após análise prévia e preenchimento da matriz, foi gerado como resultado a 
Tabela 14, onde foi quantificada por ordem de importância, segundo o 
consenso do grupo, as variáveis de saída consideradas no modelo. Cabe 
destacar que os participantes não tinham conhecimento dos resultados da 
simulação gerados para cada um dos 5 cenários. 
 

Tabela 14 – Critério de pontuação adotado na matriz de priorização  
 

 
 
Dessa forma, apresentando os dados gerados na Tabela 14 em forma de 
gráfico, temos seu resultado mostrado no gráfico 19. 
 
 
 

90 
 



 
 
 

Gráfico 19 –  Priorização das variáveis de saída 
 

 
 
 
Portanto, foram utilizados como pesos os percentuais cada variável, mostrados 
anteriormente no Gráfico 19. 
 
Após concluído o processo de priorização e atribuídos seus respectivos pesos, 
foram ranqueados os cinco cenários para cada variável de saída. Assim, os 
resultados do modelo para cada cenário foram classificados em ordem 
crescente de acordo com os resultados da simulação, em seguida foram 
atribuídos valores de 1 a 5 originando a Tabela 15, na sequencia os valores de 
cada variável foi multiplicado pelo respectivo peso e somado às demais 
variáveis da coluna. 
 
 

Tabela 15 – Resultado da classificação dos cenários por priorização 
 

Informaçõs Analisadas Cenario 1 Cenario 2 Cenario 3 Cenario 4 Cenario 5 Peso
Taxa de ocupação do píer 3 4 1 5 2 19%

Tempo de ciclo das Carretas no Porto 5 2 3 1 4 13%
Tempo de permanência dos barcos atracados 2 1 3 5 4 19%

Total de Cargas Recebidas no porto 1 2 5 3 4 12%
Total de Carga embarcada 1 3 4 5 2 19%
Qtd de barcos atendidos 1 3 4 5 2 19%

Total de carretas que chegaram 1 3 5 2 4 13%
Total 2,2 3,0 3,9 4,5 3,4 -

 
 
Notadamente, conforme apresentado na Tabela 15, o cenário 4 despontou 
como sendo o de maior relevância para o terminal, comprovando a análise dos 
resultados gerados pelo modelo. 
 
Então, considerando-se os critérios estabelecidos para comparação, pode-se 
concluir, dentre os cenários analisados, que o cenário 4 apresenta uma melhor 

91 
 



eficiência de desempenho quando comparados ao cenários original, o cenário 
1. Dessa forma, diante da possibilidade de realizar um investimento no 
terminal, será mais vantajoso para o investidor aumentar a área de 
armazenagem, uma vez que este investimento trará maiores ganhos de 
desempenho ao terminal. 
 
 
 
 
 

92 
 



8. CONCLUSÃO  
 
 
Diante dos resultados apresentados na elaboração deste trabalho, este 
capítulo apresenta a conclusão e propõe sugestões para trabalhos futuros. 
Neste sentido, verificou-se que o objetivo do estudo foi alcançado, e por sua 
vez a hipótese proposta não foi aceita, uma vez que no caso analisado, 
constatou-se que a ampliação de área de pátio proporcionou maior ganho na 
capacidade operacional do terminal em relação ao aumento de berço. 
 
Este trabalho considerou alguns conceitos iniciais para balizar os caminhos 
percorridos, neste caso, adotou-se que um terminal portuário deve ser 
entendido, em sua estrutura operacional, como uma empresa comum, tratando-
se apenas de uma organização dedicada a um campo específico de atuação. 
Assim, um porto está habilitado a fazer uso das ferramentas e técnicas de 
gestão já consolidadas em seu uso por empresas nos diversos ramos de 
atividade. 
 
Neste sentido, o atual ambiente empresarial, muito caracterizado por 
constantes mudanças e elevada competitividade, tem obrigado as 
organizações a desenvolverem cada vez mais sua capacidade de adaptação. 
Logo, o setor portuário, fundamental para o desenvolvimento econômico de um 
país, e muito afetado no Brasil pela falta de investimentos, vem nos últimos 
anos buscando tornar-se mais competitivo frente ao longo tempo sem 
investimentos representativos no setor.  
 
O presente trabalho efetuou seu estudo tomando como referência um terminal 
de apoio offshore localizado na baía de Vitória-ES, que presta atendimento às 
unidades marítimas da Petrobras em operação na região Sudeste do Brasil, 
tendo como referência os potenciais investimentos em infraestrutura visando 
aumento da capacidade operacional do terminal. Estes potenciais 
investimentos, têm a finalidade de atender à crescente demanda pelos serviços 
de logística offshore. 
 
No terminal estudado foi destacada a possibilidade de incluir um novo berço 
para atracação das embarcações e o aumento de área de pátio, o que resulta 
afetar de forma significativa o processo operacional do porto. Então o presente 
estudo objetivou avaliar os indicadores de produtividade utilizados num terminal 
de apoio offshore a partir da aplicação da técnica de simulação discreta, 
avaliando a possibilidade de se investir em infraestrutura e indicando dentro 
dos cenários estudados qual seria a melhor opção para o investidor: aumentar 
área de armazenagem ou aumentar o número de berços. 
 
A utilização de modelos computacionais em processos portuários não é inédita. 
Porém, poucos estudos foram relatados sobre terminais de apoio offshore, o 
que implica considerar que este é um campo pouco explorado da simulação, 
sendo uma ferramenta de grande aplicabilidade e com grande impacto na 
tomada de decisões gerenciais. 
 

93 
 



Por meio da comparação dos resultados obtidos e da validação estatística, 
assegurou-se que o modelo apresenta credibilidade e representatividade, tendo 
em vista que os valores obtidos estarem dentro do mesmo intervalo de 
confiança. Logo, diante da constatação que o modelo representa a realidade 
encontrada no terminal portuário, foi possível efetuar a simulação a partir dos 
cenários propostos. 
 
Analisando os resultados obtidos com este experimento, constatou-se que o 
terminal encontrava-se operando no seu limite operacional, e considerando a 
avaliação dos indicadores de desempenho adotados no porto, cabe destacar 
ainda que a análise desses índices, de forma isolada, poderia levar á 
conclusões errôneas. Dessa forma buscou-se realizar análises conjuntas que 
pudessem ampliar a abrangência dos resultados, propiciando análises com um 
foco mais sistêmico. 
 
Dessa forma, foram apresentados e modelados 5 cenários, sendo o cenário 1 
representando o modelo real, os cenários 2 e 3 representaram o aumento na 
quantidade de berços, sendo que no cenário 3 foi incluída uma linha extra para 
abastecimento de diesel, e por fim os cenários 4 e 5 que representaram o 
aumento de 20% e 40% na área de armazenagem.  
 
Portanto, após processamento dos modelos, foram gerados relatórios e dados 
referentes às variáveis, por sua vez estas variáveis foram analisadas por meio 
de uma análise se sensibilidade e posteriormente por meio de análise gráfica, 
os resultados gerados levaram a conclusão que o cenário 4 (aumento de 20% 
da área de armazenagem) é o cenário que apresentou os melhores resultados 
para o desempenho do terminal estudado, sendo a opção investimento que 
deveria ser escolhida no caso de uma ampliação da infraestrutura operacional.  
 
No entanto, para confirmar essa análise foi escolhida a técnica de matriz de 
priorização, onde foram apresentadas as variáveis de saída do modelo a um 
pequeno grupo de profissionais experientes ligados a operação portuária, os 
quais atribuíram uma pontuação a estas variáveis, que consequentemente 
foram correlacionadas e ranqueadas. Após a definição dos pesos das 
variáveis, foi gerado um novo ranking o qual confirmou o cenário 4 como a 
melhor opção para investimento no terminal, considerando as premissas 
adotadas neste trabalho. 
 
Assim, apesar de ser um senso comum que o aumento de berços tende a levar 
a um aumento de produtividade, esta dissertação mostra que o maior ganho é 
conseguido quando é realizado o aumento de área no pátio de armazenagem.  
 
Finalmente, concluiu-se que o presente trabalho atingiu os objetivos 
inicialmente propostos e como sugestões para futuros trabalhos citam-se, por 
exemplo: 
 

• Incluir no modelo o aumento de recursos de pessoal e físicos, tais como: 
empilhadeiras, guindastes e balanças; 

• Incluir os custos envolvidos no processo operacional, visando dar mais 
subsidio as decisões a serem tomadas; 

94 
 



• Considerar o período de ciclo das embarcações, pois existem outras 
variáveis que podem ser consideradas além da chegada e permanência 
dos barcos no fundeio, a saber: tempo de navegação; condições 
ambientais, tempo de atendimento às unidades marítimas etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

95 
 



REFERÊNCIA 
 
AAS, B.; HALSKAU, O.; WALLACE, S.W. The role of supply vessels in 
offshore logistics. Maritime Economics & Logistics. Vol. 11, 3, p. 302-325. 
2009.  
ALDERTON, P.M. Port Management and Operations. 3rd Edition. Lloyd´s 
Practical Shipping Guides. London. 2008 
ANEICHYK, T. Simulation Model for Strategical Fleet Sizing and 
Operational planning in offshore Supply Vessels Operations. Master’s 
degree thesis. Molde University College. LOG950 Logistics. p.54. 2009. 
ANTAQ. Indicadores de Desempenho Portuário – Sistema Permente de 
Acompanhamento de Preços e Desempenho Operacional dos Serviços 
Portuários. Cartilha de Orientação. Ministérios dos Transportes. Brasilia. 2003. 
ASSIS, L.F. Transporte Marítimo. Programa de pós-graduação em 
Engenharia Portuária. COPPE/UFRJ – Universidade Petrobras. 2012. 
BALLOU, R.H. Gerenciamento da cadeia de suprimentos/logística 
empresarial. Tradução Raul Rubenich. 5. ed. Porto Alegre: Bookman, 616 p. 
2006. 
BANKS, J. Handbook of Simulation, John Wiley & Sons, Atlanta. 1998. 
BARROS, F., WANKE, P. Planejamento de capacidade num terminal de 
contêineres via simulação – Um estudo de caso. Artigo. 2009. Disponível 
em. http://www.ilos.com.br/. 
BATISTA, B. C. Análise das Operações com Embarcações de apoio Offshore 
na Bacia de Campos – RJ. Tese de M.Sc., Engenharia Oceânica / 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, 2005. COPPE, Brasil. 
BICHOU. K., e GRAY. R. A logistics and supply chain management 
approach to port performance measurement. Maritime Policy & 
Management. V.31, n.1, p. 47-67. 2005. 
BRITO, V. Aplicação de Simulação como Ferramenta de Apoio a 
Elaboração de Planejamento estratégico de Capacidade. 2007. Disponível 
em. http://www.ilos.com.br/.  
CALDEIRINHA, V.R., FELICIO, J.A. The influence of characterizing the 
performance of ports, measured by operational, financial and efficiency 
indicators. Munich Personal RePEC Archive. – MPRA. 2011. On-line: 
http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/30009/  
CAMPOMAR, M.C. Do uso de “Estudo de Caso” em pesquisas para 
dissertações e teses em administração. Revista de Administração. V.26 n. 3, 
p. 95-97. São Paulo. Jul/set 1991. 
CARDOSO, L.C. Petróleo: do poço ao posto. Rio de Janeiro. Qualitymark Ed. 
2005. 
CARTENI, A.; LUCA, S. Tactical and strategic planning for a container 
terminal: Modelling issues within a discrete event simulation approach. 

96 
 



Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, volume: 21, issue: 1, pages: 123–
145. Itália: 2012. 
CARVALHO, L.S. Análise das potencialidades e vantagens do uso da 
simulação computacional em operações logísticas complexas, como 
ferramenta de auxílio a tomada de decisões: estudo de caso em uma 
organização industrial. Dissertação (mestrado profissional). Escola de 
Administração – UFBA. 2006. 
CAULLIRAUX, H.M., MORAES, A.B., PONTES, B., TARDELLI, E., LADARIO, 
F., SPIEGEL, T. Logística Portuária – Curso de Logística Portuária. Grupo de 
Produção Integrada – Poli & COPPE/UFRJ. Rio de Janeiro. 2010 
CHRISTIANSEN, M.; FAGERHOLT, K,; NYGREEN, B.; RONEN, D. Maritime 
Transportation. Handbook in OR & MS. Vol. 14. Chapter 4. C. Barnhart and G. 
Laport (eds). Elsevier. 2007. 
CHWIF, L. e MEDINA, A.C. Modelagem e simulação de eventos discretos: 
teoria & aplicações. 3. ed. São Paulo. Ed. do Autor. 2010. 
CORTÉS, P.; MAÑUZURI, J.; IBÁÑEZ, J. N.; GUADIX, J. Simulation of freight 
traffic in the Seville inland port. Simulation modelling practice and theory, 
volume: 15, issue: 3, pages: 256 -271. Espanha: 2007. 
CRISTOFARI JUNIOR, C.A., DE PAULA, I.C., FOGLIATTOC, F.S. Método de 
análise de maturidade e priorização de melhorias na gestão do Processo 
de Desenvolvimento de Produtos. Revista Produção. v. 20, n. 3, p. 359-377, 
2010 
FERREIRA, J.J. Classificação de Portos: Um estudo de caso no Brasil. xv, 
95p., ENC/FT/UnB. 2012. 
FREITAS FILHO, P.J. Introdução a Modelagem e Simulação de Sistemas. 
Com Aplicações em Arena. 2ª Edição. Visual Books. 2008. 
GAUR, P. Port Planning as a Strategic Tool: A Typology. Institute of 
Transport and Maritime Management Antwerp. University of Antwerp. 2005. 
GOES FILHO, H.A. Dragagem Ambiental. Programa de pós-graduação em 
Engenharia Portuária. COPPE/UFRJ – Universidade Petrobras. 2012. 
GOTTFRIED, B.S., (1984), Elements of Stochastic Process Simulation. New 
Jersey, Prentice-Hall. 1984. 
GUERRA, V.J., TREVISAN, E.F.C., MEDINA, A.C., BOTTER, R.C. Simulação 
do Sistema Portuário para Recepção de Minério e Carvão no Porto de 
Pecém-CE. XXIII Congresso Nacional de Transporte Aquaviário, Construção 
Naval e Offshore. Anais. SOBENA. Rio de Janeiro. 2010. 
HAMACHER, S., RIBAS, G.P., OLIVEIRA, F.C. Um modelo para o 
Planejamento Estratégico da cadeia de Petróleo. PUC-RJ / Deptº. de 
Engenharia Industrial. 2008. 
IGNACIO, A.A.V., NEVES, C. Análise de capacidade de terminais 
portuários através da técnica de simulação. Anais. XXIX ENEGEP. 2009. 
JOAQUIM, E.D., Análise de um Novo Centro de Cirúrgico para o Hospital 
Universitário Cajuru: Estudo de Caso Baseado em Simulação 

97 
 



Computacional. Dissertação (Mestrado) Pontifícia Universidade Católica do 
Paraná – PUC/PR. Curitiba. 2005.  
KAISER, M.J. An integrated systems framework for service vessel 
forecasting in the Gulf of Mexico. Center of Energy Studies. Lousiana State 
University. Energy Coast & Environment Buildind. 2010. Disponível em: 
www.elsevier.com/locate/energy  
KELTON, D.W., SADOWSKI, R.P., STURROCK,D.T. Simulation with Arena. 
4ª ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 2007. 
KENNEDY, O.R., LIN, K., YANG, H., RUTH, B. Sea-Port Operational Efficiency: 
An Evaluation of Asian Ports Using Stochasctic Frontier Production Function 
Model. Journal of Service Science and Management. 2011, 4, 391-399. 
LEMKE, N. Análise das condições operacionais do Porto do Rio Grande 
utilizando a técnica de simulação. Dissertação de Mestrado. Centro de pós-
graduação em Engenharia Oceânica. 2008. 
LIMA, R.M.O. O mercado de Apoio Offshore. ABEAM - Associação Brasileira 
de Empresas de Apoio Marítimo. Navalshore. 20 p. Junho, 2008. 
LORD – Laboratório de Otimização de Recursos, de Simulação Operacional e 
de Apoio a Decisões na Indústria do Petróleo. Modelagem da Cadeia de 
Suprimentos. http://www.petroleo.ufrj.br/lorde/?q=node/6, 2010. Acesso em 
dezembro 2012. 
MACHADO, D.V.C.; YONAMINE, J.S.G. Desenvolvimento de um Modelo de 
Simulação para Análise da Cadeia de Suprimentos de Petróleo e 
Distribuição de Derivados da Petrobras na Região de São Paulo. DEI-
POLI/UFRJ – Engenharia de Produção. Rio de Janeiro, 2003. 
MARANGONI, S.M. Estudo do canal reverso de alimentos descartados 
comercialmente no varejo: análise de produtos lácteos. 2010. 122f. 
Dissertação (Mestrado) – Faculdade de Economia, Administração e 
Contabilidade de Ribeirão Preto - USP, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, 2010. 
MATTOS, S. Navios de Apoio Offshore. Jornal Pelicano (artigo). SAMM - 
Sociedade Acadêmica da Marinha Mercante. 2009. Disponível em: 
http://www.jornalpelicano.com.br/2009/06/navios-de-apoio-offshore/  
MENDES, A.B. Programação de frota de apoio a operações “offshore” 
sujeita à requisição de múltiplas embarcações para uma mesma tarefa. 
Tese (doutorado) POLI-USP/Deptº de Engenharia Naval e Oceânica. 224 p. 
2007. 
NOVAES, A.G.; SILVA, V.M.D.; ROSA, H. Utilização de Modelos de Filas e 
de Simulação no Planejamento de Terminais Marítimos de Contêineres. 
Programa de Pós-graduação em Engenharia de Produção – UFSC. 2003 
PANT, R.; BARKER, K.; GRANT, F.H.; LANDERS, T.L. Interdependent 
impacts of inoperability at multi-modal transportation container terminals. 
School of Industrial Engineering, University of Oklahoma. Transportation 
Research. p. 722-737. 2011. Disponível em: www.elsevier.com/locate/tre 
PETROBRAS. Informações home page. Disponível em: 
www2.petrobras.com.br. Acesso em 28/06/2013. 

98 
 



PETROBRAS. Manual para Operações entre Embarcações de Apoio 
Marítimo e Unidades Marítimas. MT-3ED-00056. E&P-SERV/US-TA/TC. 
2009. 
PETROBRAS. Modelo do Processo de Negócio: Movimentação de Carga 
para Unidades Marítimas. Versão 1.0. Escritório de Processos de Negócio. 
TI/TI-E&P/TIDT-BC/SNEP-BC. 2007 
PIDD, M. Modelagem empresarial: ferramentas para tomada de decisão. 
Porto Alegre. Ed. Bookman. 1996. 
PINHO, B., CAPELLI, C., LIMA, L., NASCIMENTO, L., SENNA, P., PAIM, R. 
Metodologias e Ferramentas para Simulação de Processos. Relatórios 
Técnicos do DIA/UNIRIO, Deptº de Informática Aplicada. Nº 0003/2009. 
RODRIGUES, W.C. Metodologia Científica. FAETEC/Instituto Superior de 
Tecnologia em Ciências da Computação do Rio de Janeiro. Paracambi-RJ. 
2007. 
SARACENI, P.P. Transporte marítimo de petróleo e derivados. Rio de 
Janeiro: Interciência, 2006. 
SHEIN, D. Uma Metodologia para o Dimensionamento de Frota de 
Rebocadores em Terminais Portuários: uma aplicação ao porto do Rio 
Grande. Univ. Federal do Rio Grande. Dissertação de Mestrado – Deptº de 
Engenharia Oceânica. Rio Grande. 2010. 
SILVA, V.; LOPES, M.; ARBEX, F.; LOPES, P. Modelagem e Simulação de 
um Sistema Portuário: Um estudo de caso para o terminal da Petrobras na 
cidade de Macaé. Anais. Rio Oil & Gás Expo and Conference 2010. Rio de 
Janeiro. 13 a16 de setembro de 2010. 
 
SOUSA, F.N.C. A Logística no Apoio às Atividades Offshore de 
Exploração e produção de Petróleo nas Regiões Sul e Sudeste do Brasil. 
Monografia (pós-graduação lato sensu) MBA Portos e Logística Empresarial. 
Universidade Católica de Santos. Paranaguá, 2007. 
SPIEGEL, T., ANDRADE, E.A.T., MORAES, A.B.B., CAULLIRAUX, H.M. 
Análise da movimentação de carga em uma operação portuária: um 
estudo de caso. Anais. VII Congresso Nacional de Excelência em Gestão. 
2011. 
SUN, Z.; LEE, L. H.; CHEW, E. P.; TAN, K. C. MicroPort: A general 
simulation platform for seaport container terminals. Advanced engineering 
informatics, volume: 26, issue: 1, pages: 80-89. Singapura: 2012. 
UNCTAD. Transnacional corporations and export competitiveness. World 
Investiment Report. 2002. Geneva: United. 
WANKE, P.; BARROS, F. Planejamento de Capacidade num Terminal de 
Contêineres via Simulação – Um estudo de caso. 2008. Disponível em: 
http://www.ilos.com.br/site/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=id113
7&Itemid=74. Acesso em: 20/05/2012. 
WILKER, B. Gerenciamento de Capacidade Produtiva. Disponível em 
http://www.administradores.com.br/producao-academica/gerenciamento-da-
capacidade-de-producao/4337/. 2010. Acesso em 11/04/2013. 

99 
 



YIN, R.K. Estudo de Caso: planejamento e métodos. 2ª Edição. Ed. 
Bookman. Porto Alegre. 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 



 

101 
 



Reliability Engineering and System Safety' 61 (1998) 95-108 
© 1998 Elsevier Science Limited 

All rights reserved. Printed in Northenl Ireland 
P I I : S 0 9 5 1 - 8 3 2 0 ( 9 7 ) 0 0 0 6 4 - 1  0951-8320/98/$19.00 

E L S E V I E R  

The contribution of human factors to accidents 
in the offshore oil industry 

Rachael P. E. Gordon* 
Aberdeen Universi~, Psychology Department, Kings College, Aberdeen AB24 2UB 

(Received 1 February 1996; revised 24 June 1996; accepted 3 August 1996) 

Accidents such as the Piper Alpha disaster illustrate that the performance of a highly 
complex socio-technical system, is dependent upon the interaction of technical, 
human, social, organisational, managerial and environmental factors and that these 
factors can be important co-contributors that could potentially lead to a catastrophic 
event. The purpose of this article is to give readers an overview of how human factors 
contribute to accidents in the offshore oil industry. An introduction to human errors 
and how they relate to human factors in general terms is given. From here the article 
discusses some of the human factors which were found to influence safety in other 
industries and describes the human factors codes used in accident reporting forms in 
the aviation, nuclear and marine industries. Analysis of 25 accident reporting forms 
from offshore oil companies in the UK sector of the North Sea was undertaken in 
relation to the human factors. Suggestions on how these accident reporting forms 
could be improved are given. Finally, this article describes the methods by which 
accidents can be reduced by focusing on the human factors, such as feedback from 
accident reporting in the oil industry, auditing of unsafe acts and auditing of latent 
failures. © 1998 Elsevier Science Limited. 

1 I N T R O D U C T I O N  exchanged in the offshore oil industry without clear defini- 
tion as to what is actually meant by these labels. They are 

In the past, industrial accidents were reported mainly in often used interchangeably as general terms referring to 
terms of technological malfunctions and the human element the cause of an accident being related to people as opposed 
in the cause of the accident tended to be ignored. Since the to a technical fault. The traditional definition of human 
frequency of technological failures has diminished, the role factors is the scientific study of the interaction between 
of human factors has become more apparent. Accidents man and machine. This definition was extended in recent 
such as the Piper Alpha disaster I illustrate that the perform- years to encompass the effects which individual, group and 
ance of a highly complex socio-technical system, is depend- organisational factors have on safety 3 and is the framework 
ent upon the interaction of technical, human, social, used in the following article. Human errors were defined 
organisational, managerial and environmental elements by Rasmussen4 as 'human acts which are judged by some- 
and that these factors can be important co-contributors body to deviate from some kind of reference act .. they are 
to incidents which could potentially lead to a catastrophic subjective and they vary with time.' These are specific acts 
event. Human factors were deemed to be the root cause of which can either directly (active errors) or indirectly (latent 
many major disasters, such as Chernobyl, Three Mile Island errors) cause an accident. 
and Piper Alpha and as such were well-researched by Both human errors and human factors are usually studied 
those interested in the human contribution to the causes of separately and any relationship between them is often 
accidents, such as psychologists, reliability engineers and overlooked. This may be caused by the difficulty of the 
human factors specialists 2. task or because there is still no agreement between the two 

The terms 'human factors' and 'human error' are often separate areas as to their precise nature and definition. How- 
ever, a number of high reliability industries have attempted 

*E-mail: r.p.gordon@aberdeen.ac.uk; Tel: 44-1224-273-213; Fax: to combine these two subjects in their accident reporting 
44-1224-273-211. forms which will be discussed later in this article. A 

95 



96 R. P. E. Gordon  

HUMAN FACTORS HUMAN ERRORS 

INDIVIDUAL FACTORS SKILL-BASED 
competance action e r r o r s  

s t r e s s  checking errors 
motivation 

GROUP FACTORS RULE-BASED 
management retrieval errors 
supervision transmission errors 

crew 
ORGANISATIONAL FACTORS KNOWLEDGE-BASED 

company policies diagnostic e r r o r s  
company standards decision e r r o r s  

s y s t e m s  and procedures 

Fig. 1. Framework of the relationships between the underlying causes of accident (human factors) and their immediate causes 
(human errors). 

proposed framework describing the relationships between The error types used by Reason 5 are based on psycho- 
the underlying human factors and the immediate human logical theories and are designed to describe errors in 
errors is given in Fig. 1. high risk industries. Although this may sound like an ideal 

The aim of  this article is to begin to improve accident model to use in accident reporting forms, Reason 's  error 
reporting forms by basing the categorisation on a stronger types are complex and would need considerable training 
theoretical grounding. This proposes the human error to understand and use on a regular basis. A more simpli- 
categories based on Rasmussen 's  skill, rule, knowledge stic approach was devised by Kontogiannis and Embrey ~ 
model  4 to determine the immediate cause of the accident, who summarised human errors into the following six 
and use human factors categories (organisation, group, categories. 
individual) to determine the underlying causes of the acci- 

1. Ac t ion  errors: where either no action is taken, the 
dents. This article describes some of the previous literature 

wrong action is taken or the correct action is taken 
from human error and human factors research, and it also 

but on the wrong object. 
reviews the human factors categories used in accident 

2. Check ing  errors': the checks are omitted, the wrong 
reporting from high hazard industries including the UK 

checks are made or the correct check is made on the 
sector of  the offshore oil industry. Finally, suggestions on 

wrong object. 
how to improve the human factors component of  accident 

3. Re t r i eva l  errors: when information that is required is 
reporting forms and of  ways to reduce accidents using 

not available, or the wrong information is received. 
human factors data are presented. 

4. Transmiss ion  errors: when information has to be 
passed onto someone else, either no information is 
sent, the wrong information is sent, or it is sent to 

2 H U M A N  E R R O R  
the wrong place. 

5. D i a g n o s t i c  errors': when an abnormal event arises, the 
2.1 Theories  of  h u m a n  error  

actual situation is misinterpreted. 
6. Dec i s ion  errors: when the circumstances were con- 

Human error was studied in some detail by industrial 
sidered but the wrong decision is made. 

psychologists  such as Reason 5, Hudson 6 and Rasmussen 7 
whose findings suggest that by endeavouring to conquer, The first two error categories, 'act ion'  and 'checking '  
or at least understand human error, its consequences could relate to Reason 's  skill-based slips and lapses, ' retrieval '  
be reduced. Based on Rasmussen 's  theory of  human per- and ' t ransmission'  errors relate to Reason 's  rule-based 
formance, Reason 5 categorised errors in terms of: (1) skill- mistakes, and 'diagnost ic '  and 'decis ion '  errors relate to 
based slips and lapses, (2) rule-based mistakes and (3) Reason 's  knowledge-based mistakes. 
knowledge-based mistakes. At the skil l-based level, distrac- Examples  of human errors found in the nuclear industry 
tion or preoccupation with another task can lead to slips were studied by Rasmussen 7 who categorised 200 signifi- 
and lapses where monitoring of the task fails. For an error cant events into the following human error categories: 
to occur at the rule-based or knowledge-based perform- omission of  functionally isolated acts, latent conditions 
ance level, attention would not necessarily have to stray not considered, other omissions, side effects not considered, 
far from the problem. Problem solving failures may low alertness, mistakes among alternatives, strong expec- 
occur when the incorrect rule is applied (rule-based) or tation, manual variability, lack of  precision, weak spatial 
the person is unfamiliar  with the problem (knowledge- orientation, absent-mindedness and familiar association. 
based). In addition to slips, lapses and mistakes, violations The results indicate that the majority of  errors made in the 
are also unsafe acts which Reason 5 describes as deliberate nuclear industry are omissions and errors which were made 
deviations from procedures deemed necessary to maintain previously but were not detected. The research carried out 
the safe operation of  a potentially hazardous system. in this area indicates that there is an understanding of 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 97 

the basis of human error, though still little is known about between individuals and their supervisors, have the potential 
how individual error tendencies interact within complex to influence the safety of an installation. In addition, man- 
organisations of people working with high-risk techno- agement's leadership, supervision and crew factors can 
logies, such as in the offshore oil industry. affect safety. At the individual level, optimisation of the 

human-machine interface are evaluated, competence of 
2.2 Active versus latent errors the individual, perceptual judgements, stress, motivation, 

health risks (such as work over-load) and the contribution 
When considering human errors in systems disasters, two of human error to the probability of accidents are examined. 
kinds of errors can be involved. Firstly, active errors, whose A study by the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations 10 
effects are generally almost immediate (such as an omission showed that the underlying causes of accidents in the 
or using the wrong rule) and secondly, latent errors, whose nuclear industry covered organisational, group and indi- 
adverse consequences may lie dormant within the system vidual factors. The underlying factors were broken down 
for a long time, only becoming evident when they combine into the following categories; deficient procedures or docu- 
with other factors to breach the systems defences (such as mentation (43%), lack of knowledge or training (18%), 
design or training) 5. Active errors are most likely to be failure to follow procedures (16%), deficient planning or 
caused by front-line operators (e.g. control-room crews, scheduling (10%), miscommunication (6%), deficient 
production operators), whereas latent errors are more supervision (3%), policy problems (2%), other (2%). At 
likely to be caused by those who are removed from the least 92% of the underlying causes of accidents were 
direct control interface (e.g. designers, high-level decision caused by people, only a small proportion of the underlying 
makers, construction workers, managers and maintenance causes were actually initiated by front-line personnel 
personnel). In most cases, safety programmes are aimed at (i.e. failure to follow procedures) and most originated in 
the operators, to reduce active failures in order to reduce either maintenance-related activities or in bad decisions 
specific causes which are unlikely to occur in the same taken within the organisational and managerial domains. 
combination. The following section illustrates each of the underlying 

In one of their studies in the nuclear industry, Miller, factors (organisational, group and individual) with regard 
Freitag and Wilpert 9 found that in 20% of the incidents, to previous research in this area. 
outside (contracting or sub-contracting) companies were 
involved, and for the majority of these cases there was a 3.1.10rganisational factors 
time lag between the error and the consequence. This indi- It has been postulated that without a good organisational 
cates that the main contribution from the outside firms did safety climate to which everyone contributes, it is inconceiv- 
not result in immediate incidents, rather they resulted in able that any organisation has a safe working environment I 1. 
incidents which occurred later (i.e. latent errors). Wrong The organisational climate represents the context in which 
and missing procedures contributed to incidents in 22% of behaviour occurs and the basis of people's expectations 12. 
all cases for operators and contractors. In the other half In a review of research on safety climate, the following 
of the cases there was a time lag of more than 15 min and factors were found to be related to safety: management 
up to 8 h between the error being made and the conse- commitment to safety, safety training, open communication, 
quence, where most of these errors were maintenance, environmental control and management, stable workforce, 
again indicating that latent errors play a major role. By positive safety promotion policy 11. In addition, the follow- 
identifying both active and latent errors at the work site, it ing factors were found to discriminate between factories in 
is possible to focus on the actual problem, thereby under- terms of safety climate: importance of safety training, 
standing the basis of the accident or error. The following effects of workpace, status of safety committee, status of 
section focuses on the underlying causes of accidents (or safety officer, effect of safe conduct on promotion, level 
'human factors'), which also includes latent errors which of risk at the workplace, management attitudes towards 
were described before. safety and effect of safe conduct on social status 12. 

In her post-mortem examination of the factors which led 
to the Piper Alpha disaster, Elizabeth Pat~-Comell explains 

3 HUMAN FACTORS the technical and organisaional factors as mainly stemming 
from financial pressures 13'14. The corporate culture of 

3.1 The human factors found to affect safety Occidental gave priority to short-term production goals 
which were described as leading to a 'reversed safety 

The underlying human factors found to affect safety have culture'. Management was under pressure to reduce pro- 
been defined as organisational, group and individual duction costs and thus design, construction, inspection and 
factors 3. At the organisational level, various factors may maintenance costs were all at a minimum. In addition, there 
contribute to an increase in incidents and accidents, includ- was a 'culture of denial' of the serious risks, where manage- 
ing cost cutting programmes and the level of communica- ment tended to focus on frequent incidents which had the 
tion between work-sites. At the group level, the potential to disrupt production rather than focusing on 
relationships between members of a work group, and the risk of a catastrophe. Rewards and incentives were 



98 R. P. E. Gordon 

given for short-term production figures, which could have level is a feature of low accident plants. Excessive pressure 
encouraged workers to cut corners to get the job finished. for production also creates a shortage of time to complete 
There was a high turnover of staff indicating that personnel tasks which leads to 'cutting corners' and more slips and 
may not have had the necessary level of  understanding of mistakes. Finally, with regular appearances of the manage- 
the system which is of  particular importance in the case ment on the 'shop floor' an important contribution could be 
of  the system being pushed to its limit. Occidental Petro- made to the safety culture and morale in general. 
leum was not the only company which felt these pressures, In a review of  research on organisational and behavioural 
nor have these pressures disappeared from the offshore oil factors associated with US mine safety 17 numerous manage- 
industry today. ment factors were found to distinguish high-accident rate 

An important part of  the manager 's  role in increasing mines from low-accident rate mines. High-accident 
safety is that they promote learning from past experience. rate mines tended to be characterised by management 's 
Pat&Cornell ~3 described the safety culture on the Piper poor scheduling and planning, and more conflict/ 
Alpha as discouraging internal disclosure and communi- misunderstanding over directions and assignments, whereas 
cation of  bad news which led to small incidents and near- low-accident rate mines were characterised by the abun- 
misses being ignored. Lessons could have been learned from dance of training and the importance of keeping good 
an accident which occurred on the Piper Alpha, a year prior safety records. 
to the Piper Alpha disaster, in which one man was killed, One of  the critical safety aspects of any job is how well 
caused partially by the failure of the Permit To Work system the worker is supervised. The adverse consequences of 
consisting of  a breakdown of  communications and an error fallible decisions made by the organisation could be alle- 
in shift handover (i.e. similar problems to the Piper Alpha viated if line management or supervisors were competent. 
disaster). However, if line-management is limited by resources, put 

Kletz 15 recommended four ways for organisations to under undue time pressure, has inappropriate perceptions of  
learn from past experience: (1) recent and old accidents the hazards, is ignorant of the hazards or has motivational 
should be described in safety bulletins and discussed at difficulties, it is unlikely that they will identify these prob- 
safety meetings, (2) standards and codes of practice lems. In this case, line-management deficiencies could 
should contain notes on accidents which led to the result in a management failure (such as deficient training) 
recommendations, (3) a 'black book'  containing reports of revealing itself as a human error (such as carrying out a task 
accidents with technical interest that have occurred incorrectly). Had the management failure been rectified, 
should be compulsory reading for all newcomers and for the task may have been carried out correctly 5. 
refreshing memories and (4) accident information retrieval Initial research into crew factors was investigated in the 
and storage systems should be used as they contain a wealth aviation industry as early as the 1970's when John Lauber, 
of  useful information. the American aviation psychologist, termed the interaction 

In conclusion, the literature indicates that the organisa- between crew members as 'cockpit resource management ' .  
tional climate is important/ 'or a safe working environment, Specific human factors training programmes derived from 
where commitment to safety by senior management at the this research are now known as 'crew resource manage- 
strategic or policy levels, training, communication, a posi- ment'  (CRM) and are being used in other domains, such 
tive safety promotion policy and learning from past experi- as merchant navy ships, hospital operating theatres, nuclear 
ence are important factors. Therefore these organisational plants and the offshore oil industry tS. The USA National 
factors need to be incorporated into accident analysis. Transportation Safety Board indicated that 73% of accidents 

were the result of flight crew failures rather than technical 
3.1.2 Group factors problems 19. In the 1970s investigations by NASA (in the 
The following section describes group dynamics which can form of accident analyses, pilot interviews and simulator 
lead to enhanced or reduced safety. While there maybe observations), indicated that there was a need for further 
some degree of  overlap between organisational and group focus on pilots' communication and team work as well as 
factors with regard to management style, it was included in leadership, command and decision making. Crew factors 
this section. Thus the subheadings under group factors found to affect safety performance include the attitudes of  
include the role of  middle management, supervision, and the team toward communication and co-ordination, com- 
crew factors. The notion of  teamworking is a large part of mand responsibility and recognition of stressor effects. 
working in the offshore oil industry as many operations are Members of  high performing (or low error) crews were 
managed by crews, shifts and groups working together. found to have a clear understanding not only of their own 

From research into safety culture in the nuclear roles and responsibilities but also those of other team mem- 
industry, Lee 16 found that management 'style'  may affect bers. Research has shown that assertiveness is often lacking 
the accident rate indirectly through job satisfaction, where in junior crew members, where they are reluctant to point 
a 'humanistic approach',  which involves more regard by out poor decisions or errors made by the captain. In contrast 
management for personal and work problems, is likely to high performing crews are found to have a climate of 
be effective. Good communication between the various openness and trust where the leaders are receptive to alter- 
management, supervisory and worker levels at an informal native views and team members are not afraid to express 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 99 

themselves ~s. The aviation industry has made strenuous affect safety include the level of training and experience, 
attempts to improve crew performance by utilising specific the clarity of the job instructions, being overworked and 
human factors training for awareness in the function of not given enough responsibilities. A compilation of the 
CRM 2°. common human factors causes of accidents found in high 

The importance of crew factors to safety in the offshore reliability industries could assist accident reporting forms 
oil industry was highlighted in the post-mortem analysis of by defining the necessary human factors codes. In addition 
the Piper Alpha disaster ~3. There was a serious communica- to using research findings to compile an accident reporting 
tion failure, where the day crew on the Piper Alpha had form, examining the human factors accident causation codes 
failed to pass on information to the night shift about the used by high reliability industries would also be of interest. 
removal of a pressure safety valve which was replaced by Accident reporting forms from aviation, marine and nuclear 
a blind flange without proper tagging. This would normally industries were examined in the following section, followed 
mean that pump A would be out of service, however the by more detailed discussion of forms from offshore. 
night shift tried to start it which may have been the initial 
leak. This indicates that there was a serious flaw in the shift 3.2 Categorisation of  human factors in other industries 
handover system. 

Group factors seem to play an important part in the safety This section describes the accident reporting forms used 
of high hazard industries, where communication between by other high reliability industries such as the nuclear, 
different members of the organisation plays a major part. marine and aviation industries. A classification scheme 
Other factors which contribute include management's which gives an overall picture of the causes of accidents 
leadership abilities, supervisor's resources and relation- was developed by Miller et al. 9. This includes human 
ships between individuals 5. In the following section, factors causes of accidents based on different theories 
factors affecting safety which relate to the individual are from various psychological domains used for analysing 
investigated. accidents in German nuclear power plants. This research 

was carried out by a multi-disciplinary team of human 
3.1.3 Individual factors factors specialists composing of psychologists and engi- 
Previous research into individual factors has mainly focused neers. A comprehensive list of factors affecting safety 
on the man-machine interface (or ergonomics). This section, including types of human errors ('failure types') was 
however, focuses on the factors which affect a person's compiled and an in-depth view of the factors which 
performance, broadening the definition to include external contribute to accidents is presented. The scheme is com- 
influences, such as stress, motivation and health risks. prised of 8 categories. 

Lee 16 indicated that organisations which devote more of 
1. General aspects; time, state of system, operational 

their resources to safety training generally have better acci- 
phases, locus, affected parts, characteristics of the 

dent records. Training in skills is also of relevance to safety, 
component and actors. 

and should include skills requiring the use of potentially 
2. Organisational aspects; co-operation between organi- 

hazardous tools and equipment. 
sations, safety culture. 

In a review of human factors in the mining industry, job 
3. Personal aspects; characteristics of acting person and 

ambiguity was found to affect safety, where miners in 
on group characteristics. 

high-accident mines tended to be given unclear instructions 
4. Job factors; content and characteristics of task, level 

in comparison with those working in low accident rate 
of task, procedures for task, information about task, 

mines 17. Workers at high accident rate mines were more 
tools and safety devices. 

likely to report that they were overworked than those work- 
5. Aspects of the failure; the trigger, the failure type, 

ers at low accident rate mines. Worker autonomy was found 
violations of rules and procedures. 

to improve mine safety, where crews who were given entire 
6. Aspects of causes; conditioning factors, communica- 

responsibility for making the day-to-day decisions of the 
tion, erroneous decision making and level of informa- 

production of coal were thought to have been responsible 
tion processing. 

for the improvements in mine safety. In addition, miners 
7. Aspects of feedback; feedback characteristics, error 

working at high accident rate mines often reported that 
consequence, error discovery. 

they were troubled by some of their co-workers' behaviour. 
8. External impacts; lightning, flood. 

The post-mortem analysis of the Piper Alpha disaster 
indicated that the management of personnel failed 13. This Human factors accident causation codes used by two 
included problems with the hiring, screening, training and British nuclear companies follow the International Safety 
promotion of personnel. There were insufficient qualified Rating System (ISRS) 21 which covers the following 
and trained personnel and temporary promotions of the areas: (1) Personal Factors; inadequate capability, lack of 
maintenance, operators and production personnel allowed knowledge, lack of skill, stress, improper motivation and 
inexperienced workers to run Piper Alpha in a period of (2) Job Factors; inadequate leadership/supervision, inade- 
high activity. quate engineering, inadequate purchasing, inadequate 

In summary, the individual factors which were found to maintenance, inadequate tools/equipment, inadequate 



100 R. P. E. Gordon 

work standards, wear and tear, abuse or misuse. These cate- group violation, maintenance, recency problems, technical 
gories were often used by companies in the offshore oil support and training. Informational factors included; 
industry (see Section 4). electronic checklists, manuals and Standard Operating 

The US Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environ- Procedures (SOP's). Environmental factors included; 
mental Protection and the Office of Navigation Safety and communication systems, unclear information, ergonomics, 
Waterway Services recently developed a strategy to prevent language, weather conditions and operational problems. 
casualties resulting from human error 22. They categorised Accident databases developed to combine accident 
accident causes into 5 groups: management (e.g. faulty stand- information, whether it be from within the installation, 
ards and inadequate communications); operator status (e.g. within the company 23 or across different companies 24'25 
inattention, carelessness, fatigue); working environment also highlighted the impact of management and organisa- 
(e.g. poor equipment design); knowledge (e.g. inadequate tional factors. One such database was established by the 
general technical knowledge) and decision making (e.g. Commission of the European Communities in 1984 for 
poor judgement, inadequate information). They found that collecting information on world-wide major industrial acci- 
the majority of accidents were caused by fatigue, problems dents, called 'Major Accident Reporting System' (MARS). 
with crew co-ordination and inadequate technical knowl- From 1984 to 1994 the most common immediate causes 
edge. The research group believed that the reason for the of accidents were found to be component failures and pipe- 
persistence of marine casualties was because of the lack of work failures, and the second most common were operator 
root cause investigations, lack of identifying and analysing errors. The underlying causes of accidents were detailed 
high risk operations and lack of identifying, developing and as follows. 
implementing measures to prevent human errors. 1. Managerial/organisational omissions, which included 

The human factors categories developed by the UK 
insufficient procedures, relating to design inadequa- 

Marine Accident Investigation Bureau (MAIB) contains 
cies, insufficient operator training and lack of a safety 

six sections; (1) external bodies liaison, (2) company and 
culture. 

organisation, (3) crew factors, (4) equipment, (5) working 
environment and (6) individual. Items of relevance to the 2. Design inadequacy, which included analysis of the 
offshore oil industry in the company and organisation inadequacy of the process, codes/practises provided 
section include communication, pressures, inadequate for limited protection only. 
resources, training, skills, knowledge. The crew factors 3. Short cuts 25. 
section include; communication (between any member or 
group of the crew), management and supervision inade- This section has described the human factors accident 
quate, allocation of responsibility inappropriate or indi- causation codes used by companies in the nuclear, aviation 
vidual takes inappropriate responsibility, procedures and marine industries. The majority of items in these human 
inadequate, manning insufficient/inappropriate, training factors coding systems are of relevance to the offshore 
deficient and discipline of crew. Individual factors oil industry, in particular the crew factors used by British 
include; communication of the individual (language; not Airways and the Marine Accident Investigation Bureau. 
passing on information), competence, training, knowledge In the following section, the accident reporting procedures 
and skill/experience, health, domestic issues (stress arising and human factors coding systems used in the UK sector are 
from events at home), fatigue/vigilance, perceptual described in detail. 
abilities/disabilities, failure to use all the information avail- 
able/poor decision making and risk perception/risk taking 
behaviour inappropriate. The factors used by MAIB display 4 HUMAN FACTORS IN THE OFFSHORE OIL 
a comprehensive list of the human factors categories. INDUSTRY 

The British Airway's Human Factors Reporting pro- 
gramme 'BASIS'  divides accident causation into 5 cate- As part of a larger project which is investigating the human 
gories; (1) crew actions, (2) personal, (3) organisational, and organisational factors affecting offshore safety 26, a 
(4) informational and (5) environmental. The majority of study was designed to identify the human factors categories 
the items listed under these factors are of relevance to the used to ascertain the underlying causes of accidents in the 
offshore oil industry and are listed. Crew actions factors offshore oil industry. The aim of this study is to compile a 
included; crew communication, briefing, assertiveness, comprehensive human factor coding system which could be 
decision process, group climate, planning, procedure, role used for accident reporting, safety training and generally 
conformity, workload management as well as some human raising awareness of the human factor causes of accidents. 
errors: action slip, memory lapse, mis-recognition, mistake As part of this exercise, a sample of 25 British sector off- 
and misunderstanding. Personal factors; included knowl- shore oil and contracting companies' accident reporting 
edge, morale, personal, environmental and operational forms and manuals were acquired from company safety 
stress, tiredness, boredom, environmental awareness, managers. The accident reporting and investigation pro- 
distraction and recent practice. Organisational factors cedures of the 25 companies were analysed and described 
included; commercial pressure, company communication, briefly in the following section. In addition, the human 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 101 

factors codes used by the companies were combined and monthly intervals to senior management on accident fre- 
were summarised in Section 4.3. Finally, recommendations quencies and trends. Final copies of the accident report 
for improving the human factors codes in the accident would be given to the onshore Safety Department, the 
reporting forms were put forward. immediate supervisor, the OIM, the legislative authority 

(depending on severity) and where there is an injury, a 
4.1 Accident reporting procedure in the offshore oil copy is kept in the Medical Centre. 
industry 

4.2 Accident reporting forms 
In an ideal world, all incidents and accidents that occur 
would be thoroughly investigated to determine all root An accident reporting form will tend to contain most of the 
causes of the accidents. In the most part, incidents and acci- following basic items 27 
dents in the offshore oil industry are investigated to some 

1. Type of incident: injury, disease, property damage, 
extent. There is much variation between companies with 

material loss, process disruption, poisonous or flamm- 
regard to the procedures they use to carry out an incident 

able substance leaks, fire or explosion, dangerous 
or accident investigation, though they usually follow a simi- 

occurrences, environmental harm, near-misses, 
lar pattern. For minor accidents, the investigators are the 

hazards. 
supervisors and safety officers and they usually have some 

2. Personal details of people involved, including super- 
training, though there is not always the time and resources 

visor at the time 
for in-depth training with regard to, for example, human 

3. Date, time and location of occurrence 
factor causes of accidents. Where required, an investigation 

4. Work being carried out, experience of person 
team is appointed to carry out a more detailed investi- 

involved 
gation in to the occurrence. For a serious incident, teams 

5. Equipment being used, including safety equipment 
will fly to the installation from the onshore office as well as 

and devices 
government accident inspectors. Initially, the person 

6. Equipment failures 
involved in or observing an accident or incident reports 

7. Protective clothing being worn 
it to their supervisor as soon as possible. The first line 

8. Other people working in the area 
supervisor or foreman obtains written statements from 

9. Permits being issued, procedures being used 
the injured persons and witnesses and organises photo- 

10. Contributory factors, e.g. environmental conditions, 
graphs, sketches, drawings of the scene, obtains relevant 

any hazards present 
documents, procedures and relevant permits to work. The 

11. Immediate and underlying causes 
supervisor will also carry out a preliminary investigation 
into the facts and circumstances surrounding the event to 
establish causes and will recommend actions to prevent 4.3 Categorisation of  human factors in the offshore oil 
recurrence. In addition, the supervisor completes the Acci- industry 
dent/Incident Report Form, Company Standard Form and 
submits it to the Safety Officer and Senior Site Supervisor A sample of 25 UK offshore oil companies' accident report- 
for approval. ing forms were analysed and the immediate and underlying 

The Senior Site Supervisor then discusses the event with causes of accidents were compiled into lists. 'Immediate 
the supervisor/foreman and any additional recommenda- Causes' were either technical or human (Table 1), and 
tions are added at this point. The Senior Site Supervisor 
then appoints personnel responsible for executing the Table 1. Immediate causes in Offshore Accident Reporting 
recommendations and sets target dates for its completion. Forms 
The Accident/Incident Report Form is then submitted to the Immediate causes-human 
Project Manager/Department Head and the circumstances of 
the event are brought to the notice of employees and other Operating without authority 
interested parties with a view to increase safety awareness. Failure to warn/secure 

Improper speed 
The Project Manager/Department Head will discuss Made safety device inoperable 
the accident/incident with the relevant Supervisor and the Used defective equipment 
Safety Advisor and endorse or reject the recommenda- Used equipment improperly 
tions. After a Lost Time Accident the Project Manager/ Did not use proper equipment 
Department Head meets with the injured person to discuss Serviced equipment in operation 

Adjusted equipment in operation 
the circumstances surrounding the accident to identify the Horseplay 
accident causes and highlight areas where the individual Under the influence of drugs/alcohol 
may have contributed to the accident. The endorsed Acci- Improper lifting/loading 
dent/Incident Report Form is submitted to the Corporate Failure to wear PPE 
Safety Department. The Safety Advisor enters details of Lack of attention/forgetfulness 

Working on unsafe or live equipment 
the report onto computer database and makes a report at 



102 R. P. E. Gordon 

Table 2. Personal factors in Offshore Accident Reporting Forms 

Capability Knowledge and skill Stress Improper motivation 

Physical capability Lack of experience Fatigue Peer pressure 
Mental capability Inadequate orientation Stress Aggression 
Lack of competence Inadequate training Monotony Inattention 
Concentration demands Lack of education Health hazards Lack of anticipation 
Perception demands Lack of job instruction Frustration Horseplay 
Judgement demands Inadequate practice Recklessness 
Inability to comprehend Misunderstood directions Inappropriate attempt to save time 
Poor judgement Lack of hand on instruction Insufficient thought and care 
Memory failure Lack of awareness Attitude 

'Underlying Causes' were listed under: 'Personal Factors' 3. Knowledge and skill 
and 'Job Factors' (see Tables 2-3) .  Descriptions of  these 

The majority of  accident reporting tbrms had the basic 
categories are given later. 

'lack of  knowledge' or 'lack of skill' items. Other 
accident reporting forms contained extra items such 

4.3.1 Immediate causes 
as 'lack of experience', 'lack of education', 'lack of 

Immediate causes could be categorised as either technical 
job instruction' and ' inadequate training'. 

failure or human and were usually listed in no particular 
order. The technical failures were recorded generally as 4. Stress 
equipment or safety device failures, lack of  personal protec- 

Under this heading there was usually only the one 
tive equipment, environmental conditions and hazards 

item: 'stress'. However, some accident reporting 
present. The human failures were violations of procedures, 

forms described the stress in more detail: 'fatigue', 
working at improper speed, failure in communication, 

'monotony' ,  'frustration' and 'health hazards'. 
horseplay and under the influence of drugs or alcohol and 
are listed in Table 1. 5. Improper motivation 

This category usually contained only the title item, 
although a few accident reporting forms contained 

4.3.2 Underlying causes 
more detail such as: 'inappropriate peer pressure', 
'horseplay',  'inappropriate attempt to save time' 

1. Personal factors 
'attitude' and 'insufficient thought and care'. 

Under the heading of Personal Factors, there were four 
6. Job factors 

main categories; (1) capability (2) knowledge and skill, 
(3) stress and (4) improper motivation (see Table 2). Under the main heading of  'Job Factors', 60% of the 
Of the 25 accident reporting forms, 64% followed the accident reporting forms followed the basic ISRS 
basic ISRS coding system 21 (i.e. capability, knowl- coding system 21, where 'inadequate leadership and 
edge, stress and improper motivation), 20% either supervision' 'inadequate engineering', 'inadequate 
had no items or very few of  these items and 16% purchasing', 'inadequate maintenance', 'inadequate 
had extra items (between 6 and 10 items). tools and equipment' ,  'inadequate work standards' 

'wear and tear' and 'abuse or misuse' were used. 
2. Capability 

Twenty-four percent of the accident reporting forms 
The majority of accident reporting forms contained a contained extra items under each heading and 16% 
category detailing the mental and physical capability of of the reporting forms had either no items or very 
the person. This included the extreme concentration, few. There was a large degree of variance between 
perceptual and judgement demands as well as memory loss. companies with regard to the number of items in 

Table 3. Job factors in Offshore Accident Reporting Forms 

Organisation Management Supervision Task 

Company policy Inadequate planning Inspection Poor or no job description 
Inadequate safety plan Management practices Work planning Confusing directions 
Working hour policies Communication Unclear responsibilities Conflicting goals 
Competence standards Management job knowledge Instruction, training Equipment selection 
Inadequate staffing and Qualifications and Improper production incentives Inadequate matching of indivi- 

resources experience criteria dual to job task 
Inadequate procedures Bad management example Supervisory job knowledge Work planning 
Safety system Inadequate discipline Time problem 
Adequacies of systems Supervisory example Failure in communication 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 103 

each category and the items were often listed in an accidents and the underlying causes of accidents. These 
unclear manner. In order to divide items into mean- will be discussed in the following section. 
ingful categories, items were listed under the following 
four categories: organisational, management and 4.4.1 Immediate causes 
supervision issues (see Table 3). As described earlier, the immediate causes of an accident 

can either be technical or human in origin. The immediate 
7. Organisational 

human causes of accidents can be defined in terms of the 
Two items which were identified in most of the type of activity which is being performed (i.e. skill, rule or 
accident reporting forms were: 'inadequate company knowledge based). As described in Section 2.1, the errors 
policy' and 'inadequate planning/organisation'. A which relate to these categories include 'action' and 'check- 
few reporting forms included the category of 'systems ing' (skill-based slips and lapses), 'retrieval' and 'transmis- 
inadequacies' which included items such as 'inade- sion' errors (rule-based mistakes), and 'diagnostic' and 
quate maintenance system' and 'control system'. In 'decision' errors (knowledge-based mistakes). By analysing 
addition, the category of 'inadequate procedures' was the immediate causes of the accident in terms of the type 
used which included 'inadequate audit procedures' and of activity and its related human error, this may give an 
'poor or no work permit procedure'. intimation as to the underlying causes (see Fig. 1). For 

example, the disruption of a job which is skill based may 
8. Management 

be caused by personal stress. These human error categories 
Items which were used most often in relation to were suggested for the accident reporting form, as they are 
management included 'lack of management job fairly easily understood and can give further detail as to 
knowledge', 'bad management example/practices', the nature of the incident. 
'inadequate staffing/resources', 'poor or no job 
description' and 'not providing adequate reference 4.4.2 Underlying causes 
material'. Of the 25 accident reporting forms, 52% The definition of human factors which was given at the 
mentioned 'failure in communication'. beginning of this article, defines the three main categories 

as: organisationalfactors which include company policies, 
9. Supervision company standards, systems and procedures. Group Factors 

The majority of accident reporting forms only gave the include: management weaknesses, supervision and crew 
options of 'inadequate supervision', 'inadequate work factors. Individual factors: which include knowledge, per- 
planning' 'inadequate inspection/monitoring' and ceptions, stress, motivation and human errors. These cate- 
'inadequate instruction/training'. Reporting forms gories were used by other industries, such as the marine and 
with extra details gave options as to whether or not aviation industries, where the focus was redirected from the 
reporting relationships were unclear or conflicting, 
whether or not the assignment of responsibility was Table 4. Organisational factors 
unclear or conflicting and whether or not there was 1. Company policies 
adequate reinforcement of proper/improper per- 
formance. In addition, some reporting forms Safety plan 
questioned the supervisory example, the level of Company communication 

Commercial pressure 
supervisory job knowledge, the clarity of directions Company safety culture 
and instructions and the suitability of the person to Staffing/resources 
the job. Working hours policies and practise 

The underlying causes of accidents currently used in the 2. Company standards 
UK offshore oil industry were outlined in the previous Development/maintenance of standards 
section, where the majority of accident reporting forms Communication of standards 
(60%) follow the ISRS coding system 21 which divides Qualifications and experience criteria 
human factors codes into: 'Personal' and 'Job' factors. In Group violation 

Training standards 
the most part, the accident reporting forms lacked a detailed Competence standards 
structure and were inconsistent across companies. Few acci- Providing inadequate reference material 
dent reporting forms were detailed (20%) and others lacked 
even the basic categories (20%). In the following section, 3. Systems and procedures 

ways to improve these categories were suggested. Maintenance system 
Warning/safety systems 
Control systems 

4.4 Improvement  of accident causation categories Planning/organisation 
Audit procedures 

The two sections of accident reporting forms which could Operating procedures 
Work permit procedure 

be improved upon are the immediate human causes of 



104 R. P. E. Gordon 

individual factors to organisational and group factors. For Table 5. Group factors 
the offshore oil industry to improve their accident reporting 1. Management 
methods, following this lead could be an important move. 

Communication 
1. Organisational factors Management/leadership 

Management job knowledge 
The main problem with the ' job'  factors section of the Manning insufficient/inappropriate 
accident reporting forms was that it lacked structure Training deficient 
and detail. Investigation of accident reporting forms Bad management example 
from various high reliability industries (e.g. aviation, Management practices 
marine, nuclear and offshore oil) have led to the Discipline of crew 

Allocation of responsibilities 
following structure being used to describe the organi- Decision process 
sational factors: (1) company policies, (2) company 
standards and (3) systems and procedures (see 2. Supervision 

Table 4). Company policies include the effectiveness Communication 
of  their safety plan, how well the company communi- Inspection 
cates with its employees and the public, the commer- Work planning 

Supervisory job knowledge 
cial pressure which the company puts on its Supervisory example 
employees, the company safety culture, the staffing Instruction, training 
and resource levels and their policies on working Confusing directions 
hours. The item 'failure in communication'  is ambig- Conflicting goals 
uous unless described with regard to the two parties Unclear responsibilities 

Job description 
involved in the communication. Thus, it is necessary to Briefing 
have this item listed under each of the main headings. Inadequate discipline 

2. Company standards 3. Crew 

These include the competence of  the employees, the Communication 
standards of work which are expected, the training Group climate 
standards, the development and maintenance of stand- Assertiveness 

Planning 
ards and how well standards are communicated to the Procedure 
workforce. These were included as they are important Time problem 
to the overall safety standards. Ineffective standards Workload management 
may be more difficult to distinguish as causing a par- 
ticular accident, however, by having a list of  possible 

4. Management 
causes, the task could be assisted. The sub-heading 
Systems and Procedures describes those systems and Management has a significant role to play in setting the 
procedures which if faulty could endanger the safety of proper standards of  work practice and safety and lea- 
the installation. dership and communication skills are important for the 

development of  a positive safety culture in the organi- 
3. Group factors 

sation. It is important that management 's  job knowl- 
This section was practically ignored in accident report- edge is sufficient and appropriate as the workforce may 
ing forms in the UK sector of the North Sea. The sub- otherwise have difficulty respecting and trusting their 
headings under Group Factors include (1) manage- leaders. Often managers talk about 'getting things 
ment, (2) supervision and (3) crew factors (see done' and forget to mention safety, which can leave 
Table 5). Communication is the only item which is the impression that safety is less important than pro- 
listed under each of  the sub-headings and it has a duction. The 'pressure for production' may not be 
slightly different role to play in each one. Offshore verbally explicit, however, often what is not said is 
management needs the skills to communicate with as important as what you say. In addition, bad or 
onshore management as well as the workforce. Super- wrong decisions are the first line of  safety defence 
visors need to be able to communicate effectively with which can be broken and thus management 's  'deci- 
their crew members as well as their superiors. Crew sion-making' must also be in question during the 
members need to be able to communicate among them- investigation of  an incident or accident. 
selves as well as up the line, particularly to their super- 

5. Supervision 
iors. If the culture of  an organisation encourages 
communication not only between members of a work Supervisors have a particularly difficult role to play in 
group but also between personnel from different terms of safety TM where they are the 'middle-men' 
levels of  the hierarchy, there is less chance of  mis- between management and the workers. Supervisors 
understandings and errors occurring. can receive conflicting signals from above (such as 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 105 

the 'production versus safety' conflict) and are Table 6. Individual factors 
expected to pass on both messages to the workforce. 

1. Competence level 
For example 'work safely, but make sure you get the 
job done on time'. An example of  this is highlighted in Competence 
the Chernobyl disaster, where operating staff were Training 

Recent practice 
given contradictory instructions by their supervisors Knowledge, skill, experience 
when they were asked to carry out tests as quickly as Decision-making 
possible as well as to follow normal operating proce- Perceptual disabilities 
dures 2. The supervisor's role also includes 'inspection' Lack of anticipation 
of  the worksite and 'planning'  the work, which Judgements 

Risk perception/risk-taking behaviour 
requires supervisors to have sufficient knowledge of  Distraction 
the job, and to be a good example. Supervisors are Communication 
also expected to give their crew clear job descriptions, 
responsibilities, instructions, training, directions and 2. Stress 

goals. Finally, a good supervisor will be able to brief Personal stress/problems 
the workers before their job begins and have the skills Environmental stress 
to discipline those in need of  it. Operational stress 

Boredom 
6. Crew factors Frustration 

Fatigue 
Crew factors are those elements which affect safety Morale 
when it is dependent on relationships between mem- Health 
bers of  a crew or between crew members and their 3. Motivation 
superiors. An important factor is the 'group climate' 

Inappropriate attempt to save time 
or how well the members get along with each other. Peer pressure 
This will also affect how assertive the crew members Attitude 
are within the group. For example, 'new starts' may Insufficient thought and care/inattention 
lack the confidence to tell those members who are Horseplay/recklessness 
more experienced that they are doing the job wrong Aggression 

or have missed something. Crew members need to 
work together in order to plan a job, which would 

also be contributing factors, as could fatigue from long 
include planning the procedures which allow them to 

working hours or changing from day shift to night shift, 
complete the job on time, and being able to manage the 

morale and ill health (see Flin 29 for discussion on stress 
workload. 

offshore). The motivation of an individual to carry out a 
7. Individual factors task can affect they way they complete it. If an individual 

feels the pressure to get the job done (e.g. pressure for 
The category individual factors, which is often termed 

production or peer pressure), they may inappropriately try 
'Personal Factors' ,  contains three sub-headings: (1) 

and save time by cutting corners. If  an individual is not 
competence, (2) stress and (3) motivation (see 

motivated, or does not have a positive attitude they may 
Table 6). These describe how the individual involved 

put insufficient thought and care into the job. 
in the incident contributed to the cause of  the accident. 
Under the sub-heading competence, the individual's 
level of  training, knowledge, skill, experience and 
recent practice in the relevant job is called into ques- 5 R E D U C I N G  A C C I D E N T S  USING H U M A N  
tion, as is their ability to communicate information F A C T O R S  D A T A  
on to others and their English language skills. This 
section also covers their decision-making skills, any Various accident researchers have identified ways to 
perceptual difficulties which may have arisen such as improve accident reporting systems in order to prevent 
extreme concentration demands, risk perceptions, risk accident and incidents occurring in the future. The neces- 
taking behaviours and any distractions which may have sary steps to prevent the occurrence of  future accidents 
been present. described from a traditional engineering point of  view, 

would be to (1) make immediate technical recommenda- 
The origins of  stress are difficult to determine precisely, tions, (2) investigate ways of  avoiding hazards, and (3) 

however, a list describing the possible causes is given. The investigate ways of  improving the management system 13. 
various forms of  stress include: personal stress originating From a psychologists '  point of  view, Reason 5 describes the 
from the home, the stress of  the environmental conditions causes of  accidents in terms of  active and latent failures, 
and the operational stress from high workload or compli- which points the finger at the decision makers, line manage- 
cated procedures. Boredom and frustration with the job may ment, individuals and system defences. 



106 R. P. E. Gordon 

Others believe that by creating a human factors database safety studies and can help promote consistent safety 
on incidents and accidents more accidents and incidents recording and reporting and increase the reporting of non- 
could be prevented 6'23'3°. This would include identifying injury related accidents and unsafe acts throughout Shell 
latent errors, events that trigger accidents, human errors world-wide. 
and error inducing conditions present before and after the 
event. In addition to an accident database, task inventories 5.2 Auditing unsafe acts and latent failures 
could be performed to describe work groups' objectives and 
operating procedures, the hazards and the potential of  the Another method of feedback is the auditing of unsafe acts, 
work group to cause an accident and the possible outcomes by sampling the frequency and nature of unsafe acts. 
of  any incident. In addition, the operator's performance Analysis of unsafe acts can enable managers to assess 
could be regularly reassessed, by studying operator's weak spots and failures before an accident occurs. Examin- 
habits during routine activity. Brazier and Black 27 state ing the types of  unsafe acts which are prevalent can indicate 
that it is important the safety programme is open for all which underlying problems are leading to some unsafe 
employees to participate in and must be perceived as quite acts being performed more than others. However, this is a 
separate from any element of  blame. Further, it should resource intensive method of  accident prevention and clear 
be emphasised that change may not happen rapidly. The boundaries as to what defines an unsafe act are more diffi- 
following section describes the advantages and disadvan- cult to determine. 
tages of  accident reporting, auditing of unsafe acts and The auditing of latent failures can be undertaken without 
latent failures in order to prevent accidents from occurring an incident ever occurring. Auditing at this level has been 
in the future. demonstrated on North Sea gas platforms 6 and in a desert 

drilling operation by Hudson and colleagues in a project 
5.1 Reporting accidents and incidents called TRIPOD 3°. This was developed to highlight the 

latent factors in the causation of  accidents. Underlying 
Accidents which are reported usually represent those at the latent failures are central to the idea of how accidents 
tip of the iceberg (e.g. fatalities, serious accidents and happen and are referred to as General Failure Types, 
LTI's).  Each accident has unique characteristics and if the which include hardware, design, maintenance, procedures, 
goal is to remove the chance of other dissimilar accidents error enforcing conditions, housekeeping, incompatible 
from occurring in the future, feedback from this 'retrospec- goals, organisation, communication, training and defences. 
tive' reporting system is of  limited use. However, this These General Failure Types often lead to specific unsafe 
method encourages the awareness of  types of  accidents acts and triggering events. In order to assess the state of an 
that can occur. organisation or activity in terms of its underlying latent 

In order to increase the offshore accident information problems, an instrument was developed, called a Failure 
base six companies combined their accident data into a State Profile, to measure the extent of  the underlying 
database called 'Synergi '24. In 1992, three Norwegian oil problems on the basis of a sample of  General Failure 
companies (Norsk Hydro, Saga Petroleum and Statoil) Types. Specialist personnel on the desert rig (e.g. tool- 
together with 3 offshore contractors (Aker, Braathens pusher, drill supervisor) rated their rig on each of the 
Helikopter and Smedvig) developed the first version of  General Failure Types. From these data, a checklist was 
the system and data is presently collected by the Rogaland developed which was sent out to six rigs. The results indi- 
Research Institute in Stavanger, where the companies send cated that training appeared to be the main problem and 
their accident reports via electronic mail. There is an defences and hardware appeared to be the least important 
increasing emphasis on the underlying causes of  accidents of the General Failure Types. There were differences 
which include the human factors. Each company between the beliefs of  drilling supervisors and tool pushers 
receives an updated version of  the database on a with regard to the problematic General Failure Types, 
quarterly basis and the system was extended to be used in where the tool pushers tended to believe that after training, 
English as well. incompatible goals and error enforcing conditions were 

The operating company Shell 's answer to Synergy is the main problems whereas the drilling supervisors thought 
GUARD 23 (Group Unified Accident Reporting Database), that after training, organisation and operating procedures 
which uses feedback from accidents that have occurred, were the main problems. Rig staff (tool pushers and drill 
and includes the use of  immediate and underlying causes supervisors) thought that communication on the rig was 
and areas of  weakness. Accident information is entered into good, whereas office staff thought it was poor. One of the 
a computer and details on the corrective actions are problems with the TRIPOD method is that only a limited 
included. The main emphasis of  this system is on the number of possible latent failures have been described. 
identification of  basic accident causes which include per- There may be other latent errors which remain undiscovered 
sonal, organisational and job factors and definitions of  the if this method is followed rigidly. The TRIPOD approach, 
causes of accidents are provided with the system. This however, encourages an understanding of safety on a 
sy,';tem can provide an accurate historical base of  accident specific installation as well as a basic understanding of 
information and which could serve as a data-bank for how accidents occur. 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 107 

6 CONCLUSION learning from each other and from the large accident data- 
base which would result. One of  the major obstacles with 

This article has provided a brief introduction to some of  this is that there is no consistent accident reporting form 
the human factors issues surrounding safety and accidents used across companies let alone across different industries. 
in the offshore oil industry. Investigation into the human Thus, the first step is for companies and industries to agree 
factors accident causation codes used by high reliability upon a common accident reporting form. 
industries, such as, marine, aviation, nuclear and offshore This first phase of  research has provided a description of  
oil, indicate that similar themes are covered in each. The the human factors causes which are used in the UK offshore 
immediate causes of  accidents detailed in the offshore oil industry today. The theoretical question which was 
accident reporting forms tended to be labelled as technical described in this article refers to the relationship between 
faults, though some human errors (such as communication) human errors and their underlying human causes. This area 
were labelled. This article attempted to include 'human needs further indepth research to develop an understanding 
error' categories to further describe accidents in terms of  of  these relationships. At present research is being under- 
their immediate cause. The main categories used to describe taken to investigate how consistently personnel complete 
the underlying causes of  accidents in the offshore reporting accident reporting forms with respect to the human factors, 
forms were ' job'  and 'personal'  factors. The marine and how valid these data are and how the collected human 
aviation industries, investigated in this study, additionally factors data from the accident reports can be utilised. 
used 'organisational' and 'crew'  factors. 

There was a large degree of  variance between the 25 UK 
offshore accident reporting forms with regard to the number A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S  
of items in each category, their clarity and structure. 
Suggestions have been given of  ways to categorise accidents This research is part of  a larger project which is jointly 
in terms of  their immediate causes and have incorporated funded by seven oil companies, the Offshore Contractors 
the work previously carried out in this area of  research ~'7,s. Association and the Offshore Safety Division of  the Heath 
The three main categories used to describe the underlying and Safety Executive. The views presented are those of 
human factors causes of  accidents are 'organisational',  the author, and should not be taken to represent the position 
'group'  and 'individual' factors, as these were labelled as or policy of  the industrial sponsors or the Health and Safety 
the factors which make up 'human factors' by contemporary Executive. I would like to thank the 25 oil companies who 
human factors researchers 3. sent their accident reporting forms and manuals for 

As a starting point, accident reporting can give a wealth analysis and in particular the members of  the steering 
of  information if it is carried out with the care and commit- group committee for their ideas and enthusiasm. I would 
ment needed to provide a comprehensive analysis. How- also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their 
ever, training in human factors accident causation is helpful comments. 
necessary for effective collection of  data. By gathering 
statistics on the most common human factors causes of  
accidents, such information could be fed back to manage- REFERENCES 
ment, the supervisors and the workforce with the view to 
make personnel aware of  the possible causes of accidents. 1. Cullen, W. D., The Public Inquiry into the Piper Alpha 
The human factors categories could be used to train crews Disaster. vols I and II. HMSO, London, 1980. 

2. Kletz, T., Learning from Accidents. Butterworth-Heinemann 
in working together as a group and making them aware of  Ltd, Oxford, 1994. 
the crew factors which could disturb or aid their working 3. Wilpert, B., Psychology in high hazard systems-Contribu- 
relationships. In addition, these factors could be used to tions to safety and reliability. Invited Keynote Address 
train supervisors and management on how to improve given at the IV European Congress of Psychology, Athens, 
their supervisory or management skills with regard to the July, 1995. 

4. Rasmussen, J., Perspectives on the concept of human error. 
human factors. Invited Keynote Talk given at the Human Performance and 

One of  the major problems which oil companies are faced Anesthesia Technology. Socie~ for Technology in Anesthesia 
with today when using accident trends to prevent further Conference, New Orleans, February, 1993. 
accidents from occurring is that there are too few accidents 5. Reason, J., Human Error, Cambridge University Press, 
for statistical analysis. Companies which have large world- Cambridge, 1991. 

6. Hudson, P. T.W., Groeneweg, J., Reason, J. T., Wagenaar, 
wide populations are able to create accident database with W. A., van de Meeren, R. J.W. and Visser, J. P., Application 
which they can analyse and obtain meaningful human of TRIPOD to measure latent errors in North Sea gas 
factors accident trends. Other companies have integrated platforms: Validity of Failure State Profiles. In Proceedings 
their accident databases to form large accident databases, from the First International Conference on Health, Safety 
such as Synergi 24. However, it seems that as yet there has and Environment. The Hague, The Netherlands, Society of 

Petroleum Engineers Texas, November, 1991. 
been no attempt to combine accident databases from various 7. Rasmussen, J., What can be learned from human error 
industries. By joining forces with other process industries, reports? In Changes in Working Life, (ed. K. D. Duncan, 
such as chemical or nuclear, there could be great benefit in M. Gruneberg and D. Wallis) Wiley, London, 1980. 



108 R. P. E. Gordon 

8. Kontogiannis, T and Embrey, D., Human Reliability Assess- Workforce, (ed. R. Flin and G. Slaven) Penn Well Publishers, 
ment. In Practical Techniques for Assessing and Reducing Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1996. 
human error in industry. Course given by Human Reliability 21. Bird, F. E. Jr. and Germain, G. L., Practical Loss Control 
Associates, Wigan, England, 1992 (cited by Brazier and Leadership: The Consevation of People, Proper~', Process 
Black [27]). and Profits. Institute Publishing (ILCI), Logansville, 

9. Miller, R., Freitag, M. and Wilpert, B., Development and test Georgia, 1989. 
of a classification scheme for human factors in incident 22. Department of Transportation, Prevention Through People, 
reports. In 1AEA Technical Committee Meeting on Organisa- Quality Action Team Report, 1995. 
tional Factors Influencing Human Performance in Nuclear 23. Koene, W. T.C.J . ,  Willink, T. and Waterfall, K. W., 
Power Plants, Ittingen, Switzerland, July, 1995. Group Unified Accident Reporting Database (GUARD). In 

10. Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, An Analysis of  Proceedings of the Second International SPE Conference 
Root Causes in 1983 Significant Event Reports, INPO on Health, Safety and Environment, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
85-027, Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, Atlanta, Ga, Society of Petroleum Engineers, Texas, January, 1994. 
1985. 24. Ringstad, A. J. and Grundt, H. J., The Synergi project. 

11. Donald, I. & Canter, D. Employee attitudes and safety in the In European Safety and Reliability Data Association 
chemical industry. Journal of  Loss Prevention in the Process (ESReDa) Seminar on Maintenance and Databases, 1994. 
Industries, 1994, 7(3). 25. Drogaris, G. K., Major accidents in oil and gas industries. In 

12. Zohar, D. Safety climate in industrial organisations: theo- Proceedings of  the First International SPE Conference on 
retical and applied implications. Journal of  Applied Psychol- Health, Safe~ and Environment, The Hague, The Netherlands. 
ogy, 1980, 65(1), 96-102. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Texas, November, 1991. 

13. Patr-Cornell, M. E. Learning from the Piper Alpha Accident: 26. Mearns, K., Flin, R., Fleming, M. and Gordon, R., 
a post-mortem analysis of technical and organisational fac- Assessing the Organisational and Human Factors in 
tors. Risk Analysis, 1993, 13(2), 215-232. Offshore Safety. Joint industry and HSE Research Project 

14. Pat~-Cornell, M. E. Risk analysis and risk management for IOTH 97 543. Interim Progress Report, The Robert 
offshore platforms: lessons from the Piper Alpha Accident. Gordon University, Aberdeen, 1997. 
Journal of  Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 27. Brazier, A. J. and Black, J. M., Using a task inventory to 
1993, 115, 179-190. develop a more effective incident reporting system. Working 

15. Kletz, T. A. On the need to publish more case histories. Paper, University of Edinburgh, 1995. 
Plant~Operations Progress, 1988, 7(3), 145-147. 28. Fleming, M., Flin, R., Mearns, K. and Gordon, R., The off- 

16. Lee, T., Psychological aspects of safety in the nuclear indus- shore supervisor's role in safety management: law enforcer 
try. In Second Offshore Installation Management Conference or risk manager. In Third SPE International Conference on 
on Managing Offshore Safe~. , April, 1993. Health, Safeo, and Environment, Paper SPE 35906, New 

17. Peters, R. H., Review of recent research on organisational Orleans, Louisiana, 1996. 
and behavioural factors associated with mine safety. A 29. Flin, R., Occupational stress:identification and management. 
Bureau of Mines Information Circular, United States Depart- In Managing the Offshore Workforce, (ed. R. Flin and 
ment of the Interior, 1989. G. Slaven) Penn Well Publishers, Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1996. 

18. Flin, R. H. Crew resource management for teams in the off- 30. Hudson, P. T. W., Wagenaar, W. A., Reason, J. T., 
shore oil industry. Journal of  European Industrial Training, Groeneweg, J., van de Meeren, R. J. W. and Visser, J. P., 
1995, 19(9), 23-27. Enhancing safety in drilling: Implementing TRIPOD in a 

19. Taggart, W. Crew resource management in the cockpit. Air desert drilling operation. In Proceedings of  the First Inter- 
Line Pilot, 1984, 53, 20-23. national Conference on Health, Safe~ and Environment, The 

20. David, G., Lessons from offshore aviation: toward an inte- Hague, The Netherlands, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 
grated human performance system. In Managing the Offshore Texas, November, 1991. 



Reliability Engineering and System Safety' 61 (1998) 95-108 
© 1998 Elsevier Science Limited 

All rights reserved. Printed in Northenl Ireland 
P I I : S 0 9 5 1 - 8 3 2 0 ( 9 7 ) 0 0 0 6 4 - 1  0951-8320/98/$19.00 

E L S E V I E R  

The contribution of human factors to accidents 
in the offshore oil industry 

Rachael P. E. Gordon* 
Aberdeen Universi~, Psychology Department, Kings College, Aberdeen AB24 2UB 

(Received 1 February 1996; revised 24 June 1996; accepted 3 August 1996) 

Accidents such as the Piper Alpha disaster illustrate that the performance of a highly 
complex socio-technical system, is dependent upon the interaction of technical, 
human, social, organisational, managerial and environmental factors and that these 
factors can be important co-contributors that could potentially lead to a catastrophic 
event. The purpose of this article is to give readers an overview of how human factors 
contribute to accidents in the offshore oil industry. An introduction to human errors 
and how they relate to human factors in general terms is given. From here the article 
discusses some of the human factors which were found to influence safety in other 
industries and describes the human factors codes used in accident reporting forms in 
the aviation, nuclear and marine industries. Analysis of 25 accident reporting forms 
from offshore oil companies in the UK sector of the North Sea was undertaken in 
relation to the human factors. Suggestions on how these accident reporting forms 
could be improved are given. Finally, this article describes the methods by which 
accidents can be reduced by focusing on the human factors, such as feedback from 
accident reporting in the oil industry, auditing of unsafe acts and auditing of latent 
failures. © 1998 Elsevier Science Limited. 

1 I N T R O D U C T I O N  exchanged in the offshore oil industry without clear defini- 
tion as to what is actually meant by these labels. They are 

In the past, industrial accidents were reported mainly in often used interchangeably as general terms referring to 
terms of technological malfunctions and the human element the cause of an accident being related to people as opposed 
in the cause of the accident tended to be ignored. Since the to a technical fault. The traditional definition of human 
frequency of technological failures has diminished, the role factors is the scientific study of the interaction between 
of human factors has become more apparent. Accidents man and machine. This definition was extended in recent 
such as the Piper Alpha disaster I illustrate that the perform- years to encompass the effects which individual, group and 
ance of a highly complex socio-technical system, is depend- organisational factors have on safety 3 and is the framework 
ent upon the interaction of technical, human, social, used in the following article. Human errors were defined 
organisational, managerial and environmental elements by Rasmussen4 as 'human acts which are judged by some- 
and that these factors can be important co-contributors body to deviate from some kind of reference act .. they are 
to incidents which could potentially lead to a catastrophic subjective and they vary with time.' These are specific acts 
event. Human factors were deemed to be the root cause of which can either directly (active errors) or indirectly (latent 
many major disasters, such as Chernobyl, Three Mile Island errors) cause an accident. 
and Piper Alpha and as such were well-researched by Both human errors and human factors are usually studied 
those interested in the human contribution to the causes of separately and any relationship between them is often 
accidents, such as psychologists, reliability engineers and overlooked. This may be caused by the difficulty of the 
human factors specialists 2. task or because there is still no agreement between the two 

The terms 'human factors' and 'human error' are often separate areas as to their precise nature and definition. How- 
ever, a number of high reliability industries have attempted 

*E-mail: r.p.gordon@aberdeen.ac.uk; Tel: 44-1224-273-213; Fax: to combine these two subjects in their accident reporting 
44-1224-273-211. forms which will be discussed later in this article. A 

95 



96 R. P. E. Gordon  

HUMAN FACTORS HUMAN ERRORS 

INDIVIDUAL FACTORS SKILL-BASED 
competance action e r r o r s  

s t r e s s  checking errors 
motivation 

GROUP FACTORS RULE-BASED 
management retrieval errors 
supervision transmission errors 

crew 
ORGANISATIONAL FACTORS KNOWLEDGE-BASED 

company policies diagnostic e r r o r s  
company standards decision e r r o r s  

s y s t e m s  and procedures 

Fig. 1. Framework of the relationships between the underlying causes of accident (human factors) and their immediate causes 
(human errors). 

proposed framework describing the relationships between The error types used by Reason 5 are based on psycho- 
the underlying human factors and the immediate human logical theories and are designed to describe errors in 
errors is given in Fig. 1. high risk industries. Although this may sound like an ideal 

The aim of  this article is to begin to improve accident model to use in accident reporting forms, Reason 's  error 
reporting forms by basing the categorisation on a stronger types are complex and would need considerable training 
theoretical grounding. This proposes the human error to understand and use on a regular basis. A more simpli- 
categories based on Rasmussen 's  skill, rule, knowledge stic approach was devised by Kontogiannis and Embrey ~ 
model  4 to determine the immediate cause of the accident, who summarised human errors into the following six 
and use human factors categories (organisation, group, categories. 
individual) to determine the underlying causes of the acci- 

1. Ac t ion  errors: where either no action is taken, the 
dents. This article describes some of the previous literature 

wrong action is taken or the correct action is taken 
from human error and human factors research, and it also 

but on the wrong object. 
reviews the human factors categories used in accident 

2. Check ing  errors': the checks are omitted, the wrong 
reporting from high hazard industries including the UK 

checks are made or the correct check is made on the 
sector of  the offshore oil industry. Finally, suggestions on 

wrong object. 
how to improve the human factors component of  accident 

3. Re t r i eva l  errors: when information that is required is 
reporting forms and of  ways to reduce accidents using 

not available, or the wrong information is received. 
human factors data are presented. 

4. Transmiss ion  errors: when information has to be 
passed onto someone else, either no information is 
sent, the wrong information is sent, or it is sent to 

2 H U M A N  E R R O R  
the wrong place. 

5. D i a g n o s t i c  errors': when an abnormal event arises, the 
2.1 Theories  of  h u m a n  error  

actual situation is misinterpreted. 
6. Dec i s ion  errors: when the circumstances were con- 

Human error was studied in some detail by industrial 
sidered but the wrong decision is made. 

psychologists  such as Reason 5, Hudson 6 and Rasmussen 7 
whose findings suggest that by endeavouring to conquer, The first two error categories, 'act ion'  and 'checking '  
or at least understand human error, its consequences could relate to Reason 's  skill-based slips and lapses, ' retrieval '  
be reduced. Based on Rasmussen 's  theory of  human per- and ' t ransmission'  errors relate to Reason 's  rule-based 
formance, Reason 5 categorised errors in terms of: (1) skill- mistakes, and 'diagnost ic '  and 'decis ion '  errors relate to 
based slips and lapses, (2) rule-based mistakes and (3) Reason 's  knowledge-based mistakes. 
knowledge-based mistakes. At the skil l-based level, distrac- Examples  of human errors found in the nuclear industry 
tion or preoccupation with another task can lead to slips were studied by Rasmussen 7 who categorised 200 signifi- 
and lapses where monitoring of the task fails. For an error cant events into the following human error categories: 
to occur at the rule-based or knowledge-based perform- omission of  functionally isolated acts, latent conditions 
ance level, attention would not necessarily have to stray not considered, other omissions, side effects not considered, 
far from the problem. Problem solving failures may low alertness, mistakes among alternatives, strong expec- 
occur when the incorrect rule is applied (rule-based) or tation, manual variability, lack of  precision, weak spatial 
the person is unfamiliar  with the problem (knowledge- orientation, absent-mindedness and familiar association. 
based). In addition to slips, lapses and mistakes, violations The results indicate that the majority of  errors made in the 
are also unsafe acts which Reason 5 describes as deliberate nuclear industry are omissions and errors which were made 
deviations from procedures deemed necessary to maintain previously but were not detected. The research carried out 
the safe operation of  a potentially hazardous system. in this area indicates that there is an understanding of 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 97 

the basis of human error, though still little is known about between individuals and their supervisors, have the potential 
how individual error tendencies interact within complex to influence the safety of an installation. In addition, man- 
organisations of people working with high-risk techno- agement's leadership, supervision and crew factors can 
logies, such as in the offshore oil industry. affect safety. At the individual level, optimisation of the 

human-machine interface are evaluated, competence of 
2.2 Active versus latent errors the individual, perceptual judgements, stress, motivation, 

health risks (such as work over-load) and the contribution 
When considering human errors in systems disasters, two of human error to the probability of accidents are examined. 
kinds of errors can be involved. Firstly, active errors, whose A study by the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations 10 
effects are generally almost immediate (such as an omission showed that the underlying causes of accidents in the 
or using the wrong rule) and secondly, latent errors, whose nuclear industry covered organisational, group and indi- 
adverse consequences may lie dormant within the system vidual factors. The underlying factors were broken down 
for a long time, only becoming evident when they combine into the following categories; deficient procedures or docu- 
with other factors to breach the systems defences (such as mentation (43%), lack of knowledge or training (18%), 
design or training) 5. Active errors are most likely to be failure to follow procedures (16%), deficient planning or 
caused by front-line operators (e.g. control-room crews, scheduling (10%), miscommunication (6%), deficient 
production operators), whereas latent errors are more supervision (3%), policy problems (2%), other (2%). At 
likely to be caused by those who are removed from the least 92% of the underlying causes of accidents were 
direct control interface (e.g. designers, high-level decision caused by people, only a small proportion of the underlying 
makers, construction workers, managers and maintenance causes were actually initiated by front-line personnel 
personnel). In most cases, safety programmes are aimed at (i.e. failure to follow procedures) and most originated in 
the operators, to reduce active failures in order to reduce either maintenance-related activities or in bad decisions 
specific causes which are unlikely to occur in the same taken within the organisational and managerial domains. 
combination. The following section illustrates each of the underlying 

In one of their studies in the nuclear industry, Miller, factors (organisational, group and individual) with regard 
Freitag and Wilpert 9 found that in 20% of the incidents, to previous research in this area. 
outside (contracting or sub-contracting) companies were 
involved, and for the majority of these cases there was a 3.1.10rganisational factors 
time lag between the error and the consequence. This indi- It has been postulated that without a good organisational 
cates that the main contribution from the outside firms did safety climate to which everyone contributes, it is inconceiv- 
not result in immediate incidents, rather they resulted in able that any organisation has a safe working environment I 1. 
incidents which occurred later (i.e. latent errors). Wrong The organisational climate represents the context in which 
and missing procedures contributed to incidents in 22% of behaviour occurs and the basis of people's expectations 12. 
all cases for operators and contractors. In the other half In a review of research on safety climate, the following 
of the cases there was a time lag of more than 15 min and factors were found to be related to safety: management 
up to 8 h between the error being made and the conse- commitment to safety, safety training, open communication, 
quence, where most of these errors were maintenance, environmental control and management, stable workforce, 
again indicating that latent errors play a major role. By positive safety promotion policy 11. In addition, the follow- 
identifying both active and latent errors at the work site, it ing factors were found to discriminate between factories in 
is possible to focus on the actual problem, thereby under- terms of safety climate: importance of safety training, 
standing the basis of the accident or error. The following effects of workpace, status of safety committee, status of 
section focuses on the underlying causes of accidents (or safety officer, effect of safe conduct on promotion, level 
'human factors'), which also includes latent errors which of risk at the workplace, management attitudes towards 
were described before. safety and effect of safe conduct on social status 12. 

In her post-mortem examination of the factors which led 
to the Piper Alpha disaster, Elizabeth Pat~-Comell explains 

3 HUMAN FACTORS the technical and organisaional factors as mainly stemming 
from financial pressures 13'14. The corporate culture of 

3.1 The human factors found to affect safety Occidental gave priority to short-term production goals 
which were described as leading to a 'reversed safety 

The underlying human factors found to affect safety have culture'. Management was under pressure to reduce pro- 
been defined as organisational, group and individual duction costs and thus design, construction, inspection and 
factors 3. At the organisational level, various factors may maintenance costs were all at a minimum. In addition, there 
contribute to an increase in incidents and accidents, includ- was a 'culture of denial' of the serious risks, where manage- 
ing cost cutting programmes and the level of communica- ment tended to focus on frequent incidents which had the 
tion between work-sites. At the group level, the potential to disrupt production rather than focusing on 
relationships between members of a work group, and the risk of a catastrophe. Rewards and incentives were 



98 R. P. E. Gordon 

given for short-term production figures, which could have level is a feature of low accident plants. Excessive pressure 
encouraged workers to cut corners to get the job finished. for production also creates a shortage of time to complete 
There was a high turnover of staff indicating that personnel tasks which leads to 'cutting corners' and more slips and 
may not have had the necessary level of  understanding of mistakes. Finally, with regular appearances of the manage- 
the system which is of  particular importance in the case ment on the 'shop floor' an important contribution could be 
of  the system being pushed to its limit. Occidental Petro- made to the safety culture and morale in general. 
leum was not the only company which felt these pressures, In a review of  research on organisational and behavioural 
nor have these pressures disappeared from the offshore oil factors associated with US mine safety 17 numerous manage- 
industry today. ment factors were found to distinguish high-accident rate 

An important part of  the manager 's  role in increasing mines from low-accident rate mines. High-accident 
safety is that they promote learning from past experience. rate mines tended to be characterised by management 's 
Pat&Cornell ~3 described the safety culture on the Piper poor scheduling and planning, and more conflict/ 
Alpha as discouraging internal disclosure and communi- misunderstanding over directions and assignments, whereas 
cation of  bad news which led to small incidents and near- low-accident rate mines were characterised by the abun- 
misses being ignored. Lessons could have been learned from dance of training and the importance of keeping good 
an accident which occurred on the Piper Alpha, a year prior safety records. 
to the Piper Alpha disaster, in which one man was killed, One of  the critical safety aspects of any job is how well 
caused partially by the failure of the Permit To Work system the worker is supervised. The adverse consequences of 
consisting of  a breakdown of  communications and an error fallible decisions made by the organisation could be alle- 
in shift handover (i.e. similar problems to the Piper Alpha viated if line management or supervisors were competent. 
disaster). However, if line-management is limited by resources, put 

Kletz 15 recommended four ways for organisations to under undue time pressure, has inappropriate perceptions of  
learn from past experience: (1) recent and old accidents the hazards, is ignorant of the hazards or has motivational 
should be described in safety bulletins and discussed at difficulties, it is unlikely that they will identify these prob- 
safety meetings, (2) standards and codes of practice lems. In this case, line-management deficiencies could 
should contain notes on accidents which led to the result in a management failure (such as deficient training) 
recommendations, (3) a 'black book'  containing reports of revealing itself as a human error (such as carrying out a task 
accidents with technical interest that have occurred incorrectly). Had the management failure been rectified, 
should be compulsory reading for all newcomers and for the task may have been carried out correctly 5. 
refreshing memories and (4) accident information retrieval Initial research into crew factors was investigated in the 
and storage systems should be used as they contain a wealth aviation industry as early as the 1970's when John Lauber, 
of  useful information. the American aviation psychologist, termed the interaction 

In conclusion, the literature indicates that the organisa- between crew members as 'cockpit resource management ' .  
tional climate is important/ 'or a safe working environment, Specific human factors training programmes derived from 
where commitment to safety by senior management at the this research are now known as 'crew resource manage- 
strategic or policy levels, training, communication, a posi- ment'  (CRM) and are being used in other domains, such 
tive safety promotion policy and learning from past experi- as merchant navy ships, hospital operating theatres, nuclear 
ence are important factors. Therefore these organisational plants and the offshore oil industry tS. The USA National 
factors need to be incorporated into accident analysis. Transportation Safety Board indicated that 73% of accidents 

were the result of flight crew failures rather than technical 
3.1.2 Group factors problems 19. In the 1970s investigations by NASA (in the 
The following section describes group dynamics which can form of accident analyses, pilot interviews and simulator 
lead to enhanced or reduced safety. While there maybe observations), indicated that there was a need for further 
some degree of  overlap between organisational and group focus on pilots' communication and team work as well as 
factors with regard to management style, it was included in leadership, command and decision making. Crew factors 
this section. Thus the subheadings under group factors found to affect safety performance include the attitudes of  
include the role of  middle management, supervision, and the team toward communication and co-ordination, com- 
crew factors. The notion of  teamworking is a large part of mand responsibility and recognition of stressor effects. 
working in the offshore oil industry as many operations are Members of  high performing (or low error) crews were 
managed by crews, shifts and groups working together. found to have a clear understanding not only of their own 

From research into safety culture in the nuclear roles and responsibilities but also those of other team mem- 
industry, Lee 16 found that management 'style'  may affect bers. Research has shown that assertiveness is often lacking 
the accident rate indirectly through job satisfaction, where in junior crew members, where they are reluctant to point 
a 'humanistic approach',  which involves more regard by out poor decisions or errors made by the captain. In contrast 
management for personal and work problems, is likely to high performing crews are found to have a climate of 
be effective. Good communication between the various openness and trust where the leaders are receptive to alter- 
management, supervisory and worker levels at an informal native views and team members are not afraid to express 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 99 

themselves ~s. The aviation industry has made strenuous affect safety include the level of training and experience, 
attempts to improve crew performance by utilising specific the clarity of the job instructions, being overworked and 
human factors training for awareness in the function of not given enough responsibilities. A compilation of the 
CRM 2°. common human factors causes of accidents found in high 

The importance of crew factors to safety in the offshore reliability industries could assist accident reporting forms 
oil industry was highlighted in the post-mortem analysis of by defining the necessary human factors codes. In addition 
the Piper Alpha disaster ~3. There was a serious communica- to using research findings to compile an accident reporting 
tion failure, where the day crew on the Piper Alpha had form, examining the human factors accident causation codes 
failed to pass on information to the night shift about the used by high reliability industries would also be of interest. 
removal of a pressure safety valve which was replaced by Accident reporting forms from aviation, marine and nuclear 
a blind flange without proper tagging. This would normally industries were examined in the following section, followed 
mean that pump A would be out of service, however the by more detailed discussion of forms from offshore. 
night shift tried to start it which may have been the initial 
leak. This indicates that there was a serious flaw in the shift 3.2 Categorisation of  human factors in other industries 
handover system. 

Group factors seem to play an important part in the safety This section describes the accident reporting forms used 
of high hazard industries, where communication between by other high reliability industries such as the nuclear, 
different members of the organisation plays a major part. marine and aviation industries. A classification scheme 
Other factors which contribute include management's which gives an overall picture of the causes of accidents 
leadership abilities, supervisor's resources and relation- was developed by Miller et al. 9. This includes human 
ships between individuals 5. In the following section, factors causes of accidents based on different theories 
factors affecting safety which relate to the individual are from various psychological domains used for analysing 
investigated. accidents in German nuclear power plants. This research 

was carried out by a multi-disciplinary team of human 
3.1.3 Individual factors factors specialists composing of psychologists and engi- 
Previous research into individual factors has mainly focused neers. A comprehensive list of factors affecting safety 
on the man-machine interface (or ergonomics). This section, including types of human errors ('failure types') was 
however, focuses on the factors which affect a person's compiled and an in-depth view of the factors which 
performance, broadening the definition to include external contribute to accidents is presented. The scheme is com- 
influences, such as stress, motivation and health risks. prised of 8 categories. 

Lee 16 indicated that organisations which devote more of 
1. General aspects; time, state of system, operational 

their resources to safety training generally have better acci- 
phases, locus, affected parts, characteristics of the 

dent records. Training in skills is also of relevance to safety, 
component and actors. 

and should include skills requiring the use of potentially 
2. Organisational aspects; co-operation between organi- 

hazardous tools and equipment. 
sations, safety culture. 

In a review of human factors in the mining industry, job 
3. Personal aspects; characteristics of acting person and 

ambiguity was found to affect safety, where miners in 
on group characteristics. 

high-accident mines tended to be given unclear instructions 
4. Job factors; content and characteristics of task, level 

in comparison with those working in low accident rate 
of task, procedures for task, information about task, 

mines 17. Workers at high accident rate mines were more 
tools and safety devices. 

likely to report that they were overworked than those work- 
5. Aspects of the failure; the trigger, the failure type, 

ers at low accident rate mines. Worker autonomy was found 
violations of rules and procedures. 

to improve mine safety, where crews who were given entire 
6. Aspects of causes; conditioning factors, communica- 

responsibility for making the day-to-day decisions of the 
tion, erroneous decision making and level of informa- 

production of coal were thought to have been responsible 
tion processing. 

for the improvements in mine safety. In addition, miners 
7. Aspects of feedback; feedback characteristics, error 

working at high accident rate mines often reported that 
consequence, error discovery. 

they were troubled by some of their co-workers' behaviour. 
8. External impacts; lightning, flood. 

The post-mortem analysis of the Piper Alpha disaster 
indicated that the management of personnel failed 13. This Human factors accident causation codes used by two 
included problems with the hiring, screening, training and British nuclear companies follow the International Safety 
promotion of personnel. There were insufficient qualified Rating System (ISRS) 21 which covers the following 
and trained personnel and temporary promotions of the areas: (1) Personal Factors; inadequate capability, lack of 
maintenance, operators and production personnel allowed knowledge, lack of skill, stress, improper motivation and 
inexperienced workers to run Piper Alpha in a period of (2) Job Factors; inadequate leadership/supervision, inade- 
high activity. quate engineering, inadequate purchasing, inadequate 

In summary, the individual factors which were found to maintenance, inadequate tools/equipment, inadequate 



100 R. P. E. Gordon 

work standards, wear and tear, abuse or misuse. These cate- group violation, maintenance, recency problems, technical 
gories were often used by companies in the offshore oil support and training. Informational factors included; 
industry (see Section 4). electronic checklists, manuals and Standard Operating 

The US Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environ- Procedures (SOP's). Environmental factors included; 
mental Protection and the Office of Navigation Safety and communication systems, unclear information, ergonomics, 
Waterway Services recently developed a strategy to prevent language, weather conditions and operational problems. 
casualties resulting from human error 22. They categorised Accident databases developed to combine accident 
accident causes into 5 groups: management (e.g. faulty stand- information, whether it be from within the installation, 
ards and inadequate communications); operator status (e.g. within the company 23 or across different companies 24'25 
inattention, carelessness, fatigue); working environment also highlighted the impact of management and organisa- 
(e.g. poor equipment design); knowledge (e.g. inadequate tional factors. One such database was established by the 
general technical knowledge) and decision making (e.g. Commission of the European Communities in 1984 for 
poor judgement, inadequate information). They found that collecting information on world-wide major industrial acci- 
the majority of accidents were caused by fatigue, problems dents, called 'Major Accident Reporting System' (MARS). 
with crew co-ordination and inadequate technical knowl- From 1984 to 1994 the most common immediate causes 
edge. The research group believed that the reason for the of accidents were found to be component failures and pipe- 
persistence of marine casualties was because of the lack of work failures, and the second most common were operator 
root cause investigations, lack of identifying and analysing errors. The underlying causes of accidents were detailed 
high risk operations and lack of identifying, developing and as follows. 
implementing measures to prevent human errors. 1. Managerial/organisational omissions, which included 

The human factors categories developed by the UK 
insufficient procedures, relating to design inadequa- 

Marine Accident Investigation Bureau (MAIB) contains 
cies, insufficient operator training and lack of a safety 

six sections; (1) external bodies liaison, (2) company and 
culture. 

organisation, (3) crew factors, (4) equipment, (5) working 
environment and (6) individual. Items of relevance to the 2. Design inadequacy, which included analysis of the 
offshore oil industry in the company and organisation inadequacy of the process, codes/practises provided 
section include communication, pressures, inadequate for limited protection only. 
resources, training, skills, knowledge. The crew factors 3. Short cuts 25. 
section include; communication (between any member or 
group of the crew), management and supervision inade- This section has described the human factors accident 
quate, allocation of responsibility inappropriate or indi- causation codes used by companies in the nuclear, aviation 
vidual takes inappropriate responsibility, procedures and marine industries. The majority of items in these human 
inadequate, manning insufficient/inappropriate, training factors coding systems are of relevance to the offshore 
deficient and discipline of crew. Individual factors oil industry, in particular the crew factors used by British 
include; communication of the individual (language; not Airways and the Marine Accident Investigation Bureau. 
passing on information), competence, training, knowledge In the following section, the accident reporting procedures 
and skill/experience, health, domestic issues (stress arising and human factors coding systems used in the UK sector are 
from events at home), fatigue/vigilance, perceptual described in detail. 
abilities/disabilities, failure to use all the information avail- 
able/poor decision making and risk perception/risk taking 
behaviour inappropriate. The factors used by MAIB display 4 HUMAN FACTORS IN THE OFFSHORE OIL 
a comprehensive list of the human factors categories. INDUSTRY 

The British Airway's Human Factors Reporting pro- 
gramme 'BASIS'  divides accident causation into 5 cate- As part of a larger project which is investigating the human 
gories; (1) crew actions, (2) personal, (3) organisational, and organisational factors affecting offshore safety 26, a 
(4) informational and (5) environmental. The majority of study was designed to identify the human factors categories 
the items listed under these factors are of relevance to the used to ascertain the underlying causes of accidents in the 
offshore oil industry and are listed. Crew actions factors offshore oil industry. The aim of this study is to compile a 
included; crew communication, briefing, assertiveness, comprehensive human factor coding system which could be 
decision process, group climate, planning, procedure, role used for accident reporting, safety training and generally 
conformity, workload management as well as some human raising awareness of the human factor causes of accidents. 
errors: action slip, memory lapse, mis-recognition, mistake As part of this exercise, a sample of 25 British sector off- 
and misunderstanding. Personal factors; included knowl- shore oil and contracting companies' accident reporting 
edge, morale, personal, environmental and operational forms and manuals were acquired from company safety 
stress, tiredness, boredom, environmental awareness, managers. The accident reporting and investigation pro- 
distraction and recent practice. Organisational factors cedures of the 25 companies were analysed and described 
included; commercial pressure, company communication, briefly in the following section. In addition, the human 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 101 

factors codes used by the companies were combined and monthly intervals to senior management on accident fre- 
were summarised in Section 4.3. Finally, recommendations quencies and trends. Final copies of the accident report 
for improving the human factors codes in the accident would be given to the onshore Safety Department, the 
reporting forms were put forward. immediate supervisor, the OIM, the legislative authority 

(depending on severity) and where there is an injury, a 
4.1 Accident reporting procedure in the offshore oil copy is kept in the Medical Centre. 
industry 

4.2 Accident reporting forms 
In an ideal world, all incidents and accidents that occur 
would be thoroughly investigated to determine all root An accident reporting form will tend to contain most of the 
causes of the accidents. In the most part, incidents and acci- following basic items 27 
dents in the offshore oil industry are investigated to some 

1. Type of incident: injury, disease, property damage, 
extent. There is much variation between companies with 

material loss, process disruption, poisonous or flamm- 
regard to the procedures they use to carry out an incident 

able substance leaks, fire or explosion, dangerous 
or accident investigation, though they usually follow a simi- 

occurrences, environmental harm, near-misses, 
lar pattern. For minor accidents, the investigators are the 

hazards. 
supervisors and safety officers and they usually have some 

2. Personal details of people involved, including super- 
training, though there is not always the time and resources 

visor at the time 
for in-depth training with regard to, for example, human 

3. Date, time and location of occurrence 
factor causes of accidents. Where required, an investigation 

4. Work being carried out, experience of person 
team is appointed to carry out a more detailed investi- 

involved 
gation in to the occurrence. For a serious incident, teams 

5. Equipment being used, including safety equipment 
will fly to the installation from the onshore office as well as 

and devices 
government accident inspectors. Initially, the person 

6. Equipment failures 
involved in or observing an accident or incident reports 

7. Protective clothing being worn 
it to their supervisor as soon as possible. The first line 

8. Other people working in the area 
supervisor or foreman obtains written statements from 

9. Permits being issued, procedures being used 
the injured persons and witnesses and organises photo- 

10. Contributory factors, e.g. environmental conditions, 
graphs, sketches, drawings of the scene, obtains relevant 

any hazards present 
documents, procedures and relevant permits to work. The 

11. Immediate and underlying causes 
supervisor will also carry out a preliminary investigation 
into the facts and circumstances surrounding the event to 
establish causes and will recommend actions to prevent 4.3 Categorisation of  human factors in the offshore oil 
recurrence. In addition, the supervisor completes the Acci- industry 
dent/Incident Report Form, Company Standard Form and 
submits it to the Safety Officer and Senior Site Supervisor A sample of 25 UK offshore oil companies' accident report- 
for approval. ing forms were analysed and the immediate and underlying 

The Senior Site Supervisor then discusses the event with causes of accidents were compiled into lists. 'Immediate 
the supervisor/foreman and any additional recommenda- Causes' were either technical or human (Table 1), and 
tions are added at this point. The Senior Site Supervisor 
then appoints personnel responsible for executing the Table 1. Immediate causes in Offshore Accident Reporting 
recommendations and sets target dates for its completion. Forms 
The Accident/Incident Report Form is then submitted to the Immediate causes-human 
Project Manager/Department Head and the circumstances of 
the event are brought to the notice of employees and other Operating without authority 
interested parties with a view to increase safety awareness. Failure to warn/secure 

Improper speed 
The Project Manager/Department Head will discuss Made safety device inoperable 
the accident/incident with the relevant Supervisor and the Used defective equipment 
Safety Advisor and endorse or reject the recommenda- Used equipment improperly 
tions. After a Lost Time Accident the Project Manager/ Did not use proper equipment 
Department Head meets with the injured person to discuss Serviced equipment in operation 

Adjusted equipment in operation 
the circumstances surrounding the accident to identify the Horseplay 
accident causes and highlight areas where the individual Under the influence of drugs/alcohol 
may have contributed to the accident. The endorsed Acci- Improper lifting/loading 
dent/Incident Report Form is submitted to the Corporate Failure to wear PPE 
Safety Department. The Safety Advisor enters details of Lack of attention/forgetfulness 

Working on unsafe or live equipment 
the report onto computer database and makes a report at 



102 R. P. E. Gordon 

Table 2. Personal factors in Offshore Accident Reporting Forms 

Capability Knowledge and skill Stress Improper motivation 

Physical capability Lack of experience Fatigue Peer pressure 
Mental capability Inadequate orientation Stress Aggression 
Lack of competence Inadequate training Monotony Inattention 
Concentration demands Lack of education Health hazards Lack of anticipation 
Perception demands Lack of job instruction Frustration Horseplay 
Judgement demands Inadequate practice Recklessness 
Inability to comprehend Misunderstood directions Inappropriate attempt to save time 
Poor judgement Lack of hand on instruction Insufficient thought and care 
Memory failure Lack of awareness Attitude 

'Underlying Causes' were listed under: 'Personal Factors' 3. Knowledge and skill 
and 'Job Factors' (see Tables 2-3) .  Descriptions of  these 

The majority of  accident reporting tbrms had the basic 
categories are given later. 

'lack of  knowledge' or 'lack of skill' items. Other 
accident reporting forms contained extra items such 

4.3.1 Immediate causes 
as 'lack of experience', 'lack of education', 'lack of 

Immediate causes could be categorised as either technical 
job instruction' and ' inadequate training'. 

failure or human and were usually listed in no particular 
order. The technical failures were recorded generally as 4. Stress 
equipment or safety device failures, lack of  personal protec- 

Under this heading there was usually only the one 
tive equipment, environmental conditions and hazards 

item: 'stress'. However, some accident reporting 
present. The human failures were violations of procedures, 

forms described the stress in more detail: 'fatigue', 
working at improper speed, failure in communication, 

'monotony' ,  'frustration' and 'health hazards'. 
horseplay and under the influence of drugs or alcohol and 
are listed in Table 1. 5. Improper motivation 

This category usually contained only the title item, 
although a few accident reporting forms contained 

4.3.2 Underlying causes 
more detail such as: 'inappropriate peer pressure', 
'horseplay',  'inappropriate attempt to save time' 

1. Personal factors 
'attitude' and 'insufficient thought and care'. 

Under the heading of Personal Factors, there were four 
6. Job factors 

main categories; (1) capability (2) knowledge and skill, 
(3) stress and (4) improper motivation (see Table 2). Under the main heading of  'Job Factors', 60% of the 
Of the 25 accident reporting forms, 64% followed the accident reporting forms followed the basic ISRS 
basic ISRS coding system 21 (i.e. capability, knowl- coding system 21, where 'inadequate leadership and 
edge, stress and improper motivation), 20% either supervision' 'inadequate engineering', 'inadequate 
had no items or very few of  these items and 16% purchasing', 'inadequate maintenance', 'inadequate 
had extra items (between 6 and 10 items). tools and equipment' ,  'inadequate work standards' 

'wear and tear' and 'abuse or misuse' were used. 
2. Capability 

Twenty-four percent of the accident reporting forms 
The majority of accident reporting forms contained a contained extra items under each heading and 16% 
category detailing the mental and physical capability of of the reporting forms had either no items or very 
the person. This included the extreme concentration, few. There was a large degree of variance between 
perceptual and judgement demands as well as memory loss. companies with regard to the number of items in 

Table 3. Job factors in Offshore Accident Reporting Forms 

Organisation Management Supervision Task 

Company policy Inadequate planning Inspection Poor or no job description 
Inadequate safety plan Management practices Work planning Confusing directions 
Working hour policies Communication Unclear responsibilities Conflicting goals 
Competence standards Management job knowledge Instruction, training Equipment selection 
Inadequate staffing and Qualifications and Improper production incentives Inadequate matching of indivi- 

resources experience criteria dual to job task 
Inadequate procedures Bad management example Supervisory job knowledge Work planning 
Safety system Inadequate discipline Time problem 
Adequacies of systems Supervisory example Failure in communication 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 103 

each category and the items were often listed in an accidents and the underlying causes of accidents. These 
unclear manner. In order to divide items into mean- will be discussed in the following section. 
ingful categories, items were listed under the following 
four categories: organisational, management and 4.4.1 Immediate causes 
supervision issues (see Table 3). As described earlier, the immediate causes of an accident 

can either be technical or human in origin. The immediate 
7. Organisational 

human causes of accidents can be defined in terms of the 
Two items which were identified in most of the type of activity which is being performed (i.e. skill, rule or 
accident reporting forms were: 'inadequate company knowledge based). As described in Section 2.1, the errors 
policy' and 'inadequate planning/organisation'. A which relate to these categories include 'action' and 'check- 
few reporting forms included the category of 'systems ing' (skill-based slips and lapses), 'retrieval' and 'transmis- 
inadequacies' which included items such as 'inade- sion' errors (rule-based mistakes), and 'diagnostic' and 
quate maintenance system' and 'control system'. In 'decision' errors (knowledge-based mistakes). By analysing 
addition, the category of 'inadequate procedures' was the immediate causes of the accident in terms of the type 
used which included 'inadequate audit procedures' and of activity and its related human error, this may give an 
'poor or no work permit procedure'. intimation as to the underlying causes (see Fig. 1). For 

example, the disruption of a job which is skill based may 
8. Management 

be caused by personal stress. These human error categories 
Items which were used most often in relation to were suggested for the accident reporting form, as they are 
management included 'lack of management job fairly easily understood and can give further detail as to 
knowledge', 'bad management example/practices', the nature of the incident. 
'inadequate staffing/resources', 'poor or no job 
description' and 'not providing adequate reference 4.4.2 Underlying causes 
material'. Of the 25 accident reporting forms, 52% The definition of human factors which was given at the 
mentioned 'failure in communication'. beginning of this article, defines the three main categories 

as: organisationalfactors which include company policies, 
9. Supervision company standards, systems and procedures. Group Factors 

The majority of accident reporting forms only gave the include: management weaknesses, supervision and crew 
options of 'inadequate supervision', 'inadequate work factors. Individual factors: which include knowledge, per- 
planning' 'inadequate inspection/monitoring' and ceptions, stress, motivation and human errors. These cate- 
'inadequate instruction/training'. Reporting forms gories were used by other industries, such as the marine and 
with extra details gave options as to whether or not aviation industries, where the focus was redirected from the 
reporting relationships were unclear or conflicting, 
whether or not the assignment of responsibility was Table 4. Organisational factors 
unclear or conflicting and whether or not there was 1. Company policies 
adequate reinforcement of proper/improper per- 
formance. In addition, some reporting forms Safety plan 
questioned the supervisory example, the level of Company communication 

Commercial pressure 
supervisory job knowledge, the clarity of directions Company safety culture 
and instructions and the suitability of the person to Staffing/resources 
the job. Working hours policies and practise 

The underlying causes of accidents currently used in the 2. Company standards 
UK offshore oil industry were outlined in the previous Development/maintenance of standards 
section, where the majority of accident reporting forms Communication of standards 
(60%) follow the ISRS coding system 21 which divides Qualifications and experience criteria 
human factors codes into: 'Personal' and 'Job' factors. In Group violation 

Training standards 
the most part, the accident reporting forms lacked a detailed Competence standards 
structure and were inconsistent across companies. Few acci- Providing inadequate reference material 
dent reporting forms were detailed (20%) and others lacked 
even the basic categories (20%). In the following section, 3. Systems and procedures 

ways to improve these categories were suggested. Maintenance system 
Warning/safety systems 
Control systems 

4.4 Improvement  of accident causation categories Planning/organisation 
Audit procedures 

The two sections of accident reporting forms which could Operating procedures 
Work permit procedure 

be improved upon are the immediate human causes of 



104 R. P. E. Gordon 

individual factors to organisational and group factors. For Table 5. Group factors 
the offshore oil industry to improve their accident reporting 1. Management 
methods, following this lead could be an important move. 

Communication 
1. Organisational factors Management/leadership 

Management job knowledge 
The main problem with the ' job'  factors section of the Manning insufficient/inappropriate 
accident reporting forms was that it lacked structure Training deficient 
and detail. Investigation of accident reporting forms Bad management example 
from various high reliability industries (e.g. aviation, Management practices 
marine, nuclear and offshore oil) have led to the Discipline of crew 

Allocation of responsibilities 
following structure being used to describe the organi- Decision process 
sational factors: (1) company policies, (2) company 
standards and (3) systems and procedures (see 2. Supervision 

Table 4). Company policies include the effectiveness Communication 
of  their safety plan, how well the company communi- Inspection 
cates with its employees and the public, the commer- Work planning 

Supervisory job knowledge 
cial pressure which the company puts on its Supervisory example 
employees, the company safety culture, the staffing Instruction, training 
and resource levels and their policies on working Confusing directions 
hours. The item 'failure in communication'  is ambig- Conflicting goals 
uous unless described with regard to the two parties Unclear responsibilities 

Job description 
involved in the communication. Thus, it is necessary to Briefing 
have this item listed under each of the main headings. Inadequate discipline 

2. Company standards 3. Crew 

These include the competence of  the employees, the Communication 
standards of work which are expected, the training Group climate 
standards, the development and maintenance of stand- Assertiveness 

Planning 
ards and how well standards are communicated to the Procedure 
workforce. These were included as they are important Time problem 
to the overall safety standards. Ineffective standards Workload management 
may be more difficult to distinguish as causing a par- 
ticular accident, however, by having a list of  possible 

4. Management 
causes, the task could be assisted. The sub-heading 
Systems and Procedures describes those systems and Management has a significant role to play in setting the 
procedures which if faulty could endanger the safety of proper standards of  work practice and safety and lea- 
the installation. dership and communication skills are important for the 

development of  a positive safety culture in the organi- 
3. Group factors 

sation. It is important that management 's  job knowl- 
This section was practically ignored in accident report- edge is sufficient and appropriate as the workforce may 
ing forms in the UK sector of the North Sea. The sub- otherwise have difficulty respecting and trusting their 
headings under Group Factors include (1) manage- leaders. Often managers talk about 'getting things 
ment, (2) supervision and (3) crew factors (see done' and forget to mention safety, which can leave 
Table 5). Communication is the only item which is the impression that safety is less important than pro- 
listed under each of  the sub-headings and it has a duction. The 'pressure for production' may not be 
slightly different role to play in each one. Offshore verbally explicit, however, often what is not said is 
management needs the skills to communicate with as important as what you say. In addition, bad or 
onshore management as well as the workforce. Super- wrong decisions are the first line of  safety defence 
visors need to be able to communicate effectively with which can be broken and thus management 's  'deci- 
their crew members as well as their superiors. Crew sion-making' must also be in question during the 
members need to be able to communicate among them- investigation of  an incident or accident. 
selves as well as up the line, particularly to their super- 

5. Supervision 
iors. If the culture of  an organisation encourages 
communication not only between members of a work Supervisors have a particularly difficult role to play in 
group but also between personnel from different terms of safety TM where they are the 'middle-men' 
levels of  the hierarchy, there is less chance of  mis- between management and the workers. Supervisors 
understandings and errors occurring. can receive conflicting signals from above (such as 



The contribution of  human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 105 

the 'production versus safety' conflict) and are Table 6. Individual factors 
expected to pass on both messages to the workforce. 

1. Competence level 
For example 'work safely, but make sure you get the 
job done on time'. An example of  this is highlighted in Competence 
the Chernobyl disaster, where operating staff were Training 

Recent practice 
given contradictory instructions by their supervisors Knowledge, skill, experience 
when they were asked to carry out tests as quickly as Decision-making 
possible as well as to follow normal operating proce- Perceptual disabilities 
dures 2. The supervisor's role also includes 'inspection' Lack of anticipation 
of  the worksite and 'planning'  the work, which Judgements 

Risk perception/risk-taking behaviour 
requires supervisors to have sufficient knowledge of  Distraction 
the job, and to be a good example. Supervisors are Communication 
also expected to give their crew clear job descriptions, 
responsibilities, instructions, training, directions and 2. Stress 

goals. Finally, a good supervisor will be able to brief Personal stress/problems 
the workers before their job begins and have the skills Environmental stress 
to discipline those in need of  it. Operational stress 

Boredom 
6. Crew factors Frustration 

Fatigue 
Crew factors are those elements which affect safety Morale 
when it is dependent on relationships between mem- Health 
bers of  a crew or between crew members and their 3. Motivation 
superiors. An important factor is the 'group climate' 

Inappropriate attempt to save time 
or how well the members get along with each other. Peer pressure 
This will also affect how assertive the crew members Attitude 
are within the group. For example, 'new starts' may Insufficient thought and care/inattention 
lack the confidence to tell those members who are Horseplay/recklessness 
more experienced that they are doing the job wrong Aggression 

or have missed something. Crew members need to 
work together in order to plan a job, which would 

also be contributing factors, as could fatigue from long 
include planning the procedures which allow them to 

working hours or changing from day shift to night shift, 
complete the job on time, and being able to manage the 

morale and ill health (see Flin 29 for discussion on stress 
workload. 

offshore). The motivation of an individual to carry out a 
7. Individual factors task can affect they way they complete it. If an individual 

feels the pressure to get the job done (e.g. pressure for 
The category individual factors, which is often termed 

production or peer pressure), they may inappropriately try 
'Personal Factors' ,  contains three sub-headings: (1) 

and save time by cutting corners. If  an individual is not 
competence, (2) stress and (3) motivation (see 

motivated, or does not have a positive attitude they may 
Table 6). These describe how the individual involved 

put insufficient thought and care into the job. 
in the incident contributed to the cause of  the accident. 
Under the sub-heading competence, the individual's 
level of  training, knowledge, skill, experience and 
recent practice in the relevant job is called into ques- 5 R E D U C I N G  A C C I D E N T S  USING H U M A N  
tion, as is their ability to communicate information F A C T O R S  D A T A  
on to others and their English language skills. This 
section also covers their decision-making skills, any Various accident researchers have identified ways to 
perceptual difficulties which may have arisen such as improve accident reporting systems in order to prevent 
extreme concentration demands, risk perceptions, risk accident and incidents occurring in the future. The neces- 
taking behaviours and any distractions which may have sary steps to prevent the occurrence of  future accidents 
been present. described from a traditional engineering point of  view, 

would be to (1) make immediate technical recommenda- 
The origins of  stress are difficult to determine precisely, tions, (2) investigate ways of  avoiding hazards, and (3) 

however, a list describing the possible causes is given. The investigate ways of  improving the management system 13. 
various forms of  stress include: personal stress originating From a psychologists '  point of  view, Reason 5 describes the 
from the home, the stress of  the environmental conditions causes of  accidents in terms of  active and latent failures, 
and the operational stress from high workload or compli- which points the finger at the decision makers, line manage- 
cated procedures. Boredom and frustration with the job may ment, individuals and system defences. 



106 R. P. E. Gordon 

Others believe that by creating a human factors database safety studies and can help promote consistent safety 
on incidents and accidents more accidents and incidents recording and reporting and increase the reporting of non- 
could be prevented 6'23'3°. This would include identifying injury related accidents and unsafe acts throughout Shell 
latent errors, events that trigger accidents, human errors world-wide. 
and error inducing conditions present before and after the 
event. In addition to an accident database, task inventories 5.2 Auditing unsafe acts and latent failures 
could be performed to describe work groups' objectives and 
operating procedures, the hazards and the potential of  the Another method of feedback is the auditing of unsafe acts, 
work group to cause an accident and the possible outcomes by sampling the frequency and nature of unsafe acts. 
of  any incident. In addition, the operator's performance Analysis of unsafe acts can enable managers to assess 
could be regularly reassessed, by studying operator's weak spots and failures before an accident occurs. Examin- 
habits during routine activity. Brazier and Black 27 state ing the types of  unsafe acts which are prevalent can indicate 
that it is important the safety programme is open for all which underlying problems are leading to some unsafe 
employees to participate in and must be perceived as quite acts being performed more than others. However, this is a 
separate from any element of  blame. Further, it should resource intensive method of  accident prevention and clear 
be emphasised that change may not happen rapidly. The boundaries as to what defines an unsafe act are more diffi- 
following section describes the advantages and disadvan- cult to determine. 
tages of  accident reporting, auditing of unsafe acts and The auditing of latent failures can be undertaken without 
latent failures in order to prevent accidents from occurring an incident ever occurring. Auditing at this level has been 
in the future. demonstrated on North Sea gas platforms 6 and in a desert 

drilling operation by Hudson and colleagues in a project 
5.1 Reporting accidents and incidents called TRIPOD 3°. This was developed to highlight the 

latent factors in the causation of  accidents. Underlying 
Accidents which are reported usually represent those at the latent failures are central to the idea of how accidents 
tip of the iceberg (e.g. fatalities, serious accidents and happen and are referred to as General Failure Types, 
LTI's).  Each accident has unique characteristics and if the which include hardware, design, maintenance, procedures, 
goal is to remove the chance of other dissimilar accidents error enforcing conditions, housekeeping, incompatible 
from occurring in the future, feedback from this 'retrospec- goals, organisation, communication, training and defences. 
tive' reporting system is of  limited use. However, this These General Failure Types often lead to specific unsafe 
method encourages the awareness of  types of  accidents acts and triggering events. In order to assess the state of an 
that can occur. organisation or activity in terms of its underlying latent 

In order to increase the offshore accident information problems, an instrument was developed, called a Failure 
base six companies combined their accident data into a State Profile, to measure the extent of  the underlying 
database called 'Synergi '24. In 1992, three Norwegian oil problems on the basis of a sample of  General Failure 
companies (Norsk Hydro, Saga Petroleum and Statoil) Types. Specialist personnel on the desert rig (e.g. tool- 
together with 3 offshore contractors (Aker, Braathens pusher, drill supervisor) rated their rig on each of the 
Helikopter and Smedvig) developed the first version of  General Failure Types. From these data, a checklist was 
the system and data is presently collected by the Rogaland developed which was sent out to six rigs. The results indi- 
Research Institute in Stavanger, where the companies send cated that training appeared to be the main problem and 
their accident reports via electronic mail. There is an defences and hardware appeared to be the least important 
increasing emphasis on the underlying causes of  accidents of the General Failure Types. There were differences 
which include the human factors. Each company between the beliefs of  drilling supervisors and tool pushers 
receives an updated version of  the database on a with regard to the problematic General Failure Types, 
quarterly basis and the system was extended to be used in where the tool pushers tended to believe that after training, 
English as well. incompatible goals and error enforcing conditions were 

The operating company Shell 's answer to Synergy is the main problems whereas the drilling supervisors thought 
GUARD 23 (Group Unified Accident Reporting Database), that after training, organisation and operating procedures 
which uses feedback from accidents that have occurred, were the main problems. Rig staff (tool pushers and drill 
and includes the use of  immediate and underlying causes supervisors) thought that communication on the rig was 
and areas of  weakness. Accident information is entered into good, whereas office staff thought it was poor. One of the 
a computer and details on the corrective actions are problems with the TRIPOD method is that only a limited 
included. The main emphasis of  this system is on the number of possible latent failures have been described. 
identification of  basic accident causes which include per- There may be other latent errors which remain undiscovered 
sonal, organisational and job factors and definitions of  the if this method is followed rigidly. The TRIPOD approach, 
causes of accidents are provided with the system. This however, encourages an understanding of safety on a 
sy,';tem can provide an accurate historical base of  accident specific installation as well as a basic understanding of 
information and which could serve as a data-bank for how accidents occur. 



The contribution of human factors to accidents in the offshore oil industry 107 

6 CONCLUSION learning from each other and from the large accident data- 
base which would result. One of  the major obstacles with 

This article has provided a brief introduction to some of  this is that there is no consistent accident reporting form 
the human factors issues surrounding safety and accidents used across companies let alone across different industries. 
in the offshore oil industry. Investigation into the human Thus, the first step is for companies and industries to agree 
factors accident causation codes used by high reliability upon a common accident reporting form. 
industries, such as, marine, aviation, nuclear and offshore This first phase of  research has provided a description of  
oil, indicate that similar themes are covered in each. The the human factors causes which are used in the UK offshore 
immediate causes of  accidents detailed in the offshore oil industry today. The theoretical question which was 
accident reporting forms tended to be labelled as technical described in this article refers to the relationship between 
faults, though some human errors (such as communication) human errors and their underlying human causes. This area 
were labelled. This article attempted to include 'human needs further indepth research to develop an understanding 
error' categories to further describe accidents in terms of  of  these relationships. At present research is being under- 
their immediate cause. The main categories used to describe taken to investigate how consistently personnel complete 
the underlying causes of  accidents in the offshore reporting accident reporting forms with respect to the human factors, 
forms were ' job'  and 'personal'  factors. The marine and how valid these data are and how the collected human 
aviation industries, investigated in this study, additionally factors data from the accident reports can be utilised. 
used 'organisational' and 'crew'  factors. 

There was a large degree of  variance between the 25 UK 
offshore accident reporting forms with regard to the number A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S  
of items in each category, their clarity and structure. 
Suggestions have been given of  ways to categorise accidents This research is part of  a larger project which is jointly 
in terms of  their immediate causes and have incorporated funded by seven oil companies, the Offshore Contractors 
the work previously carried out in this area of  research ~'7,s. Association and the Offshore Safety Division of  the Heath 
The three main categories used to describe the underlying and Safety Executive. The views presented are those of 
human factors causes of  accidents are 'organisational',  the author, and should not be taken to represent the position 
'group'  and 'individual' factors, as these were labelled as or policy of  the industrial sponsors or the Health and Safety 
the factors which make up 'human factors' by contemporary Executive. I would like to thank the 25 oil companies who 
human factors researchers 3. sent their accident reporting forms and manuals for 

As a starting point, accident reporting can give a wealth analysis and in particular the members of  the steering 
of  information if it is carried out with the care and commit- group committee for their ideas and enthusiasm. I would 
ment needed to provide a comprehensive analysis. How- also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their 
ever, training in human factors accident causation is helpful comments. 
necessary for effective collection of  data. By gathering 
statistics on the most common human factors causes of  
accidents, such information could be fed back to manage- REFERENCES 
ment, the supervisors and the workforce with the view to 
make personnel aware of  the possible causes of accidents. 1. Cullen, W. D., The Public Inquiry into the Piper Alpha 
The human factors categories could be used to train crews Disaster. vols I and II. HMSO, London, 1980. 

2. Kletz, T., Learning from Accidents. Butterworth-Heinemann 
in working together as a group and making them aware of  Ltd, Oxford, 1994. 
the crew factors which could disturb or aid their working 3. Wilpert, B., Psychology in high hazard systems-Contribu- 
relationships. In addition, these factors could be used to tions to safety and reliability. Invited Keynote Address 
train supervisors and management on how to improve given at the IV European Congress of Psychology, Athens, 
their supervisory or management skills with regard to the July, 1995. 

4. Rasmussen, J., Perspectives on the concept of human error. 
human factors. Invited Keynote Talk given at the Human Performance and 

One of  the major problems which oil companies are faced Anesthesia Technology. Socie~ for Technology in Anesthesia 
with today when using accident trends to prevent further Conference, New Orleans, February, 1993. 
accidents from occurring is that there are too few accidents 5. Reason, J., Human Error, Cambridge University Press, 
for statistical analysis. Companies which have large world- Cambridge, 1991. 

6. Hudson, P. T.W., Groeneweg, J., Reason, J. T., Wagenaar, 
wide populations are able to create accident database with W. A., van de Meeren, R. J.W. and Visser, J. P., Application 
which they can analyse and obtain meaningful human of TRIPOD to measure latent errors in North Sea gas 
factors accident trends. Other companies have integrated platforms: Validity of Failure State Profiles. In Proceedings 
their accident databases to form large accident databases, from the First International Conference on Health, Safety 
such as Synergi 24. However, it seems that as yet there has and Environment. The Hague, The Netherlands, Society of 

Petroleum Engineers Texas, November, 1991. 
been no attempt to combine accident databases from various 7. Rasmussen, J., What can be learned from human error 
industries. By joining forces with other process industries, reports? In Changes in Working Life, (ed. K. D. Duncan, 
such as chemical or nuclear, there could be great benefit in M. Gruneberg and D. Wallis) Wiley, London, 1980. 



108 R. P. E. Gordon 

8. Kontogiannis, T and Embrey, D., Human Reliability Assess- Workforce, (ed. R. Flin and G. Slaven) Penn Well Publishers, 
ment. In Practical Techniques for Assessing and Reducing Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1996. 
human error in industry. Course given by Human Reliability 21. Bird, F. E. Jr. and Germain, G. L., Practical Loss Control 
Associates, Wigan, England, 1992 (cited by Brazier and Leadership: The Consevation of People, Proper~', Process 
Black [27]). and Profits. Institute Publishing (ILCI), Logansville, 

9. Miller, R., Freitag, M. and Wilpert, B., Development and test Georgia, 1989. 
of a classification scheme for human factors in incident 22. Department of Transportation, Prevention Through People, 
reports. In 1AEA Technical Committee Meeting on Organisa- Quality Action Team Report, 1995. 
tional Factors Influencing Human Performance in Nuclear 23. Koene, W. T.C.J . ,  Willink, T. and Waterfall, K. W., 
Power Plants, Ittingen, Switzerland, July, 1995. Group Unified Accident Reporting Database (GUARD). In 

10. Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, An Analysis of  Proceedings of the Second International SPE Conference 
Root Causes in 1983 Significant Event Reports, INPO on Health, Safety and Environment, Jakarta, Indonesia. 
85-027, Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, Atlanta, Ga, Society of Petroleum Engineers, Texas, January, 1994. 
1985. 24. Ringstad, A. J. and Grundt, H. J., The Synergi project. 

11. Donald, I. & Canter, D. Employee attitudes and safety in the In European Safety and Reliability Data Association 
chemical industry. Journal of  Loss Prevention in the Process (ESReDa) Seminar on Maintenance and Databases, 1994. 
Industries, 1994, 7(3). 25. Drogaris, G. K., Major accidents in oil and gas industries. In 

12. Zohar, D. Safety climate in industrial organisations: theo- Proceedings of  the First International SPE Conference on 
retical and applied implications. Journal of  Applied Psychol- Health, Safe~ and Environment, The Hague, The Netherlands. 
ogy, 1980, 65(1), 96-102. Society of Petroleum Engineers, Texas, November, 1991. 

13. Patr-Cornell, M. E. Learning from the Piper Alpha Accident: 26. Mearns, K., Flin, R., Fleming, M. and Gordon, R., 
a post-mortem analysis of technical and organisational fac- Assessing the Organisational and Human Factors in 
tors. Risk Analysis, 1993, 13(2), 215-232. Offshore Safety. Joint industry and HSE Research Project 

14. Pat~-Cornell, M. E. Risk analysis and risk management for IOTH 97 543. Interim Progress Report, The Robert 
offshore platforms: lessons from the Piper Alpha Accident. Gordon University, Aberdeen, 1997. 
Journal of  Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 27. Brazier, A. J. and Black, J. M., Using a task inventory to 
1993, 115, 179-190. develop a more effective incident reporting system. Working 

15. Kletz, T. A. On the need to publish more case histories. Paper, University of Edinburgh, 1995. 
Plant~Operations Progress, 1988, 7(3), 145-147. 28. Fleming, M., Flin, R., Mearns, K. and Gordon, R., The off- 

16. Lee, T., Psychological aspects of safety in the nuclear indus- shore supervisor's role in safety management: law enforcer 
try. In Second Offshore Installation Management Conference or risk manager. In Third SPE International Conference on 
on Managing Offshore Safe~. , April, 1993. Health, Safeo, and Environment, Paper SPE 35906, New 

17. Peters, R. H., Review of recent research on organisational Orleans, Louisiana, 1996. 
and behavioural factors associated with mine safety. A 29. Flin, R., Occupational stress:identification and management. 
Bureau of Mines Information Circular, United States Depart- In Managing the Offshore Workforce, (ed. R. Flin and 
ment of the Interior, 1989. G. Slaven) Penn Well Publishers, Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1996. 

18. Flin, R. H. Crew resource management for teams in the off- 30. Hudson, P. T. W., Wagenaar, W. A., Reason, J. T., 
shore oil industry. Journal of  European Industrial Training, Groeneweg, J., van de Meeren, R. J. W. and Visser, J. P., 
1995, 19(9), 23-27. Enhancing safety in drilling: Implementing TRIPOD in a 

19. Taggart, W. Crew resource management in the cockpit. Air desert drilling operation. In Proceedings of  the First Inter- 
Line Pilot, 1984, 53, 20-23. national Conference on Health, Safe~ and Environment, The 

20. David, G., Lessons from offshore aviation: toward an inte- Hague, The Netherlands, Society of Petroleum Engineers, 
grated human performance system. In Managing the Offshore Texas, November, 1991. 



DOT/FAA/AM-00/7 The Human Factors
Office of Aviation Medicine
Washington, DC 20591 Analysis and Classification

System–HFACS

Scott A. Shappell
FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute
Oklahoma City, OK  73125
Douglas A. Wiegmann
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Institute of Aviation
Savoy, IL 61874

February 2000

Final Report

This document is available to the public
through the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, Virginia  22161.

U.S. Depar tment
of Transpor tation
Federal Aviation
Administration



N O T I C E

This document is disseminated under the sponsorship of
the U.S. Department of Transportation in the interest of

information exchange. The United States Government
assumes no liability for the contents thereof.



Technical Report Documentation Page
1. Report No. 2. Government Accession No. 3. Recipient's Catalog No.

DOT/FAA/AM-00/7
4. Title and Subtitle 5. Report Date
The Human Factors Analysis and Classification System—HFACS February 2000

6. Performing Organization Code

7. Author(s) 8. Performing Organization Report No.

Shappell, S.A.1, and Wiegmann, D.A.2

9. Performing Organization Name and Address 10. Work Unit No. (TRAIS)
1FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, OK 73125
2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Institute of Aviation,
Savoy, Ill. 61874 11. Contract or Grant No.

99-G-006

12. Sponsoring Agency name and Address 13. Type of Report and Period Covered

Office of Aviation Medicine
Federal Aviation Administration 14. Sponsoring Agency Code

800 Independence Ave., S.W.
Washington, DC  20591
15. Supplemental Notes

This work was performed under task # AAM-A –00-HRR-520
16. Abstract

Human error has been implicated in 70 to 80% of all civil and military aviation accidents. Yet, most accident
reporting systems are not designed around any theoretical framework of human error. As a result, most
accident databases are not conducive to a traditional human error analysis, making the identification of
intervention strategies onerous. What is required is a general human error framework around which new
investigative methods can be designed and existing accident databases restructured. Indeed, a comprehensive
human factors analysis and classification system (HFACS) has recently been developed to meet those needs.
Specifically, the HFACS framework has been used within the military, commercial, and general aviation sectors
to systematically examine underlying human causal factors and to improve aviation accident investigations.
This paper describes the development and theoretical underpinnings of HFACS in the hope that it will help
safety professionals reduce the aviation accident rate through systematic, data-driven investment strategies and
objective evaluation of intervention programs

17. Key Words 18. Distribution Statement
Aviation, Human Error, Accident Investigation, Database Document is available to the public through the
Analysis National Technical Information Service,

Springfield, Virginia  22161
19. Security Classif. (of this report) 20. Security Classif. (of this page) 21. No. of Pages 22. Price

Unclassified Unclassified 18
Form DOT F 1700.7 (8-72) Reproduction of completed page authorized

i






THE HUMAN FACTORS ANALYSIS AND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM–HFACS

INTRODUCTION
fact, even the identification of a “primary” cause is

Sadly, the annals of aviation history are littered with fraught with problems. Rather, aviation accidents are
accidents and tragic losses. Since the late 1950s, how- the end result of a number of causes, only the last of
ever, the drive to reduce the accident rate has yielded which are the unsafe acts of the aircrew (Reason, 1990;
unprecedented levels of safety to a point where it is now Shappell & Wiegmann, 1997a; Heinrich, Peterson, &
safer to fly in a commercial airliner than to drive a car or Roos, 1980; Bird, 1974).
even walk across a busy New York city street. Still, while The challenge for accident investigators and analysts
the aviation accident rate has declined tremendously alike is how best to identify and mitigate the causal
since the first flights nearly a century ago, the cost of sequence of events, in particular that 70-80 % associ-
aviation accidents in both lives and dollars has steadily ated with human error. Armed with this challenge, those
risen. As a result, the effort to reduce the accident rate interested in accident causation are left with a growing
still further has taken on new meaning within both list of investigative schemes to chose from. In fact, there
military and civilian aviation. are nearly as many approaches to accident causation as

Even with all the innovations and improvements there are those involved in the process (Senders &
realized in the last several decades, one fundamental Moray, 1991). Nevertheless, a comprehensive frame-
question remains generally unanswered: “Why do air- work for identifying and analyzing human error contin-
craft crash?” The answer may not be as straightforward ues to elude safety professionals and theorists alike.
as one might think. In the early years of aviation, it could Consequently, interventions cannot be accurately tar-
reasonably be said that, more often than not, the aircraft geted at specific human causal factors nor can their
killed the pilot. That is, the aircraft were intrinsically effectiveness be objectively measured and assessed. In-
unforgiving and, relative to their modern counterparts, stead, safety professionals are left with the status quo.
mechanically unsafe. However, the modern era of avia- That is, they are left with interest/fad-driven research
tion has witnessed an ironic reversal of sorts. It now resulting in intervention strategies that peck around the
appears to some that the aircrew themselves are more edges of accident causation, but do little to reduce the
deadly than the aircraft they fly (Mason, 1993; cited in overall accident rate. What is needed is a framework
Murray, 1997). In fact, estimates in the literature indi- around which a needs-based, data-driven safety pro-
cate that between 70 and 80 percent of aviation acci- gram can be developed (Wiegmann & Shappell, 1997).
dents can be attributed, at least in part, to human error
(Shappell & Wiegmann, 1996). Still, to off-handedly Reason’s “Swiss Cheese” Model of Human Error
attribute accidents solely to aircrew error is like telling
patients they are simply “sick” without examining the One particularly appealing approach to the genesis of
underlying causes or further defining the illness. human error is the one proposed by James Reason

So what really constitutes that 70-80 % of human (1990). Generally referred to as the “Swiss cheese”
error repeatedly referred to in the literature? Some model of human error, Reason describes four levels of
would have us believe that human error and “pilot” error human failure, each influencing the next (Figure 1).
are synonymous. Yet, simply writing off aviation acci- Working backwards in time from the accident, the first
dents merely to pilot error is an overly simplistic, if not level depicts those Unsafe Acts of Operators that ulti-
naive, approach to accident causation. After all, it is mately led to the accident1. More commonly referred to
well established that accidents cannot be attributed in aviation as aircrew/pilot error, this level is where most
to a single cause, or in most instances, even a single accident investigations have focused their efforts and
individual (Heinrich, Petersen, and Roos, 1980). In consequently, where most causal factors are uncovered.

1 Reason’s original work involved operators of a nuclear power plant. However, for the purposes of this manuscript, the
operators here refer to aircrew, maintainers, supervisors and other humans involved in aviation.

1



After all, it is typically the actions or inactions of aircrew But exactly why did communication and coordi-
that are directly linked to the accident. For instance, nation break down in the first place? This is perhaps
failing to properly scan the aircraft’s instruments while where Reason’s work departed from more traditional
in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) or pen- approaches to human error. In many instances, the
etrating IMC when authorized only for visual meteoro- breakdown in good CRM practices can be traced
logical conditions (VMC) may yield relatively back to instances of Unsafe Supervision, the third level
immediate, and potentially grave, consequences. Repre- of human failure. If, for example, two inexperienced
sented as “holes” in the cheese, these active failures are (and perhaps even below average pilots) are paired
typically the last unsafe acts committed by aircrew. with each other and sent on a flight into known

However, what makes the “Swiss cheese” model adverse weather at night, is anyone really surprised by
particularly useful in accident investigation, is that it a tragic outcome? To make matters worse, if this
forces investigators to address latent failures within the questionable manning practice is coupled with the
causal sequence of events as well. As their name suggests, lack of quality CRM training, the potential for mis-
latent failures, unlike their active counterparts, may lie communication and ultimately, aircrew errors, is
dormant or undetected for hours, days, weeks, or even magnified. In a sense then, the crew was “set up” for
longer, until one day they adversely affect the unsuspect- failure as crew coordination and ultimately perfor-
ing aircrew. Consequently, they may be overlooked by mance would be compromised. This is not to lessen the
investigators with even the best intentions. role played by the aircrew, only that intervention and

Within this concept of latent failures, Reason de- mitigation strategies might lie higher within the system.
scribed three more levels of human failure. The first Reason’s model didn’t stop at the supervisory level
involves the condition of the aircrew as it affects perfor- either; the organization itself can impact perfor-
mance. Referred to as Preconditions for Unsafe Acts, this mance at all levels. For instance, in times of fiscal
level involves conditions such as mental fatigue and austerity, funding is often cut, and as a result, train-
poor communication and coordination practices, often ing and flight time are curtailed. Consequently, su-
referred to as crew resource management (CRM). Not pervisors are often left with no alternative but to task
surprising, if fatigued aircrew fail to communicate and “non-proficient” aviators with complex tasks. Not
coordinate their activities with others in the cockpit or surprisingly then, in the absence of good CRM train-
individuals external to the aircraft (e.g., air traffic con- ing, communication and coordination failures will
trol, maintenance, etc.), poor decisions are made and begin to appear as will a myriad of other precondi-
errors often result. tions, all of which will affect performance and elicit

aircrew errors. Therefore, it makes sense that, if the
Organizational Latent Failures accident rate is going to be reduced beyond current

Influences levels, investigators and analysts alike must examine
the accident sequence in its entirety and expand it

Unsafe Latent Failures
Supervision beyond the cockpit. Ultimately, causal factors at all

levels within the organization must be addressed if
Preconditions Latent Failures any accident investigation and prevention system is

for
Unsafe Acts going to succeed.

Unsafe Active Failures In many ways, Reason’s “Swiss cheese” model of
Acts accident causation has revolutionized common views

Failed or of accident causation. Unfortunately, however, it is
Absent Defenses simply a theory with few details on how to apply it in

a real-world setting. In other words, the theory never
defines what the “holes in the cheese” really are, at
least within the context of everyday operations. Ulti-
mately, one needs to know what these system failures
or “holes” are, so that they can be identified during

Mishap
accident investigations or better yet, detected and

Figure 1. The “Swiss cheese” model of human corrected before an accident occurs.
error causation (adapted from Reason, 1990).

2



The balance of this paper will attempt to describe their intended outcome. Not surprising, given the
the “holes in the cheese.” However, rather than at- fact that human beings by their very nature make
tempt to define the holes using esoteric theories with errors, these unsafe acts dominate most accident
little or no practical applicability, the original frame- databases. Violations, on the other hand, refer to the
work (called the Taxonomy of Unsafe Operations) was willful disregard for the rules and regulations that
developed using over 300 Naval aviation accidents govern the safety of flight. The bane of many organi-
obtained from the U.S. Naval Safety Center (Shappell zations, the prediction and prevention of these ap-
& Wiegmann, 1997a). The original taxonomy has palling and purely “preventable” unsafe acts, continue
since been refined using input and data from other to elude managers and researchers alike.
military (U.S. Army Safety Center and the U.S. Air Still, distinguishing between errors and violations
Force Safety Center) and civilian organizations (Na- does not provide the level of granularity required of
tional Transportation Safety Board and the Federal most accident investigations. Therefore, the catego-
Aviation Administration). The result was the devel- ries of errors and violations were expanded here
opment of the Human Factors Analysis and Classifi- (Figure 2), as elsewhere (Reason, 1990; Rasmussen,
cation System (HFACS). 1982), to include three basic error types (skill-based,

decision, and perceptual) and two forms of violations
THE HUMAN FACTORS ANALYSIS AND (routine and exceptional).

CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
Errors

Drawing upon Reason’s (1990) concept of latent
and active failures, HFACS describes four levels of Skill-based errors. Skill-based behavior within the
failure: 1) Unsafe Acts, 2) Preconditions for Unsafe context of aviation is best described as “stick-and-
Acts, 3) Unsafe Supervision, and 4) Organizational rudder” and other basic flight skills that occur with-
Influences. A brief description of the major compo- out significant conscious thought. As a result, these
nents and causal categories follows, beginning with the skill-based actions are particularly vulnerable to fail-
level most closely tied to the accident, i.e. unsafe acts. ures of attention and/or memory. In fact, attention

failures have been linked to many skill-based errors
Unsafe Acts such as the breakdown in visual scan patterns, task

fixation, the inadvertent activation of controls, and
The unsafe acts of aircrew can be loosely classified the misordering of steps in a procedure, among others

into two categories: errors and violations (Reason, (Table 1). A classic example is an aircraft’s crew that
1990). In general, errors represent the mental or becomes so fixated on trouble-shooting a burned out
physical activities of individuals that fail to achieve warning light that they do not notice their fatal

UNSAFE
ACTS

Errors Violations

Decision Skill-Based Perceptual
Errors Errors Errors Routine Exceptional

Figure 2. Categories of unsafe acts committed by aircrews.

3



TABLE 1. Selected examples of Unsafe Acts of Pilot Operators (Note: This is not
a complete listing)

ERRORS VIOLATIONS
Skill-based Errors Failed to adhere to brief

Breakdown in visual scan Failed to use the radar altimeter
Failed to prioritize attention Flew an unauthorized approach
Inadvertent use of flight controls Violated training rules
Omitted step in procedure Flew an overaggressive maneuver
Omitted checklist item Failed to properly prepare for the flight
Poor technique Briefed unauthorized flight
Over-controlled the aircraft Not current/qualified for the mission

Decision Errors Intentionally exceeded the limits of the aircraft

Improper procedure Continued low-altitude flight in VMC

Misdiagnosed emergency Unauthorized low-altitude canyon running

Wrong response to emergency
Exceeded ability
Inappropriate maneuver
Poor decision

Perceptual Errors (due to)
Misjudged distance/altitude/airspeed
Spatial disorientation
Visual illusion

descent into the terrain. Perhaps a bit closer to home, experience, and educational background, the manner
consider the hapless soul who locks himself out of the in which one carries out a specific sequence of events
car or misses his exit because he was either distracted, may vary greatly. That is, two pilots with identical
in a hurry, or daydreaming. These are both examples training, flight grades, and experience may differ
of attention failures that commonly occur during significantly in the manner in which they maneuver
highly automatized behavior. Unfortunately, while their aircraft. While one pilot may fly smoothly with
at home or driving around town these attention/ the grace of a soaring eagle, others may fly with the
memory failures may be frustrating, in the air they darting, rough transitions of a sparrow. Nevertheless,
can become catastrophic. while both may be safe and equally adept at flying, the

In contrast to attention failures, memory failures techniques they employ could set them up for specific
often appear as omitted items in a checklist, place failure modes. In fact, such techniques are as much a
losing, or forgotten intentions. For example, most of factor of innate ability and aptitude as they are an
us have experienced going to the refrigerator only to overt expression of one’s own personality, making
forget what we went for. Likewise, it is not difficult efforts at the prevention and mitigation of technique
to imagine that when under stress during inflight errors difficult, at best.
emergencies, critical steps in emergency procedures Decision errors. The second error form, decision
can be missed. However, even when not particularly errors, represents intentional behavior that proceeds
stressed, individuals have forgotten to set the flaps on as intended, yet the plan proves inadequate or inap-
approach or lower the landing gear – at a minimum, propriate for the situation. Often referred to as “hon-
an embarrassing gaffe. est mistakes,” these unsafe acts represent the actions

The third, and final, type of skill-based errors or inactions of individuals whose “hearts are in the
identified in many accident investigations involves right place,” but they either did not have the appro-
technique errors. Regardless of one’s training, priate knowledge or just simply chose poorly.

4



Perhaps the most heavily investigated of all error Perceptual errors. Not unexpectedly, when one’s
forms, decision errors can be grouped into three perception of the world differs from reality, errors
general categories: procedural errors, poor choices, can, and often do, occur. Typically, perceptual errors
and problem solving errors (Table 1). Procedural occur when sensory input is degraded or “unusual,”
decision errors (Orasanu, 1993), or rule-based mis- as is the case with visual illusions and spatial disori-
takes, as described by Rasmussen (1982), occur dur- entation or when aircrew simply misjudge the aircraft’s
ing highly structured tasks of the sorts, if X, then do altitude, attitude, or airspeed (Table 1). Visual illu-
Y. Aviation, particularly within the military and sions, for example, occur when the brain tries to “fill
commercial sectors, by its very nature is highly struc- in the gaps” with what it feels belongs in a visually
tured, and consequently, much of pilot decision impoverished environment, like that seen at night or
making is procedural. There are very explicit proce- when flying in adverse weather. Likewise, spatial
dures to be performed at virtually all phases of flight. disorientation occurs when the vestibular system
Still, errors can, and often do, occur when a situation cannot resolve one’s orientation in space and there-
is either not recognized or misdiagnosed, and the fore makes a “best guess” — typically when visual
wrong procedure is applied. This is particularly true (horizon) cues are absent at night or when flying in
when pilots are placed in highly time-critical emer- adverse weather. In either event, the unsuspecting
gencies like an engine malfunction on takeoff. individual often is left to make a decision that is based

However, even in aviation, not all situations have on faulty information and the potential for commit-
corresponding procedures to deal with them. There- ting an error is elevated.
fore, many situations require a choice to be made It is important to note, however, that it is not the
among multiple response options. Consider the pilot illusion or disorientation that is classified as a percep-
flying home after a long week away from the family tual error. Rather, it is the pilot’s erroneous response
who unexpectedly confronts a line of thunderstorms to the illusion or disorientation. For example, many
directly in his path. He can choose to fly around the unsuspecting pilots have experienced “black-hole”
weather, divert to another field until the weather approaches, only to fly a perfectly good aircraft into
passes, or penetrate the weather hoping to quickly the terrain or water. This continues to occur, even
transition through it. Confronted with situations though it is well known that flying at night over dark,
such as this, choice decision errors (Orasanu, 1993), featureless terrain (e.g., a lake or field devoid of trees),
or knowledge-based mistakes as they are otherwise will produce the illusion that the aircraft is actually
known (Rasmussen, 1986), may occur. This is par- higher than it is. As a result, pilots are taught to rely
ticularly true when there is insufficient experience, on their primary instruments, rather than the outside
time, or other outside pressures that may preclude world, particularly during the approach phase of
correct decisions. Put simply, sometimes we chose flight. Even so, some pilots fail to monitor their
well, and sometimes we don’t. instruments when flying at night. Tragically, these

Finally, there are occasions when a problem is not aircrew and others who have been fooled by illusions
well understood, and formal procedures and response and other disorientating flight regimes may end up
options are not available. It is during these ill-defined involved in a fatal aircraft accident.
situations that the invention of a novel solution is
required. In a sense, individuals find themselves Violations
where no one has been before, and in many ways, By definition, errors occur within the rules and
must literally fly by the seats of their pants. Individu- regulations espoused by an organization; typically
als placed in this situation must resort to slow and dominating most accident databases. In contrast,
effortful reasoning processes where time is a luxury violations represent a willful disregard for the rules
rarely afforded. Not surprisingly, while this type of and regulations that govern safe flight and, fortu-
decision making is more infrequent then other forms, nately, occur much less frequently since they often
the relative proportion of problem-solving errors involve fatalities (Shappell et al., 1999b).
committed is markedly higher.

5



While there are many ways to distinguish between (Reason, 1990). For example, an isolated instance of
types of violations, two distinct forms have been iden- driving 105 mph in a 55 mph zone is considered an
tified, based on their etiology, that will help the safety exceptional violation. Likewise, flying under a bridge or
professional when identifying accident causal factors. engaging in other prohibited maneuvers, like low-level
The first, routine violations, tend to be habitual by canyon running, would constitute an exceptional viola-
nature and often tolerated by governing authority (Rea- tion. However, it is important to note that, while most
son, 1990). Consider, for example, the individual who exceptional violations are appalling, they are not consid-
drives consistently 5-10 mph faster than allowed by law ered “exceptional” because of their extreme nature.
or someone who routinely flies in marginal weather Rather, they are considered exceptional because they are
when authorized for visual meteorological conditions neither typical of the individual nor condoned by au-
only. While both are certainly against the governing thority. Still, what makes exceptional violations par-
regulations, many others do the same thing. Further- ticularly difficult for any organization to deal with is
more, individuals who drive 64 mph in a 55 mph zone, that they are not indicative of an individual’s behavioral
almost always drive 64 in a 55 mph zone. That is, they repertoire and, as such, are particularly difficult to
“routinely” violate the speed limit. The same can typi- predict. In fact, when individuals are confronted with
cally be said of the pilot who routinely flies into mar- evidence of their dreadful behavior and asked to
ginal weather. explain it, they are often left with little explanation.

What makes matters worse, these violations (com- Indeed, those individuals who survived such excur-
monly referred to as “bending” the rules) are often sions from the norm clearly knew that, if caught, dire
tolerated and, in effect, sanctioned by supervisory au- consequences would follow. Still, defying all logic,
thority (i.e., you’re not likely to get a traffic citation many otherwise model citizens have been down this
until you exceed the posted speed limit by more than 10 potentially tragic road.
mph). If, however, the local authorities started handing
out traffic citations for exceeding the speed limit on the Preconditions for Unsafe Acts
highway by 9 mph or less (as is often done on military
installations), then it is less likely that individuals would Arguably, the unsafe acts of pilots can be directly
violate the rules. Therefore, by definition, if a routine linked to nearly 80 % of all aviation accidents. However,
violation is identified, one must look further up the simply focusing on unsafe acts is like focusing on a fever
supervisory chain to identify those individuals in au- without understanding the underlying disease causing
thority who are not enforcing the rules. it. Thus, investigators must dig deeper into why the

On the other hand, unlike routine violations, excep- unsafe acts took place. As a first step, two major subdi-
tional violations appear as isolated departures from visions of unsafe aircrew conditions were developed:
authority, not necessarily indicative of individual’s typi- substandard conditions of operators and the substan-
cal behavior pattern nor condoned by management dard practices they commit (Figure 3).

PRECONDITIONS
FOR

UNSAFE ACTS

Substandard Substandard
Conditions of Practices of

Operators Operators

Adverse Adverse Physical/ Crew Resource
Mental Physiological Mental Personal

Mismanagement
States States Limitations Readiness

Figure 3. Categories of preconditions of unsafe acts.

6



Substandard Conditions of Operators Adverse physiological states. The second category,
Adverse mental states. Being prepared mentally is adverse physiological states, refers to those medical or

critical in nearly every endeavor, but perhaps even physiological conditions that preclude safe opera-
more so in aviation. As such, the category of Adverse tions (Table 2). Particularly important to aviation are
Mental States was created to account for those mental such conditions as visual illusions and spatial disori-
conditions that affect performance (Table 2). Princi- entation as described earlier, as well as physical fa-
pal among these are the loss of situational awareness, tigue, and the myriad of pharmacological and medical
task fixation, distraction, and mental fatigue due to abnormalities known to affect performance.
sleep loss or other stressors. Also included in this The effects of visual illusions and spatial disorien-
category are personality traits and pernicious atti- tation are well known to most aviators. However, less
tudes such as overconfidence, complacency, and mis- well known to aviators, and often overlooked are the
placed motivation. effects on cockpit performance of simply being ill.

Predictably, if an individual is mentally tired for Nearly all of us have gone to work ill, dosed with
whatever reason, the likelihood increase that an error over-the-counter medications, and have generally
will occur. In a similar fashion, overconfidence and performed well. Consider however, the pilot suffer-
other pernicious attitudes such as arrogance and ing from the common head cold. Unfortunately,
impulsivity will influence the likelihood that a viola- most aviators view a head cold as only a minor
tion will be committed. Clearly then, any framework inconvenience that can be easily remedied using
of human error must account for preexisting adverse over-the counter antihistamines, acetaminophen, and
mental states in the causal chain of events. other non-prescription pharmaceuticals. In fact, when

7



confronted with a stuffy nose, aviators typically are unsuited physically or do not possess the aptitude to
only concerned with the effects of a painful sinus fly. For example, some individuals simply don’t have
block as cabin altitude changes. Then again, it is not the physical strength to operate in the potentially
the overt symptoms that local flight surgeons are high-G environment of aviation, or for anthropo-
concerned with. Rather, it is the accompanying inner metric reasons, simply have difficulty reaching the
ear infection and the increased likelihood of spatial controls. In other words, cockpits have traditionally
disorientation when entering instrument meteoro- not been designed with all shapes, sizes, and physical
logical conditions that is alarming - not to mention abilities in mind. Likewise, not everyone has the
the side-effects of antihistamines, fatigue, and sleep mental ability or aptitude for flying aircraft. Just as
loss on pilot decision-making. Therefore, it is incum- not all of us can be concert pianists or NFL lineback-
bent upon any safety professional to account for these ers, not everyone has the innate ability to pilot an
sometimes subtle medical conditions within the causal aircraft – a vocation that requires the unique ability
chain of events. to make decisions quickly and respond accurately in

Physical/Mental Limitations. The third, and final, life threatening situations. The difficult task for the
substandard condition involves individual physical/ safety professional is identifying whether aptitude might
mental limitations (Table 2). Specifically, this cat- have contributed to the accident causal sequence.
egory refers to those instances when mission require-
ments exceed the capabilities of the individual at the Substandard Practices of Operators
controls. For example, the human visual system is Clearly then, numerous substandard conditions of
severely limited at night; yet, like driving a car, operators can, and do, lead to the commission of
drivers do not necessarily slow down or take addi- unsafe acts. Nevertheless, there are a number of
tional precautions. In aviation, while slowing down things that we do to ourselves that set up these
isn’t always an option, paying additional attention to substandard conditions. Generally speaking, the sub-
basic flight instruments and increasing one’s vigi- standard practices of operators can be summed up in
lance will often increase the safety margin. Unfortu- two categories: crew resource mismanagement and
nately, when precautions are not taken, the result can personal readiness.
be catastrophic, as pilots will often fail to see other Crew Resource Mismanagement. Good communi-
aircraft, obstacles, or power lines due to the size or cation skills and team coordination have been the
contrast of the object in the visual field. mantra of industrial/organizational and personnel

Similarly, there are occasions when the time re- psychology for decades. Not surprising then, crew
quired to complete a task or maneuver exceeds an resource management has been a cornerstone of avia-
individual’s capacity. Individuals vary widely in their tion for the last few decades (Helmreich & Foushee,
ability to process and respond to information. Nev- 1993). As a result, the category of crew resource
ertheless, good pilots are typically noted for their mismanagement was created to account for occur-
ability to respond quickly and accurately. It is well rences of poor coordination among personnel. Within
documented, however, that if individuals are re- the context of aviation, this includes coordination both
quired to respond quickly (i.e., less time is available within and between aircraft with air traffic control
to consider all the possibilities or choices thoroughly), facilities and maintenance control, as well as with facil-
the probability of making an error goes up markedly. ity and other support personnel as necessary. But air-
Consequently, it should be no surprise that when crew coordination does not stop with the aircrew in
faced with the need for rapid processing and reaction flight. It also includes coordination before and after the
times, as is the case in most aviation emergencies, all flight with the brief and debrief of the aircrew.
forms of error would be exacerbated. It is not difficult to envision a scenario where the

In addition to the basic sensory and information lack of crew coordination has led to confusion and
processing limitations described above, there are at poor decision making in the cockpit, resulting in an
least two additional instances of physical/mental accident. In fact, aviation accident databases are
limitations that need to be addressed, albeit they are replete with instances of poor coordination among
often overlooked by most safety professionals. These aircrew. One of the more tragic examples was the
limitations involve individuals who simply are not crash of a civilian airliner at night in the Florida
compatible with aviation, because they are either Everglades in 1972 as the crew was busily trying to

8



troubleshoot what amounted to a burnt out indicator performance in the rigorous environment of avia-
light. Unfortunately, no one in the cockpit was moni- tion. While there may be no rules governing such
toring the aircraft’s altitude as the altitude hold was behavior, pilots must use good judgment when de-
inadvertently disconnected. Ideally, the crew would ciding whether they are “fit” to fly an aircraft.
have coordinated the trouble-shooting task ensuring
that at least one crewmember was monitoring basic Unsafe Supervision
flight instruments and “flying” the aircraft. Tragi-
cally, this was not the case, as they entered a slow, Recall that in addition to those causal factors
unrecognized, descent into the everglades resulting associated with the pilot/operator, Reason (1990)
in numerous fatalities. traced the causal chain of events back up the supervi-

Personal Readiness. In aviation, or for that matter sory chain of command. As such, we have identified
in any occupational setting, individuals are expected four categories of unsafe supervision: inadequate
to show up for work ready to perform at optimal supervision, planned inappropriate operations, fail-
levels. Nevertheless, in aviation as in other profes- ure to correct a known problem, and supervisory
sions, personal readiness failures occur when indi- violations (Figure 4). Each is described briefly below.
viduals fail to prepare physically or mentally for duty. Inadequate Supervision. The role of any supervisor
For instance, violations of crew rest requirements, is to provide the opportunity to succeed. To do this,
bottle-to-brief rules, and self-medicating all will af- the supervisor, no matter at what level of operation,
fect performance on the job and are particularly must provide guidance, training opportunities, lead-
detrimental in the aircraft. It is not hard to imagine ership, and motivation, as well as the proper role
that, when individuals violate crew rest requirements, model to be emulated. Unfortunately, this is not
they run the risk of mental fatigue and other adverse always the case. For example, it is not difficult to
mental states, which ultimately lead to errors and conceive of a situation where adequate crew resource
accidents. Note however, that violations that affect management training was either not provided, or the
personal readiness are not considered “unsafe act, opportunity to attend such training was not afforded
violation” since they typically do not happen in the to a particular aircrew member. Conceivably, aircrew
cockpit, nor are they necessarily active failures with coordination skills would be compromised and if the
direct and immediate consequences. aircraft were put into an adverse situation (an emer-

Still, not all personal readiness failures occur as a gency for instance), the risk of an error being com-
result of violations of governing rules or regulations. mitted would be exacerbated and the potential for an
For example, running 10 miles before piloting an accident would increase markedly.
aircraft may not be against any existing regulations, In a similar vein, sound professional guidance and
yet it may impair the physical and mental capabilities oversight is an essential ingredient of any successful
of the individual enough to degrade performance and organization. While empowering individuals to make
elicit unsafe acts. Likewise, the traditional “candy bar decisions and function independently is certainly
and coke” lunch of the modern businessman may essential, this does not divorce the supervisor from
sound good but may not be sufficient to sustain accountability. The lack of guidance and oversight

9



has proven to be the breeding ground for many of the conditions with less than adequate takeoff thrust.
violations that have crept into the cockpit. As such, The aircraft stalled and plummeted into the icy river,
any thorough investigation of accident causal factors killing the crew and many of the passengers.
must consider the role supervision plays (i.e., whether Clearly, the captain and crew were held account-
the supervision was inappropriate or did not occur at able. They died in the accident and cannot shed light
all) in the genesis of human error (Table 3). on causation; but, what was the role of the supervi-

Planned Inappropriate Operations. Occasionally, sory chain? Perhaps crew pairing was equally respon-
the operational tempo and/or the scheduling of air- sible. Although not specifically addressed in the report,
crew is such that individuals are put at unacceptable such issues are clearly worth exploring in many acci-
risk, crew rest is jeopardized, and ultimately perfor- dents. In fact, in that particular accident, several
mance is adversely affected. Such operations, though other training and manning issues were identified.
arguably unavoidable during emergencies, are unac- Failure to Correct a Known Problem. The third
ceptable during normal operations. Therefore, the category of known unsafe supervision, Failed to Cor-
second category of unsafe supervision, planned inap- rect a Known Problem, refers to those instances when
propriate operations, was created to account for these deficiencies among individuals, equipment, training
failures (Table 3). or other related safety areas are “known” to the

Take, for example, the issue of improper crew supervisor, yet are allowed to continue unabated
pairing. It is well known that when very senior, (Table 3). For example, it is not uncommon for
dictatorial captains are paired with very junior, weak accident investigators to interview the pilot’s friends,
co-pilots, communication and coordination prob- colleagues, and supervisors after a fatal crash only to
lems are likely to occur. Commonly referred to as the find out that they “knew it would happen to him
trans-cockpit authority gradient, such conditions some day.” If the supervisor knew that a pilot was
likely contributed to the tragic crash of a commercial incapable of flying safely, and allowed the flight
airliner into the Potomac River outside of Washing- anyway, he clearly did the pilot no favors. The failure
ton, DC, in January of 1982 (NTSB, 1982). In that to correct the behavior, either through remedial train-
accident, the captain of the aircraft repeatedly re- ing or, if necessary, removal from flight status, essen-
buffed the first officer when the latter indicated that tially signed the pilot’s death warrant - not to mention
the engine instruments did not appear normal. Un- that of others who may have been on board.
daunted, the captain continued a fatal takeoff in icing

10



Likewise, the failure to consistently correct or disci- Resource Management. This category encompasses
pline inappropriate behavior certainly fosters an unsafe the realm of corporate-level decision making regard-
atmosphere and promotes the violation of rules. Avia- ing the allocation and maintenance of organizational
tion history is rich with by reports of aviators who tell assets such as human resources (personnel), monetary
hair-raising stories of their exploits and barnstorming assets, and equipment/facilities (Table 4). Generally,
low-level flights (the infamous “been there, done that”). corporate decisions about how such resources should
While entertaining to some, they often serve to promul- be managed center around two distinct objectives –
gate a perception of tolerance and “one-up-manship” the goal of safety and the goal of on-time, cost-
until one day someone ties the low altitude flight record effective operations. In times of prosperity, both
of ground-level! Indeed, the failure to report these objectives can be easily balanced and satisfied in full.
unsafe tendencies and initiate corrective actions is yet However, as we mentioned earlier, there may also be
another example of the failure to correct known problems. times of fiscal austerity that demand some give and

Supervisory Violations. Supervisory violations, on the take between the two. Unfortunately, history tells us
other hand, are reserved for those instances when exist- that safety is often the loser in such battles and, as
ing rules and regulations are willfully disregarded by some can attest to very well, safety and training are
supervisors (Table 3). Although arguably rare, supervi- often the first to be cut in organizations having
sors have been known occasionally to violate the rules financial difficulties. If cutbacks in such areas are too
and doctrine when managing their assets. For instance, severe, flight proficiency may suffer, and the best
there have been occasions when individuals were pilots may leave the organization for greener pastures.
permitted to operate an aircraft without current quali- Excessive cost-cutting could also result in reduced
fications or license. Likewise, it can be argued that funding for new equipment or may lead to the pur-
failing to enforce existing rules and regulations or flaunt- chase of equipment that is sub optimal and inad-
ing authority are also violations at the supervisory level. equately designed for the type of operations flown by
While rare and possibly difficult to cull out, such the company. Other trickle-down effects include
practices are a flagrant violation of the rules and invari- poorly maintained equipment and workspaces, and
ably set the stage for the tragic sequence of events that the failure to correct known design flaws in existing
predictably follow. equipment. The result is a scenario involving unsea-

soned, less-skilled pilots flying old and poorly main-
Organizational Influences tained aircraft under the least desirable conditions

and schedules. The ramifications for aviation safety
As noted previously, fallible decisions of upper-level are not hard to imagine.

management directly affect supervisory practices, as Climate. Organizational Climate refers to a broad
well as the conditions and actions of operators. Unfor- class of organizational variables that influence worker
tunately, these organizational errors often go unnoticed performance. Formally, it was defined as the
by safety professionals, due in large part to the lack of a “situationally based consistencies in the organization’s
clear framework from which to investigate them. Gen- treatment of individuals” (Jones, 1988). In general,
erally speaking, the most elusive of latent failures revolve however, organizational climate can be viewed as the
around issues related to resource management, organi- working atmosphere within the organization. One
zational climate, and operational processes, as detailed telltale sign of an organization’s climate is its structure,
below in Figure 5.

11



12



as reflected in the chain-of-command, delegation of Regrettably, not all organizations have these pro-
authority and responsibility, communication chan- cedures nor do they engage in an active process of
nels, and formal accountability for actions (Table 4). monitoring aircrew errors and human factor prob-
Just like in the cockpit, communication and coordi- lems via anonymous reporting systems and safety
nation are vital within an organization. If manage- audits. As such, supervisors and managers are often
ment and staff within an organization are not unaware of the problems before an accident occurs.
communicating, or if no one knows who is in charge, Indeed, it has been said that “an accident is one
organizational safety clearly suffers and accidents do incident to many” (Reinhart, 1996). It is incumbent
happen (Muchinsky, 1997). upon any organization to fervently seek out the “holes

An organization’s policies and culture are also in the cheese” and plug them up, before they create a
good indicators of its climate. Policies are official window of opportunity for catastrophe to strike.
guidelines that direct management’s decisions about
such things as hiring and firing, promotion, reten- CONCLUSION
tion, raises, sick leave, drugs and alcohol, overtime,
accident investigations, and the use of safety equip-  It is our belief that the Human Factors Analysis
ment. Culture, on the other hand, refers to the and Classification System (HFACS) framework
unofficial or unspoken rules, values, attitudes, be- bridges the gap between theory and practice by pro-
liefs, and customs of an organization. Culture is “the viding investigators with a comprehensive, user-
way things really get done around here.” friendly tool for identifying and classifying the human

When policies are ill-defined, adversarial, or con- causes of aviation accidents. The system, which is
flicting, or when they are supplanted by unofficial based upon Reason’s (1990) model of latent and
rules and values, confusion abounds within the orga- active failures (Shappell & Wiegmann, 1997a), en-
nization. Indeed, there are some corporate managers compasses all aspects of human error, including the
who are quick to give “lip service” to official safety conditions of operators and organizational failure.
policies while in a public forum, but then overlook Still, HFACS and any other framework only contrib-
such policies when operating behind the scenes. utes to an already burgeoning list of human error
However, the Third Law of Thermodynamics tells us taxonomies if it does not prove useful in the opera-
that, “order and harmony cannot be produced by tional setting. In these regards, HFACS has recently
such chaos and disharmony”. Safety is bound to been employed by the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps,
suffer under such conditions. Army, Air Force, and Coast Guard for use in aviation

Operational Process. This category refers to corporate accident investigation and analysis. To date, HFACS
decisions and rules that govern the everyday activities has been applied to the analysis of human factors data
within an organization, including the establishment from approximately 1,000 military aviation acci-
and use of standardized operating procedures and for- dents. Throughout this process, the reliability and
mal methods for maintaining checks and balances (over- content validity of HFACS has been repeatedly tested
sight) between the workforce and management. For and demonstrated (Shappell & Wiegmann, 1997c).
example, such factors as operational tempo, time pres- Given that accident databases can be reliably ana-
sures, incentive systems, and work schedules are all lyzed using HFACS, the next logical question is
factors that can adversely affect safety (Table 4). As whether anything unique will be identified. Early
stated earlier, there may be instances when those within indications within the military suggest that the
the upper echelon of an organization determine that it HFACS framework has been instrumental in the
is necessary to increase the operational tempo to a point identification and analysis of global human factors
that overextends a supervisor’s staffing capabilities. safety issues (e.g., trends in aircrew proficiency;
Therefore, a supervisor may resort to the use of inad- Shappell, et al., 1999), specific accident types (e.g.,
equate scheduling procedures that jeopardize crew rest controlled flight into terrain, CFIT; Shappell &
and produce sub optimal crew pairings, putting aircrew Wiegmann, 1997b), and human factors problems
at an increased risk of a mishap. However, organiza- such as CRM failures (Wiegmann & Shappell, 1999).
tions should have official procedures in place to Consequently, the systematic application of HFACS
address such contingencies as well as oversight pro- to the analysis of human factors accident data has
grams to monitor such risks. afforded the U.S. Navy/Marine Corps (for which the

13



original taxonomy was developed) the ability to de- REFERENCES
velop objective, data-driven intervention strategies.
In a sense, HFACS has illuminated those areas ripe Bird, F. (1974). Management guide to loss control. At-
for intervention rather than relying on individual lanta, GA: Institute Press.
research interests not necessarily tied to saving lives
or preventing aircraft losses. Heinrich, H.W., Petersen, D., & Roos, N. (1980).

Additionally, the HFACS framework and the in- Industrial accident prevention: A safety manage-
sights gleaned from database analyses have been used ment approach (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
to develop innovative accident investigation meth- Helmreich, R.L., & Foushee, H.C. (1993). Why crew
ods that have enhanced both the quantity and quality resource management? Empirical and theoretical
of the human factors information gathered during bases of human factors training in aviation. In
accident investigations. However, not only are safety E.L. Wiener, B.G. Kanki, & R.L. Helmreich
professionals better suited to examine human error in (Eds.), Cockpit resource management (pp. 3-45).
the field but, using HFACS, they can now track those San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
areas (the holes in the cheese) responsible for the
accidents as well. Only now is it possible to track the Jones, A.P. (1988). Climate and measurement of con-
success or failure of specific intervention programs sensus: A discussion of “organizational climate.”
designed to reduce specific types of human error and In S.G. Cole, R.G. Demaree & W. Curtis, (Eds.),
subsequent aviation accidents. In so doing, research Applications of Interactionist Psychology: Essays in
investments and safety programs can be either read- Honor of Saul B. Sells (pp. 283-90). Hillsdale, NJ:
justed or reinforced to meet the changing needs of Earlbaum.
aviation safety. Murray, S.R. (1997). Deliberate decision making by

Recently, these accident analysis and investigative aircraft pilots: A simple reminder to avoid deci-
techniques, developed and proven in the military, sion making under panic. The International Jour-
have been applied to the analysis and investigation of nal of Aviation Psychology, 7, 83-100.
U.S. civil aviation accidents (Shappell & Wiegmann,
1999). Specifically, the HFACS framework is cur- Muchinsky, P.M. (1997). Psychology applied to work
rently being used to systematically analyze both com- (5th ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole Pub-
mercial and General Aviation accident data to explore lishing Co.
the underlying human factors problems associated National Transportation Safety Board. (1982). Air
with these events. The framework is also being em- Florida, Inc., Boeing 737-222, N62AF, Collision
ployed to develop improved methods and techniques with 14th Street bridge, near Washington National
for investigating human factors issues during actual Airport, Washington, D.C., January 13, 1982
civil aviation accident investigations by Federal Avia- (Tech. Report NTSB-AAR-82-8). Washington:
tion Administration and National Transportation National Transportation Safety Board.
Safety Board officials. Initial results of this project
have begun to highlight human factors areas in need Orasanu, J.M. (1993). Decision-making in the cock-
of further safety research. In addition, like their pit. In E.L. Wiener, B.G. Kanki, and R.L.
military counterparts, it is anticipated that HFACS Helmreich (Eds.), Cockpit resource management
will provide the fundamental information and tools (pp. 137-72). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
needed to develop a more effective and accessible Rasmussen, J. (1982). Human errors: A taxonomy for
human factors accident database for civil aviation. describing human malfunction in industrial in-

In summary, the development of the HFACS stallations. Journal of Occupational Accidents, 4,
framework has proven to be a valuable first step in the 311-33.
establishment of a larger military and civil aviation
safety program. The ultimate goal of this, and any Reason, J. (1990). Human error. New York: Cambridge
other, safety program is to reduce the aviation accident University Press.
rate through systematic, data-driven investment. Reinhart, R.O. (1996). Basic flight physiology (2nd ed.).

New York: McGraw-Hill.

14



Senders, J.W., and Moray, N.P. (1991). Human error: Shappell, S.A. and Wiegmann, D.A. (1999a). Human
Cause, prediction and reduction. Hillsdale, NJ: error in commercial and corporate aviation: An
Earlbaum. analysis of FAR Part 121 and 135 mishaps using

Shappell, S.A., and Wiegmann, D.A. (1996). U.S. HFACS. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medi-

naval aviation mishaps 1977-92: Differences be- cine, 70, 407.

tween single- and dual-piloted aircraft. Aviation, Shappell, S., Wiegmann, D., Fraser, J., Gregory, G.,
Space, and Environmental Medicine, 67, 65-9. Kinsey, P., and Squier, H (1999b). Beyond mis-

Shappell, S.A. and Wiegmann D.A. (1997a). A human hap rates: A human factors analysis of U.S. Navy/

error approach to accident investigation: The tax- Marine Corps TACAIR and rotary wing mishaps

onomy of unsafe operations. The International using HFACS. Aviation, Space, and Environmen-

Journal of Aviation Psychology, 7, 269-91. tal Medicine, 70, 416-17.

Shappell, S.A. & Wiegmann, D.A. (1997b). Why Wiegmann, D.A. and Shappell, S.A. (1997). Human

would an experienced aviator fly a perfectly factors analysis of post-accident data: Applying

good aircraft into the ground? In Proceedings of theoretical taxonomies of human error. The Inter-

the Ninth International Symposium on Aviation national Journal of Aviation Psychology, 7, 67-81.

Psychology, (pp. 26-32). Columbus, OH: The Wiegmann, D.A. and Shappell, S.A. (1999). Human
Ohio State University. error and crew resource management failures in

Shappell, S.A. and Wiegmann, D.A. (1997). A reliabil- Naval aviation mishaps: A review of U.S. Naval

ity analysis of the Taxonomy of Unsafe Opera- Safety Center data, 1990-96. Aviation, Space, and

tions. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medi- Environmental Medicine, 70, 1147-51.

cine, 68, 620.

15



ORIGINAL RESEARCH 

The Making of Helicopters: 
Its Strategic Implications 
for EMS Helicopter Operations 
Frank Thomas, MD, MBA’ 

1. IHC Life Flight Adult Services, Shock- Abstract Furthermore, information regarding produc- 
Trauma-Respiratory Intensive Care Unit, tion and operational management was not 
LDS Hospital, Salt Lake City, Utah Purpose: The purpose of this article is to pro- 

vide EMS helicopter personnel with an under- easily accessible because the data were not 
Key Words: EMS helicopters, helicopter standing of the civil helicopter manufacturing published or were considered confidential. 
manufacturing, helicopter production industry. Specifically, this article examines the Therefore industry analysis had to take place 
Address for correspondence and reprints: current helicopter marketplace and how vari- through direct survey interviewing technique 
Frank Thomas, MD, MBA, IHC Life Flight ous manufacturers are responding to the re- and data obtained through an analysis of the 
Adult Services, LDS Hospital, Salt Lake City, cent decline in new helicopter sales. This arti- available published data. 
UT 84101 cle further describes how helicopters are 
Copyright 0 1998 by the Air Medical Journal designed and manufactured and how global Introduction 
Associates markets, international competition, and strate Every day EMS helicopter personnel put 

gic considerations are influencing future heli- on their uniforms, grab their EMS equip 
1067-991)(/98/!$5.00 + 0 copter design and production. merit, and stand ready for the next emer- 
Reprint no. 74flf89228 Methods: Data for this paper were obtained gency helicopter transport. Without the 

from a literature search through the /@I-inform availability of lifesaving helicopters, EMS 
Telnst Servfce offered through the UnfversRyof operations would be dramatically diier- 
Utah Marrtott Library. Cn a search of “haiiitet” ent. Yet few EMS helicopter personnel 
during the past 5 years, 566 abstracts were and their administrative counterparts 
identified, all of which were rev&wed for informa- think of the factors that influence the 
ticnrelatedtotheplJrpc%3ofthisartide.Fcity- production and sale of these lifesaving 
sevsnarticleswereident&dandmsdindetall machines. Understanding the factors 
for information that may have related to the pur- that intluence helicopter production is 
pose of this art&. In addition, a library search to critical in the strategic planning of future 
identify textbccks that describe helicopter pro- EMS helicopter operations. 
duction systems was undertaken but did not 
identifyanywlitt~resources. Helicopter Sales 
Because of the lack of written resources avail- In 1986, U.S. helicopter manufacturers 
ab!f3 in wtftirg thii article, a &ect interview sur- had produced 100%of the piston-engine 
vey of leading wii~ manufacturers, associ- helicopters and 74%of the turbine-engine 
ations, and industry writers was conducted. helicopters in the civilian market.1 Bell 
Only information that was considered “public Helicopters was the largest U.S. civilian 
lUl0wledge"W&SElV&tbkbecauseOf- helicopter manufacturer with 35.7% 
by the various manufacturers that publiion of (2410/6760) of the worlds pistonengine 
confidential information could be detrimental to helicopter market and 52.3% 
their cornpetit& advantage. (5549/10$X6) of the world’s turbine-en- 
Limitations: Because helicopter-manufactur- gine helicopter market for a combined 
ing plants were not located within easy travel world market share of 24.3%. 
range, no direct observation of the produc- However, by 1994 Bell Helicopters 
tion facilities could be undertaken. had lost nearly 12.5%or 1.5%per year of 

Air Medical Journal 17:2 AprilJune 1998 57 



its turbine-engine helicopter market 
share and 9% of its piston-engine heli- United States 
copter market share.2 In addition, new New Helicopter Sales 
helicopter sales for major manufacturers 
have been falling steadily since 1990, as 250 
shown in Figure 1.3 Plummeting mili- 
tary sales as a result of thawed East- 
West relations,495a decline in U.S. hos- 
pital-based EMS hehcopter sales 200 
because of expected health care capita- 
tions and market maturity,~a falling oil 
prices, and high acquisition costs all are 
blamed for declining helicopter sales.9 
Faced with the stark reality of further 
declining military and civilian helicopter 
sales and an ever-increasing, highly 
competitive global marketplace, heli- 
copter manufacturing companies are be- 100 
ginning to modify Cth.e  way they do busi- 
ness in producing, selling, and 
providing customer service.l@la 

In this new global market, competi- 
tion is no longer just between helicopter Jo- 
manufacturers within countries. It is no 
longer between nations. Rather competi- 
tion is the result of alliances, partner- 
ships, mergers, and acquisitions that in 0 I I I I 
corporate the special abilities of each I 

1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 
region to manufacture a product superior 
in performance, maintenance, or cost 
than its nearest competitor.3 Former m--m-- Turbine & Piston 

competitors, such as MBB of Germany American Eurocopter. 1990- 1995 United States Market Analysis. March 5, 1996. 
and Aerospatiale of France, now are part- 
nering in an effort to maintain or en- 
hance market share.t4Js ‘The benefits of several drawbacks can diminish these l A production orientation directed at 
strategic alliances are critical to compet- benefits. For example, the foreign work- manufacturing affordable heli- 
ing successfully in the current global force may lack appropriate skills to en- copters 
market-16 sure minimally acceptable standards of l Collaborative supplier and customer 

Obtaining market share takes more quality. Expensive hourly wages or gov- relationships that promote not only 
than an innovative or ‘best price” prod- ernment benefits may dramatically re- economies of scale but also long- 
uct; it takes an understanding of political duce any cost benefit. term partnerships 
realities. With sales stagnant in Europe In fact, a long list of pros and cons l “Human-centered production” that 
and North America, manufacturers are needs to be considered before imple- encourages innovative manufactur- 
directing their attention to Asian and de menting licensing agreements. ing processes that lower the cost of 
veloping countries.17Js But these new Considerations include quality manage production21-” 
market segments are no longer willing ment, statistical quality control, product 
just to purchase a product for its unique and service design, process planning and Designing a New Helicopter 
ness or affordability. These potential technology decision-making, facility lay- The initial design of a helicopter begins 
markets are insisting on licensing agree out, location analysis and logistics, trans not as a sketch but rather as a list of de 
ments to enable them to manufacture portation, job design and management, sired performance specifications, such as 
these high-cost products to enhance forecasting, aggregate production and ca speed, payload, and flight distance. From 
their own economies.19 Production and pacity planning, inventory management, these specitications engineers can deter- 
manufacturing mean jobs, jobs lead to and material requirements. mine the rotor system, transmission size, 
enhanced income, and enhanced income Ultimately to win in the future global and installed power necessary to operate 
results in an improved standard of living. market, helicopter manufacturers must the proposed helicopter. Knowing the 

Although allowing these new market develop: needed engine power and desired flight 
segments to produce their helicopters l A new customer focus directed at distance determines the amount of fuel 
would seem beneficial to manufacturers, civilian rather than military sales20 required. The cabin space and cockpit er- 

58 April-June 1998 17:2 Air Medical Journal 



gonomics then are incorporated into the are merely cosmetic and do not affect the with Generation Four helicopters, the 
helicopter design. At this point, the draw- overall flight characteristics, military continued to emphasize faster, 
ings begin to resemble a helicopter. Once the aircraft is manufactured, im- more agile, higher flying, and highly 

However, before proceeding much provements to its basic flight characteris- lethal helicopters. Unfortunately, the 
further, a decision must be made regard- tics can occur. Improving the rotor manufacturers have discovered that few 
ing other subsystems. For instance, is blades, enhancing power modifications, of these factors are important to commer- 
the aircraft going to be certified for every and enlarging the cabin are all changes cial operators. Manufacturers now see 
air worthiness agency around the world? that can be incorporated into the air- that military solutions developed for 
If the answer is “yes,” a number of re crafts future design. Such changes re- Generation Four helicopters have little 
quired subsystems must be included the quire 9 to 48 months from conception to applicability to civilian helicopter needs. 
aircraft design. Now the design must in- production. As will be discussed later, The one exception is the possible 
clude dual generators, dual hydraulics, few newly designed helicopters will ap- need of systems approach in helicopters 
separated fuel systems, crashworthy fuel pear during the next decade. Instead, used for law enforcement. In this circum- 
tanks, engines with scatter shields, and manufacturers will modify existing heli- stance, alternative manufacturing assem- 
other necessary subsystems. copters by improving their basic flight bly lines are created so that the passive 

Once the ideal helicopter design is design characteristics. black box systems, such as Flir, low level 
established, a price assessment is made. light TV, communication and navigational 
As is often the case, the price exceeds Helicopter Development systems, will be assembled first, and then 
the desired price point, and subsequent Helicopter development has gone the helicopter will be assembled around 
redesign must be undertaken to meet through several generation changes. The that system. At the final step, the whole 
the required price point. Reliability parts first helicopters, Generation One heli- unit goes together to satisfy the law- 
requirements then force additional de- copters, used reciprocating engines to enforcement mission requirement for sur- 
sign changes. power the aircraft The Sikorsky R series veillance and apprehension work. Under 

Finally, when the design meets the and the Bell 47 series are examples of Generation Four, these devices are no 
price point, a 1/1oth model is made that Generation One helicopters. Turbine en- longer merely add-ons to the airframe but 
can be tested within a wind tunnel to val- gines powered Generation Two heli- are a significant component in the heli- 
idate predicted flight performance. If the copters. Not only were these helicopters copter design and production. 
wind tunnel test is successful, a full-sized more powerful but had considerable Although interest in helicopter use in 
prototype is produced, and further tests weight savings. The Bell Jet Ranger and the civilian law-enforcement market has 
are conducted with the aircraft heavily the Huey helicopter are examples of increased, the cost of Generation Four 
instrumented. During the test flight of Generation Two helicopters. helicopters has made acquiring these he 
the prototype, the aircraft is evaluated An effort was made with Generation licopters prohibitive. Further, the use of 
for parts and flight reliability. In general, Three helicopters to increase productiv- military attack helicopters in public law 
the time from the first design marks to ity by increasing the cabin size, ride qual- enforcement might not receive public 
production of the first prototype is 3 ities, speed, and lifting capabilities. This support. Currently the public appears to 
years and involves hundreds of thou- shift occurred through technological ad- be supporting law-enforcement heli- 
sands of manhours. vances in rotor-blade design and compos copter activity centered on surveillance 

After the first prototype is produced, ite materials, which further lightened the and rescue work but not in the applica- 
further testing and certification of flight aircraft. Generations One, Two, and tion of attack helicopters. 
safety are required. It is not uncommon Three helicopters largely were designed Generation Five, which represents 
for this process to take at least another 3 for transport and the carriage of person- the next stage of helicopter design and 
to 4 years before the aircraft is certified nel. Consequently some compatibility ex- production, is the result of the downturn 
for sale in the civilian market. At this isted with civilian market needs. in military sales and the need for afford- 
point the aircraft’s configuration is Generation Four helicopters have a able civilian helicopters. The focus will 
frozen, and no additional design modifi- much different design and function. not be on enhanced helicopter perfor- 
cations that would affect the aircraft’s These represent what commonly is re- mance but on reduced costs.24 Under 
flight characteristics can occur. ferred to as the “attack helicopter.” In the this scenario, manufacturers will design 

Generation Four helicopter, a battlefield and produce helicopters that are cheaper 
Helicopter Production systems approach became primary to the to acquire and operate. Because afford- 
Helicopters are not mass-produced. design, and the airframe became sec- ability rather than performance drives 
Rather, they are assembled through a ondary. The Comanche and Apache heli- the civilian market segment, mission per- 
tixed-position layout whereby the prod- copters are examples of aircraft specifi- formance most likely will decline to 
uct remains stationary during most of the cally designed to provide a battlefield achieve a significant cost reduction. 
manufacturing cycle. Equipment, work- solution. Black boxes that help provide Manufacturers will develop production 
ers, materials, and other resources are these solutions were designed and inte facilities that will make Generation Five 
brought to the production site. In almost grated into an airframe, which then was helicopters in a simpler and less expen- 
every assembly, the interior cabin is cus- built around the system designed to pro sive manner. However, Generation Five 
tomized. However, these modifications vide a battlefield solution. helicopter production is believed to be at 

Air Medical Journal 17:2 April-June 1998 59 



least 10 years away, when the currently use is at an all-time high. Because of the All these factors are crucial in deter- 
proposed concepts will be realized. high acquisition cost of new helicopters, mining the product price. However, it is 

operators are finding ways to keep their important to note that the objectives or 
The Helicopter Marketplace older helicopters operating longer, fur- strategy in helicopter pricing depend on 
Helicopter sales traditionally are divided ther depressing new sales. a variety of objectives, such as maxi- 
into five segments: military; corporate, oil Finally, as manufacturers develop bet- mized profits, maintained or increased 
and utility, EMS, and government ser- ter ways to deliver customer service, ex- market share, how quickly a breakeven 
vices, such as law enforcement and parks pectations in customer service will con- point is desired, and the expected return 
departments. In the past, military sales tinue to grow. with greater expectations on the investment. Pricing further is in- 
accounted for the major portion of heli- come increased customer costs. Because fluenced by customer demands, channel 
copter sales and served as the underpin- of these market forces, all major heli- distribution members, government inter- 
ning for the infrastructure of the worlds copter manufacturers have had and will est, competitors, and finally the manufac- 
major helicopter manufacturers. In continue to undergo a major restructuring turer. Based on anticipated costs and the 
essence, military sales paid for a large of how they market and produce their final expected price, a profit/loss deci- 
portion of the helicopter manufacturers’ products. The remaining discussion in sion to pursue development and produc- 
overhead and research and development this article focuses on the strategic direc- tion of the aircraft can be made. 
efforts. To enhance sales, some con- tion helicopter manufacturers are heading 
verted military aircraft were sold to the to ensure their survival in this very de- Strategic Factors that Influence 
smaller civilian market. However, with pressed and highly competitive market. Helicopter Production 
the end of the Cold War, military needs Once a decision is made to pursue prod- 
and helicopter sales declined rapidly. The Factors that Forecast uct development and production, the 
last major military sale occurred in 1992. Helicopter Production Modification strategic decisions of what, how, and 

Except for the utility and oil market Tivo factors determine the need to mod- where to produce the helicopter are influ- 
segment, few military helicopters have ify helicopter production: market de- enced by three more factors: marketing, 
much application in the civilian market. mand and profit/loss projections. operational, and financial considerations. 
Further, at the same time military sales Market demand. Market demand is Each of these factors may lead to separate 
are declining, the oil and utility market the driving force behind product produc- and distinct answers. The helicopter in- 
segments have been depressed because tion. How a customer perceives a prod- dustry is a strong example of how the 
of low oil prices. Supporting helicopter uct is crucial to maintainmg, acquiring, complexity of international competition ul 
purchases for offshore oil work is dii- or losing market share. The value of a timately intluences helicopter production. 
cult when oil prices are in the low $2O helicopter to a customer is determined 
per-barrel range. Operators who have at- by its functionality, emotional appeal, or Marketing Considerations 
tempted to branch out into logging benefit balanced against all the risks, Selling helicopters is crucial to any man- 
likewise have found a disappointing mar- time, money, convenience, and opportu- ufacturer% financial survival. In the past 
ket because the expense of helicopter nity costs in acquiring the product. customers bought products based on 
logging simply is not justified. Traditionally, market research helps de their functional design, quality, and af- 

Helicopter use in EMS transport of termine new product opportunities. By fordability. But the current intemation- 
critically ill or injured patients became an applying situational analysis, a manufac- ally competitive market demands new 
emerging field in the 1980s. However, turer can understand the precise specifi- methods for making headway into un- 
with the replacement of fee-for-service cations of the product to meet con- tapped market segments. 
with medical care capitation, sales for sumers’ wants. Based on physical and For example, when U.S.-based 
new helicopters to perform expensive pa behavioral descriptors, helicopter manu- McDonnell Douglas began manufactur- 
tient transports have declined similarly. facturing companies can precisely iden- ing the MD-Explorer helicopter, the com- 

Estimates indicate that approximately tify the target market pany split out portions of it to be built in 
3000 used military helicopters will be Profit/loss projections. Once the other parts of the world.26 By having the 
dumped into the civilian market at little target market has been identified, a vari- transmission built in Japan and the fuse 
or no acquisition costs by the year ety of analyses are performed to deter- lage built in Australia, McDonnell 
2000.25 The initial result of these aircraft mine what impact the development of a Douglas established an inroad into these 
entering the market will be to further de new helicopter or the modification of an market segments, which gave the com- 
press any new helicopter sales. Unlike existing helicopter design will have on pany a high-profile foreign vendor that 
the Generation Four attack helicopters, profit/loss projections. Such analyses in- could use its understanding of the mar- 
these older-but-no-longer-produced clude determinations of consumer sales, ket segment to parlay sales. Additional 
Generation Two and Three military air- distribution costs, political/regulatory/ investment from outside sources was not 
craft do have some commercial use. The legal considerations, production costs, needed because of McDonnell Douglas’s 
result has been favorable to commercial required quality standards and manage strong capital strength, nor did the corn 
purchases of these older and cheaper air- ment, customer support services, cul- parry need manufacturing expertise given 
craft. Paradoxically, despite the down- tural intluences, and the effect of compe its long history of airplane and helicopter 
turn in new helicopter sales, helicopter tition in the target market design and manufacturing. Rather, 

60 ApriMune 1996 17:2 Air Medical Journal 



McDonnell Douglas engaged in foreign seek a partner who could produce the he potential success of future collaborations. 
partnering to obtain high visibility in licopter from sheet metal using an inex- 
these potential market segments. pensive labor force. In this case, China Quality Considerations 

Similarly Sikorsky, in designing and was selected for its ability not only to pro Producing helicopters has major quality 
building the S92, has elected to bring in duce the helicopter more cheaply than its concerns and expectations. Unlike many 
vendors from Brazil, Spain, Taiwan, and nearest competitor but also to meet qual- products that reach consumers, heli- 
mainland China. Competition to sell heli- ity production standards.s* copters are highly complicated ma- 
copters is so high that manufacturers However, some composite material chines. A helicopter failure can have dis- 
must attract market shares any way they still is required to build the aircraft. Once astrous consequences to its occupants or 
can. This technique of partnering with again, Eurocopter found itself looking for those in the surrounding area. Therefore 
other companies that have not only the a partner, this time to produce the com- high-quality standards must be main- 
manufacturing expertise but also a posite material necessary to reduce heli- tained to reduce the likelihood of an acci- 
strong market influence is part of a new copter weight. Singapore Aerospace dent arising from an equipment failure. 
trend to outsource and offload product in agreed to develop the composite material Such equipment failures can cause signif- 
the helicopter industry. to make the ferrings, panels, and cockpit. icant legal and financial liabilities to the 

The development of the EC-120 heli- manufacturer. For these reasons, heli- 
Operational Considerations copter provides a vivid example of how copter manufacturers must be assured 
Operations are the second important fac- major helicopter manufacturers are re- that outsourcing production does not di- 
tor that affects the strategic approach in sponding, through operational strategies, minish the level of quality in their own 
helicopter manufacturing. Operating con- to customer desires by globaliiing the production facilities. 
siderations include the cost of research way they outsource the production of Quality in outsourcing the produc- 
and development, production costs, man- their productss tion of a helicopter is ensured through 
agement requirements, the sales force, several methods. First, the manufac- 
and customer support Financial Considerations turer designs product specifications. 

The influence of international compe Finance is the third factor that influences However, the design of helicopter speci- 
tition on operational considerations in strategic helicopter production. The pur- fications does not occur in the manufac- 
the strategic production of helicopters is pose is to get investors to help share the turer’s own format. In other words, the 
best epitomized in the production of risk involved in developing the aircraft. specifications used to develop the proto- 
Eurocopter’s EG120 helicopter.27 For ex- One example that illustrates finance’s ef- type of a helicopter in France cannot 
ample, for years Bell Helicopters has pro fect on strategic development and pro- just be handed over to a manufacturing 
duced a low acquisition- and low mainte- duction in the helicopter industry is the firm in China and result in the same 
nance-cost helicopter known as the Bell BK 117. In late ‘7Os, when the BK product that would be produced in 
Jet Ranger series. Until recently, 117 originally was designed, MBB France. Understanding the operational 
Eurocopter did not have an aircraft in the Helicopters found it could not bring the mindset of an international partnering 
Bell Jet Ranger lower weight class.With BK 117 to production by itself. The pro firm typically takes 6 months to a year. 
military sales declining and customers ject required a partner to help with fi- For example, where in Munich, 
demanding cheaper helicopters, nancing. Japan’s Kawasaki agreed to Germany, one specification would de- 
Eurocopter found it did not have a heli- enter into an equal tinancial partnership scribe a production process, in Harbean, 
copter that could compete in this market. in bringing the BK 117 to market. For ac- China, speci6cations are written for indi- 
In this situation, the production empha- cepting half the developmental costs, viduals performing a particular step in 
sis was to manufacture a helicopter that Kawasaki received half the profits from the process. Design specifications and 
could compete with the Bell Jet Ranger the successful sale of this helicopter. the manufacturing steps necessary to 
series while maintaining a specitic price Another important consideration in produce a quality product are merged to 
point range of about $700,000. helicopter production is developing long- meet the mentality of the foreign pro- 

To meet that range, Eurocopter term relationships. For example, in the duction facility. 
looked around to determine how a light- case of the EC120, Eurocopter already Second, after the production proce- 
weight helicopter could be manufactured had established a working relationship dures are established, personnel from the 
cheaply. Fit, Eurocopter began seeking with China building the Dauphine heli- home helicopter manufacturing facility 
less expensive materials because it de copter in the early 1970s. This experi- are sent to the foreign manmacmrmg fa- 
tided not to use the more expensive, ence enabled Eurocopter to quickly cility to oversee the production process. 
newer technology of composite materi- delegate the development and manufac- 
als. Rather, the company returned to the turing of the EC-120 to the same group In-house Versus Outsourcing 
older but much less expensive technol- that had built 50 Dauphme helicopters in Considerations 
ogy of sheet metal to create the mselage. China in the past two decades. In chaos One clear advantage in making the prod- 

But in selecting the cheaper sheet ing a production site, understanding the uct in-house is that it gives the manufac- 
metal, Eurocopter was faced with a highly ability of an international firm to maintain turer ultimate control of the production 
labor-intensive material. Therefore, to a long-term relationship is critical to the process. A typical helicopter has approxi- 
hold down labor costs, Eurocopter had to final success of current projects and the mately 35,000 parts, approximately 20 

Air Medical Journal 17:2 April-June 1998 61 



times the number of an airplane’s mov- update the database. a contract like those in a military con- 
ing parts.30 Each part has an individual tract. Therefore, given the cost of devel- 
drawing. Products bought from vendors Cultural and Political Considerations opment and the competition between he- 
have an individual source control draw- Despite these apparent advantages, com- licopter manufacturers, a significant risk 
ing. When changes occur in the design pany mergers between foreign entities occurs if sales do not meet expected 
of the product, data on the part likewise can have some serious shortcomings. For break-even projections. 
must be changed. Optimum figuration example, although the merger of For example, McDonnell Douglas has 
control occurs when the product is to- Aerospatiale and MBB into Eurocopter spent considerable time, effort, and 
tally built in-house. If something goes has resulted in combined technology, the money developing the MDX-Explorer. 
wrong in the field and a part needs to be savings that should occur with eliminat- This newly designed helicopter was 
changed, these changes can occur ing duplicate services have not come eas specitically made with civilian market ap 
rapidly with in-house manufacturing by ily because of cultural and political issues plications in mind and provided several 
new drawings and the production of a that have impeded downsizing. Layoffs in new cost-saving maintenance innova- 
new part. However, the losses of having France are difticult given the cultural ex- tions, such as a composite rotorhead and 
all production in-house are the marketing pectation that the French government is reduced noise levels with the elimination 
share advantages, access to cheaper pro responsible for ensuring job security for of the taih-otor.32However, several other 
duction costs, and investment sharing. its citizens.31 The result is that the innovations, like the pedal-controlled fan- 

Although outsourcing production pro French component of Eurocopter is reluc- tail, have been plagued with tailrotor au- 
vides marketing, operational, and finan- tant to downsize because of the political thority problems at altitude. None of 
cial advantages, it has drawbacks. When consequences it could have on the com- these complications is covered within 
a problem in the design arises that pany. As a consequence, a competitive military developmental cost structure; 
threatens the safe operation of the air- disadvantage now arises in controlling rather each newly identified problem rc 
craft, the source of the design flaw has to costs. Other competitive helicopter manu- sults in additional costs that must be 
be found immediately because all other facturers, not faced with the same job se- borne ultimately by the consumer in ac- 
aircraft must be grounded until the flaw curity issues that occur in France, can quiring the helicopter. Unless the con- 
is corrected. Firms that depended on make dramatic cuts in labor costs to en- sumer can be convinced that the addi- 
these aircraft to perform business func- able them to produce-and therefore tional cost is justified for these 
tions can be placed at significant financial sell-civilian helicopters less expensively. improvements, sufficient sales will not 
risk with excessivedelays. Another major concern of any manu- occur to cover breakeven costs. 

When a significant amount of the facturer engaged in outsourcing to a for- This situation is further complicated 
product is outsourced to a large number eign facility is the political impact it can by the fact that a competitor may develop 
of vendors, locating the source of prob- have on product production. For exam- an innovation that the consumer recog- 
lems can result in significant delays. As ple, suppose that Eurocopter has nizes as an important improvement for 
the production process of the aircraft ma- arranged to produce a helicopter in which additional acquisition costs are jus 
tures, part numbers change because im- China and anticipates that the biggest tified. Because of the high risks associ- 
provements are made. This scenario is share of sales will occur in the United ated with developmental costs, helicopter 
complicated further by the fact that ven- States. Now imagine that the United manufacturers are reluctant to make 
dors frequently change; they may go out States, for some reason, wants to boycott major design changes. They instead 
of business or be forced by rising prices China. Such an action might dramatically choose to pursue moditications on exist- 
to find alternative manufacturing prohibit the sale of these helicopters. ing designs. Most of these design modii- 
sources. Therefore configuration control Whenever a company engages in produc- cations include larger or more reliable 
is important in enabling a manufacturer tion with foreign entities, the possibility engines or larger tailrotors for better 
to immediately know the source of nearly always exists that a political event can high-altitude authority. All these modii- 
35,000 parts of any delivered aircraft occur that will disrupt commercial sales cations have been made either to provide 

When a helicopter manufacturer out- or the plan for producing the helicopter. some small difference in helicopter per- 
sources to many partners, particularly to This possibility is particularly true if the formance over the competitors’ heli- 
partners who lack sophisticated data pro helicopter has military implications and copters or as a response to modifications 
cessing capabilities, configuration con- may be perceived as a potential direct or by a competitor. 
trol is weakened. Establishing a material indirect threat to the country implement- In fact, except for the MDX-Explorer, 
review board compensates for this weak- ing the boycott. no really new, innovative civilian heli- 
ness. This board consists of four or five copter designs have occurred within the 
individuals, including engineers, quality Civilian Developmental past decade because price points detine 
control specialists, process experts, and Cost Considerations civilian helicopters, whereas military he- 
manufacturing engineers, and reviews Progress in helicopter technology has licopters are detined by specialized per- 
any deviation on any unit produced. This been largely through developments in formance criteria. Military contracts rou- 
group helps ensure that changes are not military contracts, which absorb devel- tinely include the developmental costs 
detrimental to parts production or assem- opmental costs. Civilian helicopter devel- required to meet these performance cri- 
bly. This board also has the charter to opmental costs are not contained within teria; therefore these costs are additive 

62 April-June 1998 17:2 Air Medical Journal 



to the sale. bearingless tailrotor incorporated into the turers enhance helicopter maintainabil- 
To be successful in the civilian heli- S76 were technological developments in ity, a strong need exists to develop addi- 

copter marketplace, a manufacturer must the production of the Black Hawk. tional ways to reduce spare part produc- 
truly understand the price point and the Few companies currently are produc- tion costs. With an expected decline in 
market segment. Unfortunately, market ing helicopters without military contracts sales of maintenance parts, manufactur- 
projections for recovery of return on in- to help subsidize their infrastructure. ers will need to develop other revenue 
vestment are often done 20 to 30 years Companies like Robinson and Enstrom streams. 
out, and their certainty is highly ques- have entered this market but at consider- One possible new source of revenue 
tionable because of the competitive na- able risk. for manut&turers is to move into the ser- 
ture of this market. Helicopter compa- vice industry. Instead of operators or cus 
nies, to be competitive, must sell Mergers and Acquisitions tomers doing their own inspections, re 
helicopters at very low gross margins. To reduce overhead costs and make he- current flight training, and mission 
The result is that it takes longer-and licopters more affordable, several large modifications, manufacturers could pro- 
many more helicopter sales-before and formerly competitive companies vide these services, thereby reducing the 
costs are recovered. have merged. They believe that dupli- infrastructure required to maintain the 

cate resources can be eliminated aircraft. Under this format, operators 
The Influence of Military Contracts through consolidation, specifically those could concentrate on marketing and op 
National defense is a different driver than personnel found in previously competing e&ions rather than technical support of 
the free enterprise market. In this mar- departments, such as marketing, admin- the aircraft 
ket, the goal is to produce a helicopter istration, and engineering. In addition to Within the next few decades, heli- 
with greater speed, agility, power, or en- these economies of scale, several other copters’ condition possibly will be real- 
durance than its competitor. This market advantages occur when helicopter manu- time monitored and telemetered through 
is less concerned with cost-effectiveness. facturers consolidate, including a larger satellite data linking to the manufacturer’s 
On the other hand, civilian markets are line of aircraft. For example, the merger control room, allowing the manutacturer 
concerned with the cost-effectiveness of of Aerospatiale with MBB to form to quickly alert the operator about a po- 
helicopter transport. Yet without a doubt, Eurocopter increased the number of tential situation before it became a sign%- 
the production of civilian helicopters is major types of civilian helicopters that cant problem. At the same time, correc- 
strongly linked to military helicopter consumers could select from a single tions could be initiated, or the materials 
manufacturing. Without military con- manufacturer. could be assembled to rapidly correct the 
tracts, little incentive exists to develop Finally, technological advances made problem. This real-time monitoring would 
expensive technology that might en- by former competitors can be integrated greatly reduce maintenance downtime. 
hance helicopter design without affecting to produce a helicopter that combines 
cost-effectiveness. the best features of each into a single air- Future Helicopter Production 

Further, without the infrastructure craft. An example is the newly produced The marketplace drives helicopter pro- 
created by military contracts, most heli- Eurocopter EC135, which combines the duction. Economic factors, such as the 
copter manufacturers would have a dii- quiet, fenestrated taihotor developed by price of crude oil, investment tax incen- 
cult time surviving. Advanced engineer- Aerospatiale with the composite rotor- tives, the need to mobii for disaster re 
ing departments, sophisticated tools, and head developed by MBB. This result is lief, effects of managed health care, and 
flight test equipment are required to the best ideas from two formerly compet- regulatory changes, such as a require- 
bring new technology advances into the ing companies placed into a single unit ment for twinengine operations for night 
marketplace. Because the civilian market without excessive developmental costs. flying, all affect the helicopter market- 
is highly regulated by the Federal place. Each of these factors needs low- 
Aviation Administration, additional test- Maintenance Costs cost solutions. 
ing requirements must be met that may Most of the discussion in this article has Currently the commercial or civilian 
not be required for military specifica- centered on the cost of making heli- helicopter industry is best described as a 
tions. All these factors form a tremen- copters. However, helicopters require “boutique” business. Too many suppliers 
dous barrier to bringing new technology significant repair and maintenance to en- are chasing too few market niches. The 
into the civilian helicopter marketplace. sure they remain safe to operate. To k.u= economics appear to be inverted when 

The logical way a company can gain ther reduce maintenance costs, manufac- one considers what it takes to get into this 
entry into the helicopter manufacturing turers are developing composite market and the possible realized sales. 
industry is to obtain military contracts components that can be used for longer Analysis of the market indicates that 
that help create the infrastructure neces- periods before overhaul. Although manu- manufacturers are responding by design 
sary to produce civilian helicopters. For facturing long-life parts meets the con- ing lower-cost helicopters. However, ap- 
example, the technology used to build sumer demand of affordability, the manu- parently far too many models are being 
the civilian Sikorsky S76 helicopter in facturer who has relied heavily on introduced, given the market share. For 
1974 was the same technology used to income derived from the sale of spare example, eight helicopter manufacturers 
build the military’s Black Hawk heli- parts now is faced with fewer sales and are competing in the 500@t o 8OOGpound 
copter. The titanium spar blade and the therefore less profitability. As manufac- market. Using market forecast data from 

Air Medical Journal 17:2 AprilJune 1998 83 



the Transportation Research Board for For these reasons, the number of man- and academia that recognize the impor- 
the next 10 years and assuming that only ufacturers producing helicopters is ex- tance of helicopters in oil survey, EMS, 
five competitors make it into the market, pected to fall during the next decade. ‘Ihe search and rescue, corporate transport, 
annual sales are expected to be only 40 survivors will focus on particular market law enforcement, and the military. 
aircraft per manufacturer. If all eight segments rather than attempt to provide a For now, the focus of future heli- 
competitors make it to market, only 25 wide range of helicopters for the industry copters is not on speed, the abiity to fly 
aircraft are expected to be sold per man at large. For example, because of the dra in any weather, lift potential, or lethal bat- 
uf&turer annually. matically less-than-expected sales of its tlefield systems but rather on producing 

Eight manufacturers also are compet- MDX-Explorer, McDonnell Douglas affordable helicopters in a free market- 
ing in the 900@ to 12,000-pound aircraft might give up its civilian helicopter pro- place. The survival of helicopter produo 
market If only five manufacturers make duction and concentrate only on its mili- ers will depend largely on maximizing 
it to market, annual sales will be 13 air- tary production capabilities. Likewise the benefits while reducing the risks a+ 
craft per manufacturer. Five competitors Agusta from Italy and Westland from sociated with global production. Such a 
are producing aircraft heavier than England might consolidate with other strategy will enable the production of re 
15,000 pounds, but the average annual European helicopter manufacturers. liable and affordable civilian helicopters. 
sales will be only three aircraft per manu- However, just one Saddam Hussein 
facturer. Experience shows that approxi- Conclusion and a resurgence in world conflict could 
mately 24 to 36 aircraft per year must be The central question is, “Which heli- quickly turn helicopter manufacturers 
sold before a company can make a profit copter manufacturers will survive this away once again from developing af- 
Barring a military contract, few manufac- current highly competitive and depressed fordable civilian helicopters to manufac- 
turers will be profitable under current marketplace?” This industry will continue turing aircraft as lethal weapons of mili- 
market conditions. to be driven by governments, operators, tary destruction. 

References 
1. Grangier M. World civil helicopter census. 12. Hugh D. Production quickens at Miibel. Avia the art of avoiding bankruptcy. Rotor 

Interavia 1987;2:145. Week & Space Tech 1994 June 20~51. 1995;8(2):12. 
2. Civil helicopter outlook brightens. Interavia 13. Kawasaki G. How to drive your competition 24. Proctor P. New models, markets push helo in- 

1994;2:35. crazy. Hyperion 1995. dustry. Avia Week & Space Tech 1996 Feb 
3. Ropelewski R, Taverna M, Sutton 0. 14. Lenorovitz J. AerospatiaIe/MBB merge heli- 1940. 

Consolidation of the helicopter sector near? copter commercial sectors. Avia Week & Space 25. Rickey P. Military surplus helicopters: boon or 
Interavia 1995;1:23. Tech 1991 May 2050. boondoggle? Rotor & Wm 1995;29(6):30. 

4. Sapaco P. France plans more cuts in mihtary 15. Sparaco P. Eurocopter navigates in crowded 26. Shifrin CA. McDonnell Douglas launches MDX 
procurement. Avia Week & Space Tech 1996 field. Avia Week & Space Tech 1993 Feb 2266. helicopter production. Avia Week & Space Tech 
May 2068. 16. Yosbino M, Rangan US. Strategic ahiances: an 1989 Jan 23~16. 

5. Bond D. U.S. defense budget cuts acquisition of entrepreneurial approach to globalization. 27. Sparaco P. Eurocopter launches EC 135, 120 
new weapon systems. Avia Week & Space Tech Boston: Harvard Business School Press; 1995. programs. Avia Week & Space Tech 1993 Feb 
1992 Feb 320. 17. Proctor P. Unique needs advance Latin heli- 2266. 

6. Copters grounded by cost cutting. Hosp Health copter sales. Avia Week & Space Tech 1996 28. Proctor P. Harbm uses new helicopter program 
Netw 1996 March 20:7?. Mar 460. to advance global manufacturing role. Avia 

7. Rickey P. Industry’s three Rs for health csre re 18. Helicopter optimism put on ice. Interavia Week & Space Tech 1992 Feb 348. 
form: regiomdize, rationaiim. reimburse. Rotor Aerospace Review 1992 Feb26. 29. Kamiol R AirIine forms aerospace backbone. 
& Ww 1993;27(10):23. 19. Guyot E. The choppers from France Iift off in Interavia 1991 June:50. 

8. Harvey DS. How wiII reform reshape air med- Asia. Asian Fiice 1991 Jan 1517. 30. Desfor B. Are inventories more or less than the 
icai transport Rotor & Ww 1996$0(10):28. 20. Barnard W, W&ace ‘IF. The innovation edge: sum of their patts? Rotor 1995;8(3):16. 

9. Kemstock NC. Hiih costs, weak economy cut creating strategic breakthrough using the voice 31. Monocco JD. Germans assess impact of French 
helicopter industry growth. Avia Week & Space of the customer. New York John Wdey & Sons; helicopter cuts. Avia Week & Space Tech 1996 
Tech 1991 Jan 2836. 1994. May 2068. 

10. Aboulafia R Rotor-wing rationalization. Avia 21. Robert M. Product innovation strategy. New 32. Henderson, B. MD900 bearingless rotor com- 
Week & Space Tech 1996 Jan 661. York McGraw-HiIb 1995. pletes fuI&aIe wing tunnel testing. Avia Week 

11. Iaabs JJ. HR initiative support, BeII Helicopter 22. Mehrbardis R A factory takes off. Canadian & Space Tech 1992 April n:72. 
new plant operations. Avia Week & Space Tech Business Productivity Suppkment 1994 Now44 
1993 May%%. 23. Desfor B. Helicopter buying, cost controls, and 

64 AprilJune 1998 17:2 Air Medcal Journal 



80 Quality in Health Care 1995;4:80-89

Understanding adverse events: human factors

James Reason

A decade ago, very few specialists in human More recently, the interest in the human
factors were involved in the study and factors ofhealth care has spread to a wide range
prevention ofmedical accidents. Now there are of medical specialties (for example, general
many. Between the 1940s and 1980s a major practice, accident and emergency care, obstetrics
concern of that community was to limit the and gynaecology, radiology, psychiatry, surgery,
human contribution to the conspicuously etc). This burgeoning concern is reflected in
catastrophic breakdown of high hazard enter- several recent texts and journal articles devoted
prises such as air, sea, and road transport; to medical accidents7`9 and in the creation of
nuclear power generation; chemical process incident monitoring schemes that embody
plants; and the like. Accidents in these systems leading edge thinking with regard to human
cost many lives, create widespread environ- and organisational contributions.9 One of the
mental damage, and generate much public and most significant consequences of the collab-
political concern. oration between specialists in medicine and in
By contrast, medical mishaps mostly affect human factors is the widespread acceptance

single individuals in a wide variety of health- that models of causation of accidents devel-
care institutions and are seldom discussed oped for domains such as aviation and nuclear
publicly. Only within the past few years has the power generation apply equally well to most
likely extent of these accidental injuries become healthcare applications. The same is also true
apparent. The Harvard medical practice study for many of the diagnostic and remedial
found that 4% of patients in hospital in New measures that have been created within these
York City in 1984 sustained unintended non-medical areas.
injuries caused by their treatment. For New I will first consider the different ways in
York state this amounted to 98 600 injuries in which humans can contribute to the break-
one year and, when extrapolated to the entire down of complex, well defended technologies.
United States, to the staggering figure of 1-3 Then I will show how these various contri-
million people harmed annually- more than butions may be combined within a generic
twice the number injured in one year in road model of accident causation and illustrate its
accidents in the United States.' 2 practical application with two case studies of

Since the mid-i 980s several interdisciplinary medical accidents. Finally, I will outline the
research groups have begun to investigate the practical implications of such models for
human and organizational factors affecting improving risk management within the health-
the reliability of healthcare provision. Initially, care domain.
these collaborations were focused around the
work of anaesthetists and intensiviStS,3 4 partly Human contribution
because these professionals' activities shared A recent survey of published work on human
much in common with those of more widely factors disclosed that the estimated con-
studied groups such as pilots and operators tribution of human error to accidents in
of nuclear power plants. This commonality hazardous technologies increased fourfold
existed at two levels. between the 1960s and '90s, from minima of
* At the "sharp end" (that is, at the immediate around 20% to maxima of beyond 90%. 10 One
human-system or doctor-patient interface) possible inference is that people have become
common features include uncertain and more prone to error. A likelier explanation,
dynamic environments, multiple sources of however, is that equipment has become more
concurrent information, shifting and often ill reliable and that accident investigators have
defined goals, reliance on indirect or inferred become increasingly aware that safety-critical
indications, actions having immediate and errors are not restricted to the "sharp end."
multiple consequences, moments of intense Figures of around 90% are hardly surprising
time stress interspersed with long periods considering that people design, build, operate,
of routine activity, advanced technologies maintain, organism, and manage these systems.
with many redundancies, complex and often The large contribution of human error is more
confusing human-machine interfaces, and a matter of opportunity than the result of
multiple players with differing priorities and excessive carelessness, ignorance, or reckless-
high stakes.5 ness. Whatever the true figure, though, human

* At an organisational level these activities are behaviour - for good or ill - clearly dominates
carried on within complex, tightly coupled the risks to modern technological systems -
institutional settings and entail multiple medical or otherwise.

Department of interactions between different professional Not long ago, these human contributions
Psychology, groups.6 This is extremely important for would have been lumped together under
University the

of
Manchester, understanding not only the character and catch all label of "human error." Now it is
Manchester M13 9PL aetiology of medical mishaps but also for apparent that unsafe acts come in many forms
James Reason, professor devising more effective remedial measures. - slips, lapses and mistakes, errors and



Understanding adverse events: human factors 81

violations - each having different psychological * The actions may go entirely as planned, but
origins and requiring different counter- the plan is inadequate to achieve its intended
measures. Nor can we take account of only outcome. These are failures of intention,
those human failures that were the proximal termed mistakes. Mistakes can be further
causes of an accident. Major accident inquiries subdivided into rule based mistakes and
(for example those for Three Mile Island knowledge based mistakes (see below).
nuclear reactor accident, Challenger (space All errors involve some kind of deviation. In the
shuttle) explosion, King's Cross underground case of slips, lapses, trips and fumbles, actions
fire, Herald of Free Enterprise capsizing, Piper deviate from the current intention. Here the
Alpha explosion and fire, Clapham rail disaster, failure occurs at the level of execution. For
Exxon Valdez oil spill, Kegworth air crash, etc) mistakes, the actions may go entirely as
make it apparent that the human causes of planned but the plan itself deviates from some
major accidents are distributed very widely, adequate path towards its intended goal. Here
both within an organisation as a whole and the failure lies at a higher level: with the mental
over several years before the actual event. In processes involved in planning, formulating
consequence, we also need to distinguish intentions, judging, and problem solving.
between active failures (having immediate Slips and lapses occur during the largely
adverse outcomes) and latent or delayed action automatic performance of some routine task,
failures that can exist for long periods before usually in familiar surroundings. They are
combining with local triggering events to almost invariably associated with some form of
penetrate the system's defences. attentional capture, either distraction from the
Human errors may be classified either by immediate surroundings or preoccupation with

their consequences or by their presumed something in mind. They are also provoked by
causes. Consequential classifications are already change, either in the current plan of action
widely used in medicine. The error is described or in the immediate surroundings. Figure 2
in terms of the proximal actions contributing shows the further subdivisions of slips and
to a mishap (for example, administration of a lapses; these have been discussed in detail
wrong drug or a wrong dose, wrong intubation, elsewhere."
nerve or blood vessel unintentionally severed Mistakes can begin to occur once a problem
during surgery, etc). Causal classifications, has been detected. A problem is anything that
on the other hand, make assumptions about requires a change or alteration of the current
the psychological mechanisms implicated in plan. Mistakes may be subdivided into two
generating the error. Since causal or psycho- groups, as follows.
logical classifications are not widely used in * Rule based mistakes, which relate to prob-
medicine (though there are notable exceptions, lems for which the person possesses some
see Gaba,4 Runciman et al9) a brief description prepackaged solution, acquired as the result
of the main distinctions among types of of training, experience, or the availability
errors and their underlying rationale is given of appropriate procedures. The associated
below. errors may come in various forms: the mis-

Psychologists divide errors into two causally application of a good rule (usually because of
determined groups (see Reason"), as sum- a failure to spot the contraindications), the
marised in figure 1. application of a bad rule, or the non-

application of a good rule.
SLIPS AND LAPSES VERSUS MISTAKES: THE FIRST * Knowledge based mistakes, which occur in
DISTINCTION novel situations where the solution to a prob-
Error can be defined in many ways. For my lem has to be worked out on the spot without
present purpose an error is the failure of the help of preprogrammed solutions. This
planned actions to achieve their desired goal. entails the use of slow, resource-limited
There are basically two ways in which this but computationally-powerful conscious
failure can occur, as follows. reasoning carried out in relation to what is
* The plan is adequate, but the associated often an inaccurate and incomplete "mental

actions do not go as intended. The failures model" of the problem and its possible
are failures of execution and are com- causes. Under these circumstances the human
monly termed slips and lapses. Slips relate mind is subject to several powerful biases, of
to observable actions and are associated which the most universal is confirmation
with attentional failures. Lapses are more bias. This was described by Sir Francis Bacon
internal events and relate to failures of more than 300 years ago. "The human mind
memory.

i *|~~~0 Recognitio n failures|
Slips, lapses, trips,

* and fumbles: f |
l Execution failures *L Attentionalfailures |

Slips and lapses
Errors *| Memory failures

Mistakes: planning
1 or problem solving

failures A Selection failures

Fig 1 Distinguishing slips, lapses, and mistakes Fig 2 Varieties ofslips and lapses



82 Reason

when it has once adopted an opinion draws At first sight the faults which led to this disaster were
all things else to support and agree with the ... errors of omission on the part of the Master,
it."'2 Confirmation bias or "mindset" is par- the Chief Officer and the assistant bosun ... But a
ticularly evident when trying to diagnose full investigation into the circumstances of the
what has gone wrong with a malfunctioning disaster leads inexorably to the conclusion that the
system. We "pattern match" a possible cause underlying or cardinal faults lay higher up in the

Company ... From top to bottom
to the available signs the

and symptoms and then body corporate
was infected with the disease of

seek out only that evidence that sloppiness."
supports this

particular hunch, ignoring or rationalising Here the distinction between active and latent
away contradictory facts. Other biases have failures is made very clear. The active failures
been discussed elsewhere." - the immediate causes of the capsize - were

various errors on the part of the ships' officers
ERRORS VERSUS VIOLATIONS: THE SECOND and crew. But, as the inquiry disclosed, the
DISTINCTION ship was a "sick" ship even before it sailed from
Violations are deviations from safe operating Zeebrugge on 6 March 1987.
practices, procedures, standards, or rules. To summarise the differences between active
Here, we are mostly interested in deliberate and latent failures:
violations, in which the actions (though * Active failures are unsafe acts (errors and
not the possible bad consequences) were violations) committed by those at the "sharp
intended. end" of the system (surgeons, anaesthetists,

Violations fall into three main groups. nurses, physicians, etc). It is the people at the
* Routine violations, which entail cutting human-system interface whose actions can,
corners whenever such opportunities present and sometimes do, have immediate adverse
themselves consequences

* Optimising violations, or actions taken to * Latent failures are created as the result of
further personal rather than strictly task decisions, taken at the higher echelons of
related goals (that is, violations for "kicks" or an organisation. Their damaging conse-
to alleviate boredom) quences may lie dormant for a long time,

* Necessary or situational violations that seem only becoming evident when they combine
to offer the only path available to getting the with local triggering factors (for example,
job done, and where the rules or procedures the spring tide, the loading difficulties at
are seen to be inappropriate for the present Zeebrugge harbour, etc) to breach the
situation. system's defences.

Deliberate violations differ from errors in Thus, the distinction between active and latent
several important ways. failures rests on two considerations: firstly, the
* Whereas errors arise primarily from length of time before the failures have a
informational problems (that is, forgetting, bad outcome and, secondly, where in an
inattention, incomplete knowledge, etc) organisation the failures occur. Generally,
violations are more generally associated with medical active failures are committed by those
motivational problems (that is, low morale, people in direct contact with the patient, and
poor supervisory example, perceived lack of latent failures occur within the higher echelons
concern, the failure to reward compliance of the institution, in the organisational and
and sanction non-compliance, etc) management spheres. A brief account of a

* Errors can be explained by what goes on in model showing how top level decisions create
the mind of an individual, but violations conditions that produce accidents in the work-
occur in a regulated social context place is given below.

* Errors can be reduced by improving the
quality and the delivery of necessary infor- Aetiology of "organisational" accidents
mation within the workplace. Violations The technological advances of the past 20
require motivational and organizational years, particularly in regard to engineered
remedies. safety features, have made many hazardous

systems largely proof against single failures,
ACTIVE VERSUS LATENT HUMAN FAILURES: THE either human or mechanical. Breaching the
THIRD DISTINCTION "defences in depth" now requires the unlikely
In considering how people contribute to confluence of several causal streams.
accidents a third and very important Unfortunately, the increased automation
distinction is necessary - namely, that between afforded by cheap computing power also
active and latent failures. The difference provides greater opportunities for the insidious
concerns the length of time that passes before accumulation of latent failures within the
human failures are shown to have an adverse system as a whole. Medical systems and items
impact on safety. For active failures the of equipment have become more opaque to the
negative outcome is almost immediate, but for people who work them and are thus
latent especially

failures the consequences of human prone to the rare, but often catastrophic,
actions or decisions can take a long time to be organizationall accident." Tackling these
disclosed, sometimes many years. organisational failures represents a
The major

distinction between active and latent challenge in medicine and elsewhere.
failures owes much to Mr Justice Sheen's Figure 3 shows the anatomy of an organis-
observations on the capsizing of the Herald ational accident, the direction of causality
of Free Enterprise. In his inquiry report, he being from left to right. The accident sequence
wrote: begins with the negative consequences of



Understanding adverse events: human factors 83

Corporate Local climate Situation Defences as active failures is shown in the figure by the
culture Task Barriers arrow connecting organizational processes

directly to defences.
Error-

Management producing Errors The model presents the people at the sharp
decisions conditions end as the inheritors rather than as the

and instigators of an accident sequence. This may
organizational Violation- seem as if the "blame" for accidents has been

processes producing IH
Violations shifted from the sharp end to the system

conditions managers. But this is not the case for the
following reasons.

Latent failures in defenses * The attribution of blame, though often
emotionally satisfying, hardly ever translates

Fig 3 Stages ofdevelopment oforganizational accident into effective countermeasures. Blame implies
delinquency, and delinquency is normally
dealt with by exhortations and sanctions.

organisational processes (that is, decisions con- But these are wholly inappropriate if the
cerned with planning, scheduling, forecasting, individual people concerned did not choose
designing, policy making, communicating, to err in the first place, nor were not
regulating, maintaining, etc). The latent failures appreciably prone to error.
so created are transmitted along various * High level management and organisational
organizational and departmental pathways to decisions are shaped by economic, political,
the workplace (the operating theatre, the ward, and operational constraints. Like designs,
etc), where they create the local conditions decisions are nearly always a compromise. It
that promote the commission of errors and is thus axiomatic that all strategic decisions
violations (for example, understaffing, high will carry some negative safety consequences
workload, poor human equipment interfaces, for some part of the system. This is not to say
etc). Many of these unsafe acts are likely to be that all such decisions are flawed, though
committed, but only very few of them will some of them will be. But even those
penetrate the defences to produce damaging decisions judged at the time as being good
outcomes. The fact that engineered safety ones will carry a potential downside.
features, standards, controls, procedures, etc, Resources, for example, are rarely allocated
can be deficient due to latent failures as well evenly. There are nearly always losers. In

judging uncertain futures some of the shots
will inevitably be called wrong. The crux of

Case 1: Therac-25 accident at East Texas Medical Centre the matter is that we cannot prevent the
(1986) creation of latent failures; we can only make
A 33 year old man was due to receive his ninth radiation treatment after their adverse consequences visible before
surgery for the removal of a tumour on his left shoulder. The radiotherapy they combine with local triggers to breach the
technician positioned him on the table and then went to her adjoining control system's defences.
room. The Therac-25 machine had two modes: a high power "x ray" mode These organizational root causes are further
and a low power "electron beam" mode. The high power mode was selected complicated by the fact that the health-
by typing an "x" on the keyboard of the VT100 terminal. This put the care system as a whole involves many
machine on maximum power and inserted a thick metal plate between the interdependent organizations: manufacturers,
beam generator and the patient. The plate transformed the 25 million volt
electron beam into therapeutic x rays. The low power mode was selected by government agencies, professional and patient
typing "e" and was designed to deliver a 200 rad beam to the tumour. organizations, etc. The model shown in figure
The intention on this occasion was to deliver the low power beam. But 3 relates primarily to a given institution, but the

the technician made a slip and typed in an "x" instead of an "e." She reality is considerably more complex, with the
immediately detected her error, pressed the "up" arrow to select the edit behaviour of other organizations impinging
functions from the screen menu and changed the incorrect "x" command on the accident sequence at many different
to the desired "e" command. The screen now confirmed that the machine
was in electron beam mode. She returned the cursor to the bottom of the points.
screen in preparation for the "beam ready" display showing that the machine
was fully charged. As soon as the "beam ready" signal appeared she depressed Applying the organizational accident
the "b" key to activate the beam. model in medicine: two case studies
What she did not realism - and had no way of knowing - was that an Two radiological case studies are presented

undetected bug in the software had retracted the thick metal protege plate to give substance to this rather abstract
(used in the x ray mode) but had left the power setting on maximum. As
soon as she activated the "b" command, a blast of 25 000 rads was delivered theoretical framework and to emphasise some

to the patient's unprotected shoulder. He saw a flash ofblue light (Cherenkov important points regarding the practice of high
radiation), heard his flesh frying, and felt an excruciating pain. He called out tech medicine. Radiological mishaps tend to
to the technician, but both the voice and video intercom were switched off. be extensively investigated, particularly in the
Meanwhile, back in the control room, the computer screen displayed a United States, where these examples occurred.

"malfimction 54" error signal. This meant little to the technician. She took
it to mean that the beam had not fired, so reset the machine to fire again. But organisational accidents should not be
Once again, she received the "malfunction 54" signal, and once more she assumed to be unique to this specialty. An
reset and fired the machine. As a result, the patient received three, 25 000 entirely comparable anaesthetic case study
rad blasts to his neck and upper torso, although the technician's display has been presented elsewhere.'4 15 Generally,
showed that he had only received a tenth of his prescribed treatment dose. though, medical accidents have rarely been
The patient died four months later with gaping lesions on his upper body. investigated to the extent that their systemic
His wry comment was: "Captain Kirk forgot to put his phaser on stun." and institutional root causes are disclosed, so
A very similar incident occurred three weeks later. Subsequently,

comparable overdoses were discovered to have been administered in three the range of suitable case studies is limited.
other centres using the same equipment. The box describes details of the first case

study.



84 Reason

Several latent failures contributed to this The accident occurred as the result of a
accident. combination of procedural violations (resulting
* The Canadian manufacturer had not con- in breached or ignored defences) and latent
sidered it possible that a technician could failures.
enter that particular sequence of keyboard
commands within the space of eight seconds Active failures
and so had not tested the effects of these * The area radiation monitor alarmed several
closely spaced inputs times during the treatment but was ignored,

* The technician had not been trained to partly because the doctor and technicians
interpret the error signals knew that it had a history of false alarms

* It was regarded as normal practice to carry * The console indicator showed "safe" and the
out radiation treatment without video or attending staff mistakenly believed the source
sound communication with the patient to be fully retracted into the lead shield

* Perhaps most significantly, the technician * The truck driver deviated from company
was provided with totally inadequate feed- procedures when he failed to check the
back regarding the state of the machine and nursing home waste with his personal
its prior activity. radiation survey meter.

This case study provides a clear example of
what has been called "clumsy auto- Latentfailures
mation."3 16 17 Automation intended to * The rapid expansion of high dose rate
reduced errors created by the variability of brachytherapy, from one to ten facilities in
human performance increases the probability less than a year, had created serious weak-
of certain kinds of mistakes by making the nesses in the radiation safety programme
system and its current state opaque to the * Too much reliance was placed on unwritten
people who operate it. Comparable problems or informal procedures and working
have been identified in the control rooms of practices
nuclear power plants, on the flight decks of * There were serious inadequacies in the
modem airliners, and in relation to con- design and testing of the equipment
temporary anaesthetic work stations.17 Auto- * There was a poor organisational safety
mation and "defence in depth" mean that these culture. The technicians routinely ignored
complex systems are largely protected against alarms and did not survey patients, the after-
single failures. But they render the workings of loader, or the treatment room after high dose
the system more mysterious to its human rate procedures.
controllers. In addition, they permit the subtle * There was weak regulatory oversight. The
build up of latent failures, hidden behind Nuclear Regulatory Commission did not
high technology interfaces and within the adequately address the problems and dangers
interdepartmental interstices of complex associated with high dose rate procedures.
organisations. This case study illustrates how a combination
The second case study has all the causal of active failures and latent systemic weak-

hallmarks of an organizational accident but nesses can conspire to penetrate the many
differs from most medical mishaps in layers of defences which are designed to
having adverse outcomes for nearly 100 protect both patients and staff. No one person
people. The accident is described in detail was to blame; each person acted according
elsewhere. 18 to his or her appraisal of the situation, yet

one person died and over 90 people were
irradiated.

Case 2: Omnitron 2000 accident at Indiana Regional Cancer Principled risk management
Centre (1992) In many organisations managing the human
An elderly patient with anal carcinoma was treated with high dose rate risks has concentrated on trying to prevent
(HDR) brachytherapy. Five catheters were placed in the tumhout An iridium- the recurrence of specific errors and violations
192 source (4-3 cune, 1 6 E + 11 becquerel) was intended to be located in that have been implicated in particular local
various positions within each catheter, using a remotely controlled Omnitron mishaps. The common internal response to
2000 afterloader. The treatment was the first of three treatments planned by such events is to issue new
the procedures that

doctor, and the catheters were to remain in the patient for the subsequent
treatments, proscribe the particular behaviour; to devise
The iridium source wire was placed in four of the catheters without engineering "retro-fixes" that will prevent such

apparent faculty, but after several unsuccessfid attempts to insert the source actions having adverse outcomes; to sanction,
wire into the fifth catheter, the treatment was terminated. In fact, a wire had exhort, and retrain key staffin an effort to make
broken, leaving an iridium source inside one of the first four catheters. Four them more careful; and to introduce increased
days later the catheter Containing source came loose a. eventuallfell
out of t patient. It wUs picked up adplaced inma storagerotmbyb a member automation. This "anti-personnel" approach
of staff of the nursing home, who did not realise it was radioactive. Five days has several problems.
later a truck picked up the waste bag containing the source. As part of the (1) People do not intend to commit errors. It
driver's normal routine the bag was-then driven to the depot and remained is therefore difficult for others to control
there fo a day (dirig7Thanksgiving) before being d d to a meIal what people cannot control for themselves.
waste incinerator wherebye sourcweas detected'y fixed r on monies (2) The psychological precursors of an error
at the site. It was left over the weekend but was then traced to the nursig
home. It was retrieved nearly three weeks after the original (that is, inattention,

treatment. The distraction, pre-

patient had died five days after the treatment session, and in the ensuing occupation, forgetting, fatigue, and stress)
weeks over 90 people had been irradiated in varying degrees b the idm are probably the last and least manageable
source. links in the chain of events leading to an

error.



Understanding adverse events: human factors 85

(3) Accidents rarely occur as the result of performance in the operating theatre of a Swiss
single unsafe acts. They are the product of teaching hospital.20 They noted that "inter-
many factors: personal, task related, situ- personal and communications issues are
ational, and organisational. This has two responsible for many inefficiencies, errors, and
implications. Firstly, the mere recurrence frustrations in this psychologically and organ-
of some act involved in a previous accident isationally complex environment."8 They also
will probably not have an adverse outcome observed that attempts to improve institutional
in the absence of the other causal factors. performance largely entailed throwing money
Secondly, so long as these underlying at the problem through the acquisition of new
latent problems persist, other acts - not and ever more advanced equipment whereas
hitherto regarded as unsafe - can also improvements to training and team per-
serve to complete an incipient accident formance could be achieved more effectively at
sequence. a fraction of this cost. As has been clearly

(4) These countermeasures can create a false
sense of security.3 Since modem systems
are usually highly reliable some time is Team related factors and role in 51
likely to pass between implementing these aircraft accidents and incidents*
personnel related measures and the next Team concept and environment for open
mishap. During this time, those who have communications established (negative 7;
instituted the changes are inclined to positive 2)
believe that they have fixed the problem. Briefings are operationally thorough, interesting,
But then a different kind of mishap occurs, and address crew coordination and planning for
and the cycle of local repairs begins all over potential problems. Expectations are set for how
again. Such accidents tend to be viewed possible deviations from normal operations are
in isolation, rather than being seen as to be handled (negative 9; positive 2)
symptomatic of some underling systemic Cabin crew are included as part of the team in
malaise. briefings, as appropriate, and guidelines are

(5) Increased automation does established for coordination between flight deck
not cure the and cabin (negative 2)

human factors problem, it simply changes
its nature. Systems become Group climate is appropriate to operational

more opaque to situation (for example, presence of social
their operators. Instead of causing harm by conversation). Crew ensures that non-
slips, lapses, trips and fumbles, people are operational factors such as social interaction do
now more prone to make mistaken judge- not interfere with necessary tasks (negative 13;
ments about the state of the system. positive 4)

The goal of effective risk management is not Crew members ask questions regarding crew
so much to minimise particular errors and actions and decisions (negative 1 1; positive 4)
violations as to enhance human performance at Crew members speak up and state their
all levels of the system.3 Perhaps paradoxically, information with appropriate persistence until
most performance enhancement measures are there is some clear resolution or decision

(negative 14; positive 4)
not directly focused at what goes on inside
the heads of single individuals. Rather, they Captain coordinates flight deck activities to

establish proper balance between command
are directed at team, task, situation, and authority and crew member participation and
organisational factors, as discussed below. acts decisively when the situation requires it

(negative 18; positive 4)
TEAM FACTORS Workload and task distribution are clearly
A great deal of health care is delivered by communicated and acknowledged by crew
multidisciplinary teams. Over a decade of members. Adequate time is provided for the
experience in aviation (and, more recently, completion of tasks (negative 12; positive 4)
marine technology) has shown that measures Secondary tasks are prioritised to allow sufficient
designed to improve team management and resources for dealing effectively with primary
the quality of the communications between duties (negative 5; positive 2)
team members can have an enormous impact Crew members check with each other during

times of high and low workload to maintain
on human performance. Helmreich (one of the
pioneers of crew resource management) and situational awareness and alertness (negative 3;

positive 3)
his colleagues at the University of Texas
analysed 51 aircraft accidents and incidents, Crew prepares for expected contingency

situations (negative 28; positive 4)
paying special attention to team related
factors.'9 The box summarises their findings, Guidelines are established for the operation and

disablement of automated systems. Duties and
where the team related factors are categorised responsibilities with regard to automated
as negative (having an adverse impact upon systems are made clear. Crew periodically review
safety and survivability) or positive (acting to and verify the status of automated systems.
improve survivability). The numbers given in Crew verbalises and acknowledges entries and
each case relate to the number of accidents or changes to automated systems. Crew allows

sufficient time for programming automated
incidents in which particular team related systems before manoeuvres (negative 14)
factors had a negative or a positive role.

This list offers clear recommendations for When conflicts arise the crew remains focused
on the problem or situation at hand. Crew

the interactions of medical teams just as much members listen actively to ideas and opinions
as for aircraft crews. Recently, the aviation and admit mistakes when wrong (negative 2)
psychologist Robert Helmreich and the anaes- *After Helmreich et all 9

thetist Hans-Gerhard Schaefer studied team



86 Reason

shown for aviation, formal training in team Table 1 Summary of errorproducing conditions ranked in
management and communication skills can order ofknown effect (after Williams2)
produce substantial improvements in human Condition Risk factor
performance as well as reducing safety-critical
errors. Unfamiliarity with the task (X 17)

Time shortage (X I1)
Poor signal:noise ratio (X 10)
Poor human system interface (x

TASK FACTORS 8)
Designer user mismatch (X 8)

Tasks vary widely in their liability to promote Irreversibility of errors (X 8)
errors. Identifying and modifying tasks and Information overload (X 6)

Negative transfer between tasks (X 5)
task elements that are conspicuously prone to Misperception of risk (X 4)
failure are essential steps in risk Poor feedback from

management. system (X4)
Inexperience - not lack of training (X 3)

The following simple example is represen- Poor instructions or procedures (X 3)
tative of many maintenance tasks. Imagine Inadequate checking (X

a 3)
Educational mismatch of person with task (X 2)

bolt with eight nuts on it. Each nut is coded Disturbed sleep patterns (X 1-6)
and has to be located in a particular Hostile environment (X 1

sequence. 2)
Monotony and boredom (X 1)

Disassembly is virtually error free. There is
only one way in which the nuts can be removed
from the bolt and all the necessary knowledge best researched factors - namely, sleep
to perform this task is located in the world (that disturbance, hostile environment, and bore-
is, each step in the procedure is automatically dom - carry the least penalties. Also, those
cued by the preceding one). But the task of error producing factors at the top of the list are
correct reassembly is immensely more difficult. those that lie squarely within the organisational
There are over 40 000 ways in which this sphere of influence. This is a central element
assemblage of nuts can be wrongly located on in the present view of organisational accidents.
the bolt (factorial 8). In addition, the knowl- Managers and administrators rarely, if ever,
edge necessary to get the nuts back in the right have the opportunity to jeopardise a system's
order has to be either memorised or read from safety directly. Their influence is more indirect:
some written procedure, both of which are top level decisions create the conditions that
highly liable to error or neglect. Such an promote unsafe acts.
example may seem at first sight to be far For convenience, error producing conditions
removed from the practice of medicine, but can be reduced to seven broad categories: high
medical equipment, like any other sophisticated workload; inadequate knowledge, ability or
hardware, requires careful maintenance - experience, poor interface design; inadequate
and maintenance errors (particularly omitting supervision or instruction; stressful environ-
necessary reassembly steps) constitute one of ment; mental state (fatigue, boredom, etc); and
the greatest sources ofhuman factors problems change. Departures from routine and changes
in high technology industries." in the circumstances in which actions are

Effective incident monitoring is an in- normally performed constitute a major factor
valuable tool in identifying tasks prone to in absentminded slips of action.23
error. On the basis of their body of nearly Compared to error producing conditions,
4000 anaesthetic and intensive care incidents, the factors that promote violations are less
Runciman et al at the Royal Adelaide Hospital well understood. Ranking their relative effects
(see Runciman et al9 for a report of the first is not possible. However, we can make an
2000 incidents) introduced many inexpensive informed guess at the nature of these vtolation-
equipment modifications guaranteed to producing conditions, as shown in table 2,
enhance performance and to minimise although in no particular order of effect.
recurrent errors. These include colour coded Again, for causal analysis this list can be
syringes and endotracheal tubes graduated to reduced to a few general categories: lack of
help non-intrusive identification of endo- safety culture, lack of concern, poor morale,
bronchial intubation.2' norms condoning violation, "can do" attitudes,

and apparently meaningless or ambiguous
SITUATIONAL FACTORS rules.
Each type of task has its own nominal error
probability. For example, carrying out a totally
novel task with no clear idea of the likely Table 2 Violation producing conditions, unranked
consequences (that is, knowledge based Conditions
processing) has a basic error probability of
0 75. At the other extreme, a highly familiar, Manifest lack of organisational safety culture

Conflict between
routine task performed management and staff

by a well motivated and Poor morale
competent workforce has an error probability Poor supervision and checking

Group norms
of 0 0005. But condoning violations

there are certain conditions Misperception of hazards
both of the individual person and his or her Perceived lack of management care and concern

Little elan or
immediate pride in work

environment that are guaranteed to Culture that encourages taking risks
increase these nominal error probabilities Beliefs that bad outcomes will not happen

Low self esteem
(table 1). Here the error producing conditions Learned helplessness
are ranked in the order of their known effects Perceived licence to bend rules

Ambiguous or
and the apparently meaningless

numbers in rules
parentheses indicate the Rules inapplicable due to local conditions

risk factor (that is, the amount by which the Inadequate tools and equipment
Inadequate

nominal training
error rates should be multiplied under Time pressure

the worst conditions). Notably, three of the Professional attitudes hostile to procedures



Understanding adverse events: human factors 87

ORGANISATIONAL FACTORS those core processes common to all tech-
Quality and safety, like health and happiness, nological organizations (that is, design, build,
have two aspects: a negative aspect disclosed operate, maintain, manage, communicate, etc).
by incidents and accidents and a positive Since there is unlikely to be a single universal
aspect, to do with the system's intrinsic resist- set of indicators for all types of hazardous
ance to human factors problems. Whereas operations one way of communicating how
incidents and accidents convert easily into safety health can be assessed is simply to list
numbers, trends, and targets, the positive the organisational factors that are currently
aspect is much harder to identity and measure. measured (see table 3). Tripod-Delta, com-

Accident and incident reporting procedures missioned by Shell International and currently
are a crucial part of any safety or quality implemented in several of its exploration and
information system. But, by themselves, they production operating companies, on Shell
are insufficient to support effective quality and tankers, and on its contracted helicopters in the
safety management. The information they North Sea, assesses the quarterly or half yearly
provide is both too little and too late for this state of 11 general failure types in specific
longer term purpose. To promote proactive workplaces: hardware, design, maintenance
accident prevention rather than reactive "local management, procedures, error enforcing
repairs" an organisation's "vital signs" should conditions, housekeeping, incompatible goals,
be monitored regularly. organizational structure, communication,
When a doctor carries out a routine medical training, and defences. A discussion of the

check he or she samples the state of several rationale behind the selection and measure-
critical bodily systems: the cardiovascular, ment of these failure types can be found
pulmonary, excretory, neurological systems, elsewhere.25
and so on. From individual measures of blood Tripod-Delta uses tangible, dimension
pressure, electrocardiographic activity, choles- related indicators as direct measures or
terol concentration, urinary contents, reflexes, "symptoms" of the state of each of the 11

and so on the doctor makes a professional failure types. These indicators are generated by
judgement about the individual's general state task specialists and are assembled into check-
of health. There is no direct, definitive measure lists by a computer program (Delta) for each
of a person's health. It is an emergent property testing occasion. The nature of the indicators
inferred from a selection of physiological signs varies from activity to activity (that is, drilling,
and lifestyle indicators. The same is also true seismic surveys, transport, etc) and from test
from complex hazardous systems. Assessing an to test. Examples of such indicators for
organisation's current state of "safety health," design associated with an offshore platform
as in medicine, entails regular and judicious are listed below. All questions have yes/no
sampling of a small subset of a potentially large answers.
number of indices. But what are the dimen- * Was this platform originally designed to be
sions along which to assess organisational unmanned?
"safety health?" * Are shut-off valves fitted at a height of more

Several such diagnostic techniques are than 2 metres?
already being implemented in various * Is standard (company) coding used for the
industries.24 The individual labels for the pipes?
assessed dimensions vary from industry to * Are there locations on this platform where
industry (oil exploration and production, the deck and walkways differ in height?
tankers, helicopters, railway operations, and * Have there been more than two unscheduled
aircraft engineering), but all of them have been maintenance jobs over the past week?
guided by two principles. Firstly, they try to *Are there any bad smells from the low
include those organizational "pathogens" that pressure vent system?
have featured most conspicuously in well Relatively few of the organizational and
documented accidents (that is, hardware managerial factors listed in table 3 are specific
defects, incompatible goals, poor operating to safety; rather, they relate to the quality of the
procedures, understaffing, high workload, overall system. As such, they can also be used
inadequate training, etc). Secondly, they seek to gauge proactively the likelihood of negative
to encompass a representative sampling of outcomes other than coming into damaging

Table 3 Measures oforganisational health used in different industrial settings
Oil exploration and production Railways Aircraft maintenance

Hardware Tools and equipment Organisational structure
Design Materials People management
Maintenance management Supervision Provision and quality of tools and equipment
Procedures Working environment Training and selection
Error enforcing conditions Staff attitudes Commercial and operational pressures
Housekeeping Housekeeping Planning and scheduling
Incompatible goals Contractors Maintenance of buildings and equipment
Organisation Design Communication
Communication Staff communication
Training Departmental communication
Defences Staffing and fostering

Training
Planning
Rules
Management
Maintenance



88 Reason

contact with physical hazards, such as loss of or control effectively. The same is true of
market share, bankruptcy, and liability to the factors associated with forgetting.
criminal prosecution or civil law suits. States of mind contributing to error are
The measurements derived from Tripod- thus extremely difficult to manage; they

Delta are summarised as bar graph profiles. can happen to the best of people at any
Their purpose is to identify the two or three time.
factors most in need of remediation and to (7) People do not act in isolation. Their
track changes over time. Maintaining adequate behaviour is shaped by circumstances.
safety health is thus comparable to a long term The same is true for errors and violations.
fitness programme in which the focus of The likelihood of an unsafe act being
remedial efforts switches from dimension to committed is heavily influenced by the
dimension as previously salient factors improve nature of the task and by the local work-
and new ones come into prominence. Like life, place conditions. These, in turn, are
effective safety management is "one thing after the product of "upstream" organizational
another." Striving for the best attainable level factors. Great gains in safety can be
of intrinsic resistance to operational hazards is achieved through relatively small modifi-
like fighting a guerrilla war. One can expect no cations of equipment and workplaces.
absolute victories. There are no "Waterloos" in (8) Automation and increasingly advanced
the safety war. equipment do not cure human factors

problems, they merely relocate them.
Summary and conclusions In contrast, training people to work
(1) Human rather than technical failures now effectively in teams costs little, but has

represent the greatest threat to complex achieved significant enhancements of
and potentially hazardous systems. This human performance in aviation.
includes healthcare systems. (9) Effective risk management depends

(2) Managing the human risks will never be critically on a confidential and preferably
100% effective. Human fallibility can be anonymous incident monitoring system
moderated, but it cannot be eliminated. that records the individual, task, situ-

(3) Different error types have different under- ational, and organizational factors associ-
lying mechanisms, occur in different parts ated with incidents and near misses.
of the organisation, and require different (10) Effective risk management means the
methods of risk management. The basic simultaneous and targeted deployment of
distinctions are between: limited remedial resources at different
* Slips, lapses, trips, and fumbles (ex- levels of the system: the individual or
ecution failures) and mistakes (planning team, the task, the situation, and the
or problem solving failures). Mistakes organisation as a whole.
are divided into rule based mistakes and
knowledge based mistakes 1 Brennan TA, Leape LL, Laird NM, Herbert L, Localio AR,

* Errors (information-handling problems) Lawthers AG, et al. Incidence of adverse events and
negligence in hospitalized patients: results from the

and violations (motivational problems) Harvard medical practice study 1. New Engl J Med
* Active versus latent failures. Active 1991 ;324:370-6.

2 Leape LL, Brennan TA, Laird NM, Lawthers AG,
failures are committed by those in direct Localio AR, Barnes BA, et al. The nature of adverse
contact with the patient, latent failures events in hospitalized patients: results from the Harvard

medical practice study II. New Engl J Med 1991;324:
arise in organizational and managerial 377-84.
spheres and their adverse effects may 3 Cook RI, Woods DD. Operating at the sharp end: the

complexity of human error. In: Bogner MS, ed. Human
take a long time to become evident. errors in medicine. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum,

(4) Safety significant errors occur at all levels 1994:255-310.
4 Gaba DM. Human error in anesthetic mishaps. Int

of the system, not just at the sharp end. Anesthesiol Clin 1989;27:137-47.
Decisions made in the upper echelons of 5 Gaba DM. Human error in dynamic medical domains.

In: Bogner MS, ed. Human errors in medicine. Hillsdale,
the organisation create the conditions in New Jersey: Erlbaum, 1994:197-224.
the workplace that subsequently promote 6 Perrow C. Normal accidents. New York: Basic Books, 1984.

7 Vincent C, Ennis M, Audley RJ. Medical accidents. Oxford:
individual errors and violations. Latent Oxford University Press, 1993.
failures are present long before an 8 Bogner MS. Human error in medicine. Hillsdale, New Jersey:

Erlbaum, 1994.
accident and are hence prime candidates 9 Runciman WB, Sellen A, Webb RK, Williamson JA,
for principled risk management. Currie M, Morgan C, et al. Errors, incidents and

accidents in anaesthetic practice. Anaesth Intensive Care
(5) Measures that involve sanctions and 1993;21:506-19.

exhortations (that is, moralistic measures 10 Hollnagel E. Reliability of cognition: foundations of human
reliability analysis. London: Academic Press, 1993.

directed to those at the sharp end) have 11 Reason J. Human error. New York: Cambridge University
only very limited effectiveness, especially Press, 1990.

12 Bacon F. In: Anderson F, ed. The new Organon.
so in the case of highly trained Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1960. (Originally published
professionals. 1620.)

13 Sheen. MV Herald ofFree Enterprise. Report ofcourt
(6) Human factors No 8074

problems are a product of formal investigation. London: Department of Transport,
a chain of causes in which the individual 1987.

14 Eagle CJ, Davies JM, Reason JT. Accident analysis of large
psychological factors (that is, momentary scale technological disasters applied to an anaesthetic
inattention, forgetting, etc) are the last complication. Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia 1992;39:

118-22.
and least manageable links. Attentional 15 Reason J. The human factor in medical accidents. In:
"capture" (preoccupation or distraction) Vincent C, Ennis M, Audley R, eds. Medical accidents.

Oxford: Oxford
is University Press, 1993:1-16.

a necessary condition for the com- 16 Wiener EL. Human factors of advanced technology ("glass
mission of slips and lapses. Yet its cockpit") transport aircraft. Moffett Field, California:

NASA Ames Research Center, 1989. Technical report
occurrence is almost impossible to predict 117528.



Understanding adverse events: human factors 89

17 Woods DD, Johannesen JJ, Cook RI, Sarter NB. Behind 21 Runciman WB. Anaesthesia incident monitoring study. In:
human error: cognitive systems, computers, and hindsight. Incident monitoring and risk management in the health care
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio: Crew Systems sector. Canberra: Commonwealth Department of Human
Ergonomics Information Analysis Center, 1994. Services and Health, 1994:13-5.
(CSERIAC state of the art report.) 22 Williams J. A data-based method for assessing and reducing

18 NUREG. Loss of an iridium-192 source and therapy human error to improve operational performance. In:
misadministration at Indiana Regional Cancer Center, Hagen W, ed. 1988 IEEE Fourth Conference on Human
Indiana, Pennsylvania, on November 16, 1992. Factors and Power Plants. New York: Institute of Electrical
Washington, DC: US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and Electronic Engineers, 1988:200-31.
1993. (NUREG-1480.) 23 Reason J, Mycielska K. Absent-minded? The psychology of

19 Helmreich RL, Butler RA, Taggart WR, Wilhem JA. mental lapses and everyday errors. Englewood Cliffs, New
Behavioral markers in accidents and incidents: reference list. Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1982.
Austin, Texas: University of Texas, 1994. (Technical 24 Reason J. A systems approach to organisation errors.
report 94-3; NASA/University of Texas FAA Aerospace Ergonomics (in press).
Crew Research Project.) 25 Hudson P, Reason J, Wagenaar W, Bentley P, Primrose M,

20 Helmreich RL, Schaefer H-G. Team performance in the Visser J. Tripod Delta: proactive approach to enhanced
operating room. In: Bogner MS, ed. Human errors in safety. Journal of Petroleum Technology 1994;46:
medicine. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum, 1994. 58-62.



216           Artigo Científico 

UTILIZAÇÃO DO MODELO DE FATORES HUMANOS (HFACS) NA 
ESTRUTURAÇÃO DE MAPAS CAUSAIS DE SEGURANÇA OPERACIONAL 1 

João Alexandro B. M. Vilela 2 
Rodolfo dos Santos Sampaio 3 

Artigo submetido em 19/09/2011. 
Aceito para publicação em 07/11/2011. 

RESUMO: O aprimoramento de ferramentas prospectivas que auxiliem as atividades 
de prevenção pró-ativa de ocorrências aeronáuticas demanda a utilização de 
técnicas objetivas que também considerem as interações entre os fatores de risco 
presentes no contexto de segurança operacional em aviação. Estudos indicam que 
as inter-relações de causa-e-efeito que caracterizam um sistema complexo, como é 
o de aviação, podem potencializar o risco de danos e que as influências podem ser 
capturadas por meio de adequadas técnicas de mapeamento causal. Este trabalho 
amplia a análise sobre o tema, avaliando a interação entre os fatores de risco e as 
barreiras de defesa do contexto operacional do Instituto de Pesquisas e Ensaios em 
Voo (IPEV), considerando os fatores de risco definidos pelo Modelo de Fatores 
Humanos (Human Factors Analysis and Classification System – HFACS). O estudo 
conclui que a estruturação de Mapas Causais de Segurança Operacional - MCSO, 
baseado no modelo HFACS, aporta benefícios à técnica de mapeamento causal, 
uma vez que permite organizar os fatores de risco e as barreiras de defesa de 
acordo com a realidade abordada no modelo do acidente organizacional de Reason. 
Nesse sentido, verifica-se que o aprimoramento de técnicas de estruturação da 
segurança, fundamentada na natureza prospectiva do mapeamento causal, amplia a 
capacidade de prevenção pró-ativa com instrumentos objetivos, contribuindo para o 
aperfeiçoamento da gestão de segurança operacional no IPEV. 
 
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Ensaios em Voo. Gerenciamento da Segurança Operacional. HFACS. 
Mapas Causais. 
 

1 INTRODUÇÃO 

As organizações que trabalham com aviação possuem metas que determinam 

a sua sobrevivência e, embora a segurança não seja o principal objetivo do negócio, 

ela é um componente fundamental para que as metas de produtividade sejam 

alcançadas de forma segura. Nas organizações que desenvolvem atividades aéreas, 

                                                        
1
 Artigo originalmente apresentado no IV Simpósio de Segurança de Voo do Instituto de Pesquisas e 
Ensaios em Voo (IPEV), ocorrido em São José dos Campos - SP, de 15 a 17 de agosto de 2011. 
2
 Coronel Aviador da Força Aérea Brasileira, piloto de caça, piloto de prova e piloto inspetor de 
aviação civil. Especialista e mestre em segurança de aviação e aeronavegabilidade continuada pelo 
Instituto de Tecnologia e Aeronáutica – ITA. Experiência profissional em projetos aeronáuticos, com 
ênfase em ensaios em voo, armamento aéreo e combate eletrônico. Possui o curso de segurança de 
voo do SIPAER – Módulo Prevenção. Atualmente, é chefe da seção técnica do GAC-CASA (empresa 
Airbus Military - Espanha), atuando nos projetos P-3BR e CL-X. vilelajabm@gmail.com 
3
 Capitão Aviador da Força Aérea Brasileira, piloto de prova, piloto de asas rotativas. Mestre em 
Segurança de Aviação e Aeronavegabilidade Continuada, pelo ITA. Especialista em investigação e 
prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos. Atualmente, é chefe da seção de coordenação de operações 
aéreas e da seção de investigação e prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos do IPEV, além de atuar 
junto ao IFI no projeto AS565 K2, entre outros. rodolfosap@hotmail.com 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          217 
 

quando ocorre um desequilíbrio entre os recursos que suportam as metas de 

produção e os objetivos de segurança, aumentam-se os riscos de surgirem 

ocorrências (acidentes, incidentes ou ocorrências de solo) aeronáuticas (ICAO, 

2008). 

Para manter a atividade aérea dentro de um nível aceitável de segurança, 

realiza-se a Gestão da Segurança Operacional (GSO), cujo conceito compreende o 

conjunto de ações, métodos e procedimentos a ser adotado, no âmbito de uma 

organização, para a prevenção de acidentes aeronáuticos (BRASIL, 2008b). Seu 

principal instrumento, no âmbito governamental, é o Programa de Prevenção de 

Acidentes Aeronáuticos - PPAA (BRASIL, 2009). 

No Comando da Aeronáutica, a gestão da segurança em ensaios em voo é 

realizada pelo Instituto de Pesquisas e Ensaios em Voo (IPEV). As principais 

atividades aéreas deste Instituto estão associadas à execução de voos de ensaio, 

instrução aérea de pessoal especializado, instrução aérea básica e transporte aéreo 

(BRASIL, 2011). O voo fora do envelope (condições de voo ainda não testadas), 

suportado por atividades de engenharia, conferem ao IPEV aspectos funcionais 

diferentes dos encontrados nos diversos esquadrões da Força Aérea Brasileira e, 

portanto, demandam ações complementares ao previsto nas normas para confecção 

do PPAA.  

De forma a adequar a abrangência das atividades de prevenção do IPEV, 

desenvolveu-se o Programa de Segurança de Voo em Ensaios (PSVE) o qual tem 

por objetivo orientar a prevenção de ocorrências aeronáuticas e manter a atividade 

de voos de ensaios com um nível de segurança aceitável (BRASIL, 2009b).  

O PSVE estabelece processos e orienta o gerenciamento do risco operacional 

com o foco baseado em informações e exemplos que evidenciam somente os 

fatores de risco associados aos voos de ensaios. Entretanto, muitos dos recursos 

materiais, humanos e financeiros são compartilhados com outras atividades 

importantes do IPEV que vão além do planejamento e realização de voos de 

ensaios, como por exemplo, a formação de pessoal especializado em ensaios, 

manutenção e instrumentação de aeronaves, instrução aérea básica, transporte 

aéreo e serviços aeroportuários, os quais precisam coexistir de forma harmoniosa 

para que o sistema atinja seus objetivos de produtividade com segurança.  

Para realizar a prevenção pró-ativa em ambientes operacionais 

multicomponentes de elevada complexidade, como é o contexto do IPEV, Vilela 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



218           Artigo Científico 

(2011) propõe a utilização de Mapas Causais de Segurança Operacional (MCSO) 

baseados em modelos estruturados nas inter-relações causais entre fatores de risco 

e barreiras de segurança (barreiras de defesa).  

Os mapas causais correspondem à representação gráfica e instantânea das 

relações de causa-e-efeito existentes nos modelos mentais de indivíduos ou de 

grupos acerca de uma dada realidade. Esses mapas podem conter elevado nível de 

detalhes, de forma a proporcionar condições para uma rica descrição qualitativa e 

objetiva das condições de segurança de um contexto operacional. Em seu trabalho, 

Vilela (2011) estruturou MCSO segundo a percepção de especialistas na atividade 

de ensaios em voo, utilizando somente os fatores contribuintes previstos no Manual 

de Investigação de Acidentes Aeronáuticos do SIPAER - MCA 3-6 (BRASIL, 2008a). 

Neste trabalho, amplia-se o estudo de referência, estruturando a pesquisa de 

modo a considerar a atuação dos fatores de risco em conjunto com as variáveis que 

reduzem os efeitos dos riscos (barreiras de defesa, representadas pela tecnologia, 

treinamento, normatização e fiscalização). Adicionalmente, utilizam-se os fatores de 

risco definidos pelo Modelo de Fatores Humanos (Human Factors Analysis and 

Classification System – HFACS), em substituição aos originalmente definidos na 

MCA 3-6.  

Essa mudança busca avaliar a adequabilidade em confeccionar MCSO que 

considerem a realidade abordada no modelo do acidente organizacional (accident 

causation), desenvolvido pelo Professor James Reason e operacionalizado no 

modelo de análise de erro - HFACS. Como resultados do estudo, disponibilizam-se 

um guia de procedimentos (check-list) para orientar a confecção de mapas causais 

de segurança operacional (MCSO) do IPEV e uma proposta de representação 

diagramática de MCSO. 

No próximo capítulo são indicadas as bases teóricas relacionadas com a 

gestão da segurança operacional no IPEV e com os modelos tradicionais aplicados 

à segurança (acidente organizacional de Reason e o modelo de fatores humanos 

HFACS). Complementando o referencial bibliográfico, apresenta-se a metodologia 

de prevenção pró-ativa de ocorrências aeronáuticas com uso de modelos causais.  

Em seguida, são estabelecidos os procedimentos para elaborar a lista 

constructos do sistema de segurança operacional (fatores de risco e barreiras de 

defesa) de modo a confeccionar os MCSO. Nas discussões, explica-se o processo 

de interpretação e análise desses mapas, evidenciando as influências causais 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          219 
 

decorrentes das interações entre os fatores de risco e as barreiras de defesa. Por 

fim, conclui-se que a estruturação de modelos causais com base no HFACS aporta 

benefícios à técnica de confecção de MCSO e contribui para o aprimoramento de 

ferramentas objetivas que suportam as atividades de prevenção pró-ativa com vistas 

ao aperfeiçoamento da gestão de segurança operacional no IPEV. 

Como limitação de pesquisa, o estudo não quantifica os valores das variáveis 

e das influências entre os fatores de risco e as barreiras de defesa, apenas explora o 

método relacionado com a identificação e quantificação dos constructos e de suas 

inter-relações causais. 

Definição dos símbolos utilizados: 
Bi - Barreira de defesa de índice i 
Ci - Constructo de índice i (Bi ou Fi) 

+ p

Ci→C j - impacto/influência de Ci sobre Cj com polaridade positiva igual a +p 

Fi - Fator de risco de índice i 
I – Impacto direto 
Ix - Impacto indireto 
 

2 REFERENCIAL TEÓRICO 

2.1 Gestão da segurança operacional no IPEV 

No Comando da Aeronáutica, a atividade de ensaios em voo é desenvolvida 

pelo Instituto de Pesquisa e Ensaios em Voo - IPEV, antigo Grupo Especial de 

Ensaios em Voo (GEEV). Esta organização, pertencente ao Departamento de 

Ciência e Tecnologia Aeroespacial, foi criada pelo Decreto nº 5.657, de 30 de 

dezembro de 2005 e teve sua denominação renomeada (de Grupo para Instituto) em 

09 de março de 2011. A finalidade do IPEV é a prestação de serviços tecnológicos 

especializados na área de ensaios em voo, instrumentação de aeronaves e 

telemetria de dados para apoio à pesquisa, desenvolvimento e certificação de 

produtos aeronáuticos, bem como a formação de pessoal especializado em ensaios 

em voo (BRASIL, 2011). 

No IPEV, coexistem atividades administrativas, técnicas e logísticas em 

suporte à atividade aérea, a qual está organizada em três grandes áreas: voos de 

ensaio com e sem abertura de envelope (condições de voo ainda não testadas), 

instrução aérea de pessoal especializado (curso de ensaios em voo e curso de 

recebimento de aeronaves) e operações aéreas (instrução de voo básica e 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



220           Artigo Científico 

transporte aéreo) conforme os manuais de operação dos fabricantes de aeronaves 

(BRASIL, 2011). A Figura 1 apresenta um diagrama que ilustra o contexto 

operacional do IPEV. 

 

FIGURA 1 - Contexto da atividade aérea no IPEV 
Fonte: BRASIL, 2011 

 
Cada área de atividade aérea engloba um conjunto de missões com 

diferentes níveis de complexidade, as quais demandam distintos requisitos para o 

cumprimento das diferentes condições de voo (noturno, diurno, instrumento, visual), 

perfis (tráfego, navegação a baixa altura, etc.) e fases (táxi, decolagem, subida, 

cruzeiro, ensaio, descida, pouso). 

No que tange à gestão da segurança operacional, o desafio está em como 

realizar ações de prevenção nesse complexo ambiente operacional de modo a 

mitigar os risco das atividades e nas áreas que suportam a atividade aérea. 

A perspectiva de gestão da segurança deve ser compreendida como uma 

importante função na organização, uma vez que existe o potencial de ocorrer 

competitividade danosa na alocação de recursos para atender as principais funções 

da organização que apóiam direta ou indiretamente a produção dos seus serviços. 

Caso não seja adequadamente gerenciada, a alocação de recursos pode ser 

prejudicada como decorrência dos conflitos que surgem na priorização das metas de 

produção (Production - fornecimento de serviços) e das metas de proteção 

(Protection - segurança) (ICAO, 2008). Esses conflitos, comumente conhecido como 

dilema dos dois “P”, podem converter-se em fatores de risco para a atividade aérea 

e devem ser adequadamente identificados e seus efeitos mitigados. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          221 
 

A segurança é o estado no qual a possibilidade de lesões às pessoas ou de 

danos aos bens se reduz e se mantém em um nível aceitável ou abaixo deste, por 

meio de um processo contínuo de identificação de perigos e gestão de riscos (ICAO, 

2008).  

Stolzer, Halford e Goglia (2008) afirmam que, para profissionais de segurança 

operacional, a palavra safety é um “verbo ativo” (p. 15), visto que implica constante 

mensuração, avaliação e análise dos dados dentro de um sistema. O gerenciamento 

de risco operacional, como uma das formas de prevenção, é definido como “um 

processo de mensuração deste risco e de desenvolvimento de estratégias para 

gerenciá-los” (STOLZER; HALFORD; GOGLIA, 2008). 

De acordo com as normas em vigor, o PPAA é o instrumento por meio do qual 

se transmite as políticas de segurança operacional, processos, métodos, 

ferramentas, dados estatísticos, atividades (educativas, promocionais, vistorias e 

auditorias, programas, gestão do risco, divulgação operacional, reportes) e 

responsabilidades, sob a óptica do SIPAER, visando à prevenção de ocorrências 

aeronáuticas (BRASIL, 2008c).  

O PPAA do IPEV considera o Método SIPAER de Gerenciamento de Risco – 

MSGR como recurso da prevenção pró-ativa para as atividades aéreas que não são 

específicas de ensaios em voo (treinamento, voos de instrução aérea e transporte). 

Restrito às atividades aéreas dentro do envelope de voo, o MSGR estabelece 

procedimentos para mitigar o risco dos fatores de risco previamente definidos, 

utilizando a análise de tendência com base em indicadores estabelecidos por meio 

dos dados coletados (BRASIL, 2008c).  

Esta ferramenta, de uso amplo, procura mensurar os aspectos do presente 

mais próximos como possíveis causadores de acidentes, identificando, porém, 

limitadas condições latentes e sem considerar a existência das inter-relações entre 

os fatores contribuintes como potencializadores das condições de risco. 

Assim, em virtude das peculiaridades do IPEV, o PPAA é complementado 

pelo Programa de Segurança de Voo em Ensaios (PSVE), principal ferramenta de 

gerenciamento de risco em ensaios, cujo processo está estruturado em quatro fases 

conforme ilustrado na Figura 2. 
 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



222           Artigo Científico 

 
FIGURA 2 - Fases do programa de segurança em voos de ensaio 

Fonte: BRASIL, 2009ª 
 
Na fase de planejamento (primeira etapa), a equipe de ensaio explora as 

condições potencialmente inseguras para a realização do ensaio, aplica medidas 

mitigadoras e classifica o nível de risco. A previsão do comportamento da aeronave 

ou do sistema a ser ensaiado é um aspecto relevante para diminuir a incerteza do 

ensaio e considera testes em laboratório, ensaios no solo, meios computacionais 

disponíveis, meios de simulação e outras formas de levantamento de dados como 

meios para mitigar os riscos.  

A segunda fase (revisão de segurança) é realizada por pessoal mais 

experiente e/ou especializado em segurança operacional de modo a inserir medidas 

extras que visem ao aperfeiçoamento da documentação de ensaio, à aplicação de 

procedimentos adicionais, em caso de uma emergência relacionada ao ensaio, e, se 

necessário, à alteração da classificação inicial do nível de risco. 

Durante a execução dos ensaios (terceira etapa), qualquer situação diferente 

do previsto é documentada e encaminhada ao revisor do ensaio, juntamente com as 

providências tomadas, para registro, revisão dos procedimentos de segurança e 

utilização em futuros planejamentos.  

Ao final (quarta fase), analisam-se as condições inseguras identificadas nas 

fases anteriores com o objetivo de renovar e atualizar a base de dados relacionada 

com a segurança operacional dos ensaios, permitindo a aplicação das lições 

aprendidas em atividades futuras. 

Ressalta-se que o processo de classificação do nível de risco aborda, 

principalmente, os fatores diretamente ligados à execução do ensaio, 

desconsiderando a influência organizacional e a supervisão como condições latentes 

para o surgimento de ocorrências aeronáuticas, de modo que fatores de risco 

importantes podem não ser identificados e, consequentemente, suas influências 

indiretas não serem devidamente analisadas. As pré-condições para atos inseguros 

são verificadas momentos antes do voo pelas equipagens de ensaio por meio do 

MSGR. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          223 
 

Os dados estatísticos de ocorrências aeronáuticas e de relatórios de 

prevenção (RELPREV) também são utilizados na gestão da segurança do IPEV. A 

literatura especializada indica que o erro humano continua a afligir tanto percalços 

militares como civis, sendo apontado como fator causal em 80 a 90% dos acidentes 

e resultado de inúmeras falhas latentes ou condições que precedem falhas ativas 

(DoD-HFACS, 2005), razão pela qual faz-se necessário considerar modelos que 

abordem esta questão como referências para o gerenciamento de risco operacional 

de uma forma mais ampla. 

 

2.2. Modelos Tradicionais Aplicados à Segurança 

A aplicação de modelos sob perspectivas cognitiva, ergonômica, 

comportamental, aeromédica, psicossocial e organizacional contribui para a gestão 

da segurança operacional uma vez que a compreensão da natureza humana, sob a 

ótica do raciocínio, das reações orgânicas, do comportamento e das interações 

homem-máquina, permite a explicação das causas de acidentes aeronáuticos 

(WIEGMANN; SHAPPELL, 2003). 

Neste trabalho, explora-se a estrutura do modelo de fatores humanos 

(HFACS) como arcabouço para estruturar os MCSO a permitir análises das inter-

relações causais entre fatores contribuintes de ocorrências aeronáuticas e suas 

influências na segurança operacional de ensaios em voo. 

 

2.2.1 MODELO DE FATORES HUMANOS 

A teoria de Reason está fundamentada na influência da organização sobre o 

indivíduo, sendo amplamente difundida e aceita pelas indústrias e pelos órgãos 

reguladores. Segundo essa teoria, sistemas complexos, tais como o de aviação, são 

extremamente bem defendidos por camadas de defesas em profundidade em que as 

falhas simples e pontuais raramente geram consequências catastróficas. As falhas 

de equipamento ou os erros operacionais (falhas ativas) nunca são a causa das 

rupturas em defesas da segurança, mas os gatilhos. Essas rupturas são uma 

consequência atrasada das decisões feitas em níveis mais elevados do sistema 

(condições latentes) e que permanecem dormentes até que seus efeitos sejam 

ativados por circunstâncias operacionais (ICAO, 2008). 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



224           Artigo Científico 

A Figura 3 ilustra a sequência causal de acidentes segundo o modelo 

Reason. 

 
FIGURA 3 – Modelo do queijo suíço 

Fonte: DoD-HFACS, 2005 
 
O ambiente organizacional contribui para que os fatores de risco dos níveis 

gerenciais e de supervisão afetem as condições de trabalho e permitam gerar 

situações que influenciam direta e indiretamente as ações mais próximas do 

acidente. As barreiras de defesa atuam em todo o contexto organizacional e 

operacional de forma a impedir ou minimizar a atuação das condições latentes e 

falhas ativas. Na ausência ou deficiência dessas barreiras, as condições 

operacionais tornam-se propícias para o surgimento de ocorrências aeronáuticas.  

O HFACS (Human Factors Analysis and Classification System) está 

estruturado com base na teoria do acidente organizacional de Reason (accident 

causation – The Reason model). Esse modelo de análise de erros, originariamente 

desenvolvido e testado nas Forças Armadas Americanas, é uma ferramenta utilizada 

para investigar e analisar as causas de acidentes aeronáuticos decorrentes de 

fatores humanos, cuja contribuição chega a 70% a 80% dos ocorridos na aviação 

civil e militar (WIEGMANN; SHAPPELL, 2003). 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          225 
 

O advento desta ferramenta é decorrente da dificuldade encontrada por 

pesquisadores em analisar e investigar os dados armazenados nos diversos 

sistemas de registro de acidentes aeronáuticos. As estruturas de dados desses 

sistemas, por serem concebidas e empregadas por engenheiros e operadores de 

linha de frente com pouca experiência em fatores humanos, não incorporam a teoria 

e conceitos afins, dificultando as análises de acidentes decorrentes de erros 

humanos e, por conseguinte, impedindo o estabelecimento de adequadas 

estratégias de prevenção (WIEGMANN; SHAPPELL, 1997). 

O HFACS implementa os conceitos do acidente organizacional de Reason e 

força o investigador a correlacionar os erros humanos identificados nas 

investigações de acidentes aeronáuticos, permitindo classificar os fatores de risco 

(falhas ativas e condições latentes) de acordo com os códigos (nanocodes) da 

taxonomia estabelecida (DoD-HFACS, 2005). Devido a essas características, o 

HFACS auxilia a compreender por que os atos inseguros dos indivíduos envolvidos 

em um acidente têm condições precedentes que propiciam suas ocorrências como 

resultado final de uma série de causas primárias.  

Esse modelo, portanto, é projetado para apresentar uma abordagem 

sistemática e multidimensional para análise de erros, abrangendo o erro humano 

sob perspectivas de integração cognitiva, de interação entre indivíduos, de aspectos 

sociocculturais e de fatores organizacionais. O HFACS organiza os fatores de risco 

em quatro níveis de falhas: 

 Influências Organizacionais; 

 Supervisão Insegura; 

 Pré-condições para Atos Inseguros; e  

 Atos Inseguros.  

Esses grupos subdividem-se em outros menores (categorias, subcategorias) 

conforme ilustrado na Figura 4. Cada subdivisão está estruturada em denominações 

mais básicas compostas de códigos (nanocodes), cujas definições permitem 

correlacioná-los com as evidências encontradas nas investigações de forma mais 

precisa e objetiva (DoD-HFACS, 2005). 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



226           Artigo Científico 

 

 

 

 
FIGURA 4 – Modelo HFACS 
Fonte: DoD-HFACS, 2005 

 
A literatura apresenta resultados positivos na aplicação do HFACS como 

recurso de investigação de acidentes aeronáuticos (WIEGMANN; SHAPPELL, 

1997). A aplicação do HFACS diminui a distância entre a teoria de Reason e a 

prática de investigação ao prover os investigadores de uma ferramenta amigável que 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          227 
 

permita a identificação e a classificação das causas humanas em acidentes 

aeronáuticos (COLORADO FIRECAMP, 2011).  

Em sua dissertação, Vilela (2011) analisa as inter-relações entre os fatores 

contribuintes do MCA 3-6 sem considerar qualquer classificação. Neste trabalho, 

diferentemente, amplia-se a análise sobre o tema, explorando e avaliando a maneira 

como os fatores estão organizados, e a aplicabilidade do HFACS como recurso para 

a confecção de MCSO. 

 

2.3. Prevenção pró-ativa com uso de mapas causais 

“A atitude ativa frente ao futuro, própria da prospectiva, surgiu em 
decorrência da decadência da previsão quantitativa, a qual consiste 
em observar o passado e, baseando em algo quantitativamente 
invariante, postular sua permanência no futuro. De forma análoga, 
tem-se o enfoque prospectivo que, com base numa visão sistêmica, 
na subjetividade da interpretação dos fatos e na inter-relação de 
fatores, procuram estabelecer as possibilidades do futuro com os 
fundamentos do presente.” (DURÁN, 2010). 

Luxhøj (2003) explica que o modelamento formal de sistemas pressupõe da 

utilização de métodos quantitativos ou qualitativos para identificar e medir as 

influências entre as variáveis como forma de obter indicadores numéricos em 

suporte às estratégias de segurança. Entretanto, salienta que o processo para 

obtenção de valores quantitativos é considerado um gargalo na estruturação de 

modelos para a segurança operacional. 

Para suprir essa limitação, Vilela (2011) propõe a utilização de modelos 

causais como recurso estruturar a segurança operacional. Por meio de adequadas 

técnicas de mapeamento, as inter-relações causais entre os fatores de risco e as 

barreiras de defesa que caracterizam a segurança de um determinado contexto 

operacional podem ser capturadas e expressar, de forma objetiva, as influências 

diretas e indiretas dos constructos na segurança operacional.  

Os Mapas Causais da Segurança Operacional (MCSO) correspondem à 

representação gráfica e instantânea dos modelos de causa-e-efeito de indivíduos ou 

de grupos frente a uma dada realidade. Eles podem ser estáticos ou dinâmicos e 

conter elevado nível de detalhes, proporcionando condições para uma rica descrição 

qualitativa e quantitativa das condições de segurança de um contexto operacional. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



228           Artigo Científico 

A aplicação de mapas causais como recurso de prevenção pró-ativa está 

inserida no contexto da metodologia de prevenção pró-ativa por modelos causais 

(Figura 5) e está fundamentada na seguinte premissa: 

O contexto de ensaios em voo é multicomponente e complexo, caracterizado 

por variáveis que se inter-relacionam de forma sistêmica, as quais afetam direta e 

indiretamente a segurança operacional de todo o sistema. O modelo conceitual do 

segurança operacional de ensaios em voo (SOEV) considera a existência de dois 

tipos básicos de variáveis:  

- Fatores de risco - variáveis que contribuem para o surgimento de 

ocorrências aeronáuticas. Neste estudo, equivalem aos nanocodes definidos em 

DoD-HFACS (2005); e 

- Barreiras de defesa - variáveis que atuam de forma a reduzir ou inibir 

os efeitos dos fatores de risco. Neste estudo, adotam-se os seguintes grupos: 

tecnologia, treinamento, regulação e fiscalização. 

 
FIGURA 5 - Metodologia de prevenção pró-ativa por modelos causais 

Fonte: VILELA, 2011 
 
O bloco “B.1“ corresponde ao ambiente da segurança operacional de ensaios 

em voo (Figura 6), cujo modelo conceitual é caracterizado pela diversidade de 

componentes que se interagem em complexas inter-relações as quais podem 

amplificar os impactos dos elementos no sistema de segurança.  

 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          229 
 

 

FIGURA 6 - Modelo conceitual da segurança operacional de ensaios em voo 
Fonte: VILELA, 2011 

 
O círculo maior representa a Segurança Operacional de Ensaios em Voo 

(SOEV), cujo estado é diretamente influenciado pela atuação dos fatores de risco, 

representado pelos círculos que estão identificados por códigos Fi (F3, F7, F8 e F9), e 

indiretamente impactado pelas inter-relações entre os fatores de risco e as barreiras 

de defesa, identificadas por Bi (B1 e B2). As setas que apontam para o círculo maior 

representam os impactos (influências) diretos dos fatores de risco na SOEV. As 

setas entre os círculos menores constituem as inter-relações, ou seja, os impactos 

cruzados entre os elementos e representam as influências indiretas dos fatores de 

risco na SOEV. 

As relações de influência, quando existem, são representadas por setas 

(arcos causais), acompanhadas por números compostos de sinal e valor. Cada arco 

apresenta um sentido de impacto e um valor numérico, cujo sinal representa a 

polaridade (positiva ou negativa) e seu módulo corresponde à intensidade (nível, 

grau ou quantidade) de impacto. Quando a polaridade assume um valor positivo, a 

influência é diretamente proporcional, ou seja, um aumento/diminuição na variável 

impactante leva a um aumento/diminuição do elemento impactado. Se a polaridade 

é negativa, o efeito é inversamente proporcional, pois um aumento no primeiro leva 

a uma diminuição do segundo ou uma diminuição no primeiro leva a um aumento no 

segundo. De acordo com a Figura 6, por exemplo, F7 impacta positivamente em F3 
+4

com intensidade igual a 4. A influência é representada pelo símbolo F→F . 
7 3

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



230           Artigo Científico 

A técnica de modelamento causal utilizada neste estudo não limita o tipo de 

entrada, podendo, inclusive, acomodar números que expressem incertezas sobre a 

quantificação das influências causais. Estudos que se baseiam na Teoria de 

Sistemas Nebulosos (Grey System Theory - GST) utilizam, ao invés de números 

inteiros e discretos, intervalos (grey numbers) para quantificar a influência nebulosa 

(grau de incerteza) das relações causais entre conceitos como forma de obter 

modelos mais confiáveis do processo decisório (Salmeron, 2010).  

O bloco “B.2” representa o processo de estruturação do modelo causal da 

segurança em ensaios em voo, caracterizado pelo sequenciamento das atividades 

de pesquisa com base no julgamento de especialistas (bloco “B.2a”), pelas técnicas 

de organização e tratamento dos resultados, e pelas análises qualitativas e 

quantitativas dos mapas causais. No trabalho original, apesar de Vilela (2011) 

mencionar as barreiras de defesa como elementos integrantes do modelo conceitual 

da segurança operacional em ensaios em voo, somente utiliza os fatores 

contribuintes previstos no Manual de Investigação de Acidentes Aeronáuticos do 

SIPAER - MCA 3-6 (BRASIL, 2008a) para a confecção dos MCSO. 

O bloco “B.3” (linha dupla) corresponde às atividades que se utilizam dos 

MCSO para realizar o gerenciamento de risco. O bloco “B.4“, em linha tracejada e 

pontilhada, representa o processo de realimentação, possibilitando a atualização dos 

mapas causais a partir de pesquisas de campo, sempre que necessário, de forma a 

obter um contínuo gerenciamento do risco operacional. O bloco “B.5”, em linha 

tracejada, representa as propostas de trabalhos futuros no sentido de permitir o 

cálculo dos impactos diretos e indiretos (impacto total) no sistema de segurança 

operacional. O bloco “B.6”, em linha tracejada, representa outra proposta de trabalho 

futuro para, em complemento às atividades do bloco “B.5”, viabilizar a definição de 

critérios de mensuração e interpretação de indicadores que possam representar o 

nível de segurança de um determinado contexto operacional. 

 

3 ESTRUTURAÇÃO E USO DE MAPAS CAUSAIS COM BASE NO HFACS 

Em sua dissertação, Vilela (2011) avaliou a adequabilidade de estruturar a 

segurança operacional por meio de modelos causais, utilizando um modelo 

conceitual da segurança operacional coerente com a teoria de causa de acidentes 

(accident causation) do Professor James Reason e um conjunto de fatores 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          231 
 

contribuintes baseados no MCA 3-6. O trabalho de referência não tinha por objetivo 

definir qual seria a melhor estrutura para organizar os fatores contribuintes no 

processo de confecção dos MCSO. Para ampliar o escopo do estudo e alcançar o 

objetivo pretendido, duas mudanças significativas são introduzidas neste estudo. 

A primeira corresponde à substituição dos fatores contribuintes, originalmente 

definidos com base no manual MCA 3-6, pelos constructos definidos no HFACS. 

Essa alteração visa a avaliar o processo de confecção de mapas causais de 

segurança, considerando contextos operacionais baseados na teoria de causa de 

acidentes (accident causation) desenvolvida pelo Professor James Reason. A 

segunda objetiva avaliar as inter-relações considerando a inclusão das barreiras de 

defesa no processo de estruturação dos MCSO.  

 

3.1. Guia de procedimentos para estruturar MCSO 

3.1.1. DEFINIÇÃO DO ESCOPO DA SEGURANÇA OPERACIONAL 

O primeiro passo para iniciar o processo de estruturação de MCSO consiste 

em definir o contexto da atividade aérea sobre a qual se deseja realizar as análises 

referentes à segurança operacional, pois ele serve de referência para a identificação 

e escolha dos fatores de risco que vão fazer parte da confecção dos mapas causais. 

Conforme abordado anteriormente, o contexto operacional do IPEV é 

caracterizado pelas atividades de ensaios em voo, instrução aérea especializada e 

operações. É importante ter consciência de que o escopo da atividade aérea delimita 

as variáveis de estudo. Isso significa dizer que alguns fatores de risco (nanocodes) 

definidos no HFACS podem estar associados a um determinado contexto 

operacional (ensaios em voo), mas não necessariamente a outro (voos de instrução 

básica/transporte aéreo, instrução especializada).  

A contextualização operacional no nível mais amplo (ensaios em voo, por 

exemplo) implica na obtenção de mapas mais genéricos cujas características podem 

não expressar informações úteis para a gestão de risco quanto aos aspectos 

relacionados com o tipo de missão/perfil de voo, gerando incertezas sobre a sua 

aplicabilidade. Por outro lado, se o contexto operacional da pesquisa abordar um 

escopo no nível das fases de voo (decolagem, por exemplo), o MCSO pode ter uma 

abrangência reduzida e não ser aplicável aos aspectos relacionados com o tipo de 

missão e/ou área de atividade aérea.  
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



232           Artigo Científico 

3.1.2. LISTA DE CONSTRUCTOS 

A lista de constructos define os elementos com os quais se pretende avaliar 

as influências causais. Uma vez definido o escopo do contexto operacional, listam-

se os constructos (elementos) com base na literatura especializada. Neste trabalho, 

utiliza-se o arcabouço do HFACS como estrutura de referência para definir os 

fatores de risco, mas poder-se-ia utilizar outras perspectivas e/ou modelos de 

segurança. Não existe uma referência correta para a organização e escolha das 

variáveis. A técnica de modelamento também permite mesclar fontes de referência 

além de poder-se complementar a lista com variáveis com sugestões dos 

respondentes do formulário de pesquisa. Ressalta-se que quanto maior for o número 

de variáveis, mais detalhado pode ser o mapa. Entretanto, o excesso de variáveis 

pode impossibilitar a aplicação de formulários em função da excessiva quantidade 

de respostas por formulário de pesquisa que é influenciada de forma quadrática 

(VILELA, 2011).  

Por ocasião da confecção dos mapas causais da segurança operacional, 

apesar de Markóczy e Goldberg (1995) sugerirem o uso de 40 a 50 constructos, 

recomenda-se analisar e definir a lista inicial de constructos a partir 147 nanocodes. 

Caso algum nanocode não seja suficiente para distinguir condições distintas e 

propiciarem respostas dúbias, outras categorias de nanocodes devem ser criadas de 

modo a representar o contexto operacional de interesse. De forma a simplificar este 

trabalho, utilizam-se apenas os fatores de risco adotados pelo DoD-HFACS (2005) 

até o nível de subcategoria e os quatro tipos genéricos de barreiras de defesa 

(ICAO, 2008).  
 

3.1.3. AMOSTRA 

O MCSO deve ser elaborado com base em uma amostra heterogênea que 

reflita a estrutura funcional e operacional da organização. Entende-se por grupo 

heterogêneo aquele cujos integrantes possuem o mesmo nível de conhecimento no 

tema de interesse, mas de áreas de atuação distintas (SALMERON; LOPEZ, 2011).  

Considerando que cada profissional percebe os fatores de risco de acordo 

com sua idiossincrasia (área de atuação, conhecimento ou formação), é relevante 

que a amostra composta de representantes de cada área funcional que, no caso do 

IPEV, está assim identificada: pilotos de prova, engenheiros de prova, 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          233 
 

instrumentadores de ensaios (engenheiros ou técnicos), mecânicos de voo de 

ensaios, servidores do setor de manutenção de aeronaves, servidores do setor de 

administração e outros setores técnicos do IPEV. Caso não haja médico e psicólogo 

de aviação, recomenda-se envolver profissionais dessas especialidades de outras 

organizações. 

Os profissionais especialistas envolvidos devem ter pleno conhecimento dos 

fundamentos e experiência profissional sobre ensaios em voo, riscos, fatores de 

risco e barreiras da segurança na atividade aérea desenvolvida no IPEV. Em função 

desses aspectos, julga-se que a amostragem seja representativa da cultura de 

segurança do IPEV. 

 

3.1.4. CARACTERIZAÇÃO DOS IMPACTOS CAUSAIS 

A caracterização dos impactos causais (identificação e quantificação das 

inter-relações causais) é realizada por meio de um formulário de pesquisa com 

vistas ao preenchimento de uma matriz de impactos cruzados.  As orientações 

fornecidas ao respondente devem abordar o escopo da atividade aérea que está 

sendo avaliada para que as avaliações dos impactos entre os constructos sejam 

coerentes com o contexto operacional da pesquisa. As conceituações das variáveis 

devem estar explícitas no formulário.  

Os questionamentos são realizados em duas etapas: a primeira para obter 

dados pessoais, indicando a área de atuação profissional, o tempo de serviço na 

atividade aérea e na atividade de ensaios em voo, o nível de conhecimento em 

ensaios em voo e em segurança de aviação, pois podem ser úteis na análise dos 

mapas. Na segunda parte, deve-se quantificar a influência (polaridade e a 

intensidade) com que um constructo Ci impacta outro elemento constructo Cj 

+ p

(Ci→C j ).  

A sequência de perguntas ocorre sempre de uma linha para uma coluna 

(sentido do impacto) de forma que todos os elementos sejam confrontados com os 

demais. Uma exceção é feita ao constructo SOEV, pois considera-se que este 

constructo não influencia os demais.  

O preenchimento da matriz inicia-se pontuando a influência do primeiro 

elemento da linha (F1) sobre o primeiro elemento disponível da coluna (F → F ). 
1 2

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



234           Artigo Científico 

Após, prossegue-se pontuando a influência de F1 sobre o elemento da coluna 

seguinte (F → F ) até o último da linha (F → F ). Prossegue para a linha 
1 3 1 SOEV

seguinte (F → F ), repetindo os mesmos procedimentos até a avaliação do último 
2 1

impacto (B → F ). Os campos são preenchidos por um sinal de polaridade 
4 SOEV

acompanhado de um valor inteiro. 

Quando a polaridade dos arcos causais é representada por um sinal “+” 

(positivo), um aumento/diminuição do valor de um constructo da linha i implica em 

um aumento/diminuição do elemento da coluna j (influência diretamente 

proporcional). Como exemplo, um aumento do “Estresse” influencia para o aumento 

da “Compulsão para agilizar o tráfego em detrimento da segurança”. Um valor 

negativo significa que um aumento/diminuição do elemento da linha i implica em 

uma diminuição/aumento do constructo da coluna j (influência inversamente 

proporcional). Como exemplo, um aumento do “Estresse” faz com que a 

“Consciência Situacional” diminua.  

A escala utilizada é ordinal, discreta e sequencial, com valores de impacto 

variando de 0 a 5 (0 – Não há; 1 - Muito Fraco; 2 - Fraco; 3 - Moderado; 4 - Forte e 5 

- Muito Forte). Quando o julgamento não for suficiente para assegurar uma resposta 

consciente, o campo é deixado vazio. O formulário indica quais os campos que 

ainda devem ser preenchidos.  
p

Os impactos entre constructos são representados pelo símbolo Ci→C j , com 

i=1, 2, ..., n-1; j=1, 2, ..., n e p=-5, -4, ..., 5. Exemplificando, um impacto do fator de 

risco F7 sobre F8, com polaridade negativa e intensidade igual a três, é representado 
−3

pelo símbolo F →F
7 8 . 

 

3.1.5. CONSTRUÇÃO DOS MAPAS CAUSAIS 

Com base nos resultados dos formulários de pesquisa, organizam-se os 

dados coletados por áreas de atuação profissional de modo a gerar uma matriz do 

grupo de interesse, usando os valores médios calculados a partir dos resultados 

individuais. Esta medida de tendência central possibilita diminuir as influências de 

respostas extremas ou sem consenso (erro de interpretação, cultura individual 

afastada da cultura organizacional). A utilização do desvio padrão pode auxiliar a 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          235 
 

encontrar erros de julgamento. Quando os resultados possuírem variações díspares 

(polaridades opostas com valores absolutos aproximados), recomenda-se aplicar o 

questionário para os itens duvidosos. 

Embora não esteja sendo tratado neste artigo, é possível modelar a incerteza 

das influências das relações causais com o uso de intervalos (grey numbers) ao 

invés de números inteiros e discretos, conforme explica Salmeron (2010). 

A Figura 7 exemplifica a representação matricial de um MCSO.  

 
FIGURA 7 – Exemplo de representação matricial de MCSO. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



236           Artigo Científico 

Os grupos de constructos (influências organizacionais, supervisão insegura, 

pré-condições para atos inseguros, atos inseguros, barreiras de defesa e SOEV) 

estão descritos na primeira coluna e organizados por cores. Os nomes dos 

elementos (etiquetas), descritos na segunda coluna, correspondem às categorias e 

subcategorias escolhidas para este estudo e são seguidos pelos códigos (F1, ..., F20, 

B1, ..., B4, SOEV). Os campos para preenchimento dos valores dos impactos 

cruzados médios estão apresentados nas células correspondentes aos cruzamentos 

de cada linha com cada coluna.  

No exemplo da Figura 7, todos os elementos dos grupos “barreiras de defesa” 

e “atos inseguros” foram avaliados entre si, bem como os impactos destes últimos na 

SOEV. Também são apresentadas algumas outras medidas de influência entre 

elementos de outros grupos para facilitar a compreensão e uso da matriz de impacto 

cruzado. Os campos na cor cinza não são preenchidos, pois não se considera um 

elemento impactando a ele mesmo.   
 

 
FIGURA 8 – Exemplo de representação diagramática de MCSO. 

 
A representação diagramática do MCSO (Figura 8) é completamente diferente 

do trabalho original (VILELA, 2011), pois o diagrama que se apresenta é concebido 

à semelhança do “Modelo do Queijo Suíço” (Figura 3). Os quatro círculos maiores, 

representando os quatro níveis de falha da estrutura do HFACS, agrupam os fatores 

de risco (F1 a F20) e as barreiras de defesa (B1 a B4).  

O primeiro grande círculo representa o ambiente onde se desenvolvem as 

Influências Organizacionais (F18 a F20). De forma análoga, o círculo seguinte contém 

os fatores relacionados com a Supervisão (F14 a F17), seguido pelas Pré-condições 

(F5 a F13). O último círculo corresponde ao grupo dos Atos Inseguros (F1 a F4), cujos 

fatores de risco (falhas ativas) estão mais próximos das ocorrências aeronáuticas 

(representadas pelo ícone da SOEV). 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          237 
 

As inter-relações causais (setas) da representação diagramática da Figura 8 

correspondem às células preenchidas da representação matricial da Figura 7. A 

polaridade positiva está expressa por setas contínuas e a negativa por setas 

tracejadas. A espessura das setas é diretamente proporcional à intensidade das 

influências causais. A cor preta e a cor verde referem-se à influência dos fatores de 

risco a das barreiras de defesa, respectivamente. Convenciona-se que quanto maior 

o impacto de um fator de risco no SOEV, menor é o nível de segurança do sistema. 

 

4 INTERPRETAÇÃO DOS IMPACTOS CAUSAIS 

As representações matriciais e diagramáticas de MCSO contêm elevado nível 

de detalhes e proporcionam, em conjunto, condições para uma rica descrição 

qualitativa e objetiva das condições de segurança de um contexto operacional.  

Os aspectos visuais (quantidade de setas e as correspondentes espessuras) 

podem evidenciar indicações importantes sobre o nível de segurança operacional. 

As setas que unem elementos dos dois primeiros grupos aos constructos do último 

grupo podem ser indicativas de condições latentes. As setas que conectam os 

fatores de risco ao ícone de segurança operacional expressam as influências das 

falhas ativas. As setas pretas que permanecem dentro de cada círculo grande são 

interpretadas como as influências indiretas que potencializam os fatores de risco e 

as verdes indicam a contribuição das barreiras no sentido de amenizar seus efeitos. 

A quantidade de setas que chegam e saem de um elemento é proporcional à sua 

relevância no sistema de segurança operacional. 

Quando se associa este MCSO com o modelo do acidente organizacional de 

Reason, é natural pensar que as influências ocorram no sentido da esquerda para a 

direita da Figura 8 (influência organizacional → supervisão → pré-condições → atos 

inseguros), o que podem ser observados nos exemplos listados abaixo. 
+5

- F →F : “Impacto positivo muito forte” de “F7-Falhas Cognitivas” 
7 3

(canalização da atenção) para a ocorrência dos “F3-Erros de Percepção” - (Impacto 

indireto - Ix);  
+4

- F →F : “Impacto positivo forte” de “F17-Violações de Supervisores” para a 
17 1

ocorrência dos “F1-Erros de Procedimentos” - (Ix); e 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



238           Artigo Científico 

+4

- F →F : “Impacto positivo forte” de “F19-Clima Organizacional” para a 
19 2

ocorrência dos “F2-Erros de Julgamento ou de Tomadas de Decisão” - (Ix). 

Alguns contextos operacionais podem proporcionar condições para que 

existam influências na direção contrária (sentido da direita para a esquerda da 

Figura 8), ou seja, uma causa ativa potencializando uma condição latente. 

Normalmente, como mostra este exemplo de MCSO, esta influência é nula (como 

está representado pelo impacto de F3 em F14). Entretanto, os fatores de risco F3 e F4 

do grupo “Ato Inseguro” impactam outros fatores de grupos anteriores (F7 em “Pré-

Condição para Atos Inseguros” e F20 em “Influência Organizacional”), evidenciando 

que falhas ativas podem potencializar condições latentes e realimentar o sistema.  
0

- F →F : “Impacto nulo” de “F3-Erro de Percepção” em “F14-Falhas de 
3 14

Supervisão Inadequada”;  
+1

- F →F : “Impacto positivo muito fraco” de “F3-Erro de Percepção” em     
3 20

“F20-Processos Organizacionais” - (Ix); e 
−3

- F →F : “Impacto negativo moderado” de “F4-Violações” em “F7-Falhas 
4 7

Cognitivas” - (Ix). 

As relações de causa-e-efeito das barreiras de defesa com as falhas (e vice-

versa) mostram informações interessantes e, por vezes, pouco intuitivas. Como 

exemplo, espera-se que uma barreira se segurança sempre contribua para a não 

ocorrência de erros. À primeira vista, entende-se que sim, pois as barreiras são 

utilizadas para inibir a ocorrência de acidentes no sistema, como é visto a seguir: 
−5

- B →F : “Impacto negativo muito forte” de “B1-Recursos tecnológicos” em 
1 4

“F4-Violações” - (Ix), significando que o investimento em recursos tecnológicos 

favorece a diminuição de violações, como é o caso da aplicação de sistemas FOQA 

(Flight Operation Quality Assurance). 

Entretanto, em outras situações, os mapas causais podem evidenciar que 

uma barreira de defesa pode amplificar os efeitos de certos fatores de risco, como é 

mostrado no seguinte exemplo: 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          239 
 

+3

- B →F : “Impacto positivo moderado” de “B1-Recursos tecnológicos” em “F6-
1 6

Ambiente Tecnológico” - (Ix), significando que o excesso de recursos tecnológicos 

pode aumentar os riscos associados ao fator “F6 - Ambiente Tecnológico”.  

Quando os recursos tecnológicos são empregados como fonte de informação 

e controle do voo de ensaio, espera-se uma contribuição positiva para que haja uma 

tomada de decisão acertada no caso de replanejamento da missão em situações de 

emergência. Contudo, caso esses recursos (interface homem-máquina, por 

exemplo) não sejam amigáveis, o operador não esteja bem preparado ou existam 

falhas ocultas, condições facilitadoras podem estar reunidas de modo a contribuir 

para a ocorrência novas falhas ligadas ao ambiente tecnológico e à automação de 

sistemas, podendo, assim, aumentar a gravidade da emergência.  

Em casos de violações eventuais, por exemplo, pode-se esperar uma 

diminuição na possibilidade de ocorrência de falhas ligadas à falta de atenção, uma 

vez que a consciência do erro deliberado (assunção do risco da operação marginal) 

desperta, normalmente, maior atenção no indivíduo. Nesse caso, uma falha ativa 

inibe, ao invés de potencializar, uma pré-condição para atos inseguros.  

A quantificação dos impactos totais de um fator sobre a segurança 

operacional, aspecto não abordado neste trabalho, pode ser compreendida como 

sendo o conjunto de setas que chegam (impactos indiretos) em um fator de risco tipo 

falha ativa e que potencializa o efeito deste na segurança operacional (impacto 

direto).  
 

4.1. Atualização dos MCSO 

A atualização dos mapas causais deve ser realizada ao final do período de 

validade estipulado na pesquisa. Entretanto, Caso ocorram mudanças significativas 

na estrutura, no cenário operacional ou ocorram acidentes graves, os mapas causais 

podem não mais ser válidos e, portanto, deve-se realizar um ciclo de revisão para 

atualizá-los. Essa recomendação segue a filosofia das auditorias especiais do 

SIPAER (BRASIL, 2008c). 
 

5 CONCLUSÕES 

Observa-se nos mapas causais de segurança operacional (MCSO) que há 

uma complexa inter-relação causal entre as variáveis do sistema. A compreensão 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



240           Artigo Científico 

das interações entre os fatores de risco e as barreiras de defesa é fundamental para 

o desenvolvimento de modelos que permitam avaliar de forma objetiva o nível de 

segurança de um determinado contexto de segurança operacional de aviação.  

A aplicação da estrutura HFACS, como recurso para a organização dos 

fatores de risco de mapas causais de segurança operacional, evidencia e clarifica a 

influência das condições latentes (influências organizacionais, supervisão, pré-

condições para atos inseguros) sobre as falhas ativas, e vice-e-versa, além de 

permitir uma maior interação com as barreiras de defesa. De fato, as falhas 

organizacionais (alocação de recursos, processos formais da organização e o clima 

organizacional) podem facilitar erros de supervisão e enfraquecer eficácia das 

barreiras de defesa.  

A organização dos fatores de risco em quatro níveis (influências 

organizacionais, supervisão insegura, pré-condições para atos inseguros e atos 

inseguros) permite identificar com maior propriedade a maneira como os fatores de 

risco (condições latentes ou causas ativas) se relacionam e influenciam para o 

surgimento das ocorrências aeronáuticas.  

O estudo demonstra que a estruturação desses fatores em conjunto com as 

barreiras de defesa (tecnologia, treinamento, normatização e fiscalização), 

possibilita, com base no julgamento de especialistas, identificar o quanto e como as 

inter-relações ocorrem de modo a melhor compreender o ambiente operativo e 

permitir a aplicação de medidas preventivas mais adequadas e coerentes com a 

realidade operacional. Neste sentido, a utilização da estrutura HFACS (Human 

Factors Analysis and Classification System) revela-se apropriada para estruturar as 

inter-relações causais do ambiente operacional do Instituto de Pesquisas e Ensaios 

em Voo (IPEV).  

O trabalho disponibiliza procedimentos para a confecção de mapas causais 

de segurança operacional (MCSO) e uma proposta de representação diagramática, 

a qual ilustra as inter-relações e influências entre as variáveis organizadas nos 

quatro grupos do HFACS de modo a facilitar a visualização das influências das 

condições latentes, das causas ativas e das medidas de defesa sobre a segurança 

operacional.  

Adicionalmente, verifica-se que o aprimoramento de técnicas de estruturação 

da segurança, fundamentada na natureza prospectiva do mapeamento causal e à 

semelhança do modelo do acidente organizacional de Reason, conceito amplamente 
ISSN 2176-7777 

 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          241 
 

aceito pela comunidade aeronáutica, amplia a capacidade de prevenção pró-ativa e 

favorece os meios para se obter indicadores objetivos com vistas ao 

aperfeiçoamento da gestão de segurança operacional no IPEV. 

Este estudo, por questões de ordem prática, limitou-se a utilizar uma lista de 

constructos com 25 variáveis, a qual se mostrou suficiente para avaliar a aplicação 

da estrutura do HFACS e de barreiras de defesa na confecção de MCSO. Para 

trabalhos práticos, faz-se necessária a utilização de todos os nanocodes 

(denominações mais básicas dos fatores de risco) previstos pelo DoD-HFACS e 

variáveis tipo barreiras de defesa mais específicas, de modo a permitir estruturar os 

MCSO com maior propriedade. 

Como perspectiva para trabalhos futuros, recomenda-se que pesquisas de 

campo com vistas à aplicação dos procedimentos propostos sejam conduzidas de 

modo a prover subsídios para atualização e aperfeiçoamento do uso da técnica, 

além de estruturar a base para o desenvolvimento de mapas causais dinâmicos e 

ferramentas computacionais para calcular indicadores preditivos de segurança 

operacional. 

Quanto aos parâmetros utilizados na caracterização dos arcos causais 

(polaridade e intensidade), incentiva-se o estudo de outros aspectos que possam ser 

consideradas importantes para caracterizar a relação causal, a saber: incerteza, 

latência, tempo de reação, peso e probabilidade de ocorrência. Sugere-se, ainda, a 

estruturação de mapas por camadas, considerando variados contextos específicos, 

de forma a harmonizá-los para a condição mais genérica. 

Recomenda-se que os formulários de pesquisa considerem que os 

avaliadores possam complementar a lista de constructos com outras variáveis, mas 

que estejam em consonância com a estrutura do HFACS. Para tal, incentiva-se 

utilizar dados estatísticos de ocorrências aeronáuticas no IPEV e outras literaturas 

especializadas, por exemplo, o Código Brasileiro de Aeronáutica (BRASIL, 1986) e o 

MCA 3-6 (BRASIL, 2008a). 

 

REFERÊNCIAS 

BRASIL. Lei nº 7.565, de 19 de dezembro de 1986. Código Brasileiro de Aeronáutica – 
CBA. Brasília, DF, 1986. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



242           Artigo Científico 

BRASIL. Comando da Aeronáutica. MCA 3-6: Manual de investigação do SIPAER. Brasília, 
DF, 2008a. 

_______. NSCA 3-1: Conceituação de vocábulos, expressões e siglas de uso no SIPAER. 
Brasília, DF, 2008b. 

_______. NSCA 3-3: Gestão da segurança operacional. Brasília, DF, 2008c. 

_______. ICA 3-1: Programa de Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos da aviação militar 
brasileira para o ano de 2009. Brasília, DF, 2009. 

_______. PSVE: Programa de Segurança em Voos de Ensaio. Grupo Especial de Ensaios 
em Vôo. Revisão B. São José dos Campos, 2009b. 

_______. ROCA 21-73: Regulamento do Instituto de Pesquisas e Ensaios em Voo. Brasília, 
DF, 2011. 

COLORADO FIRECAMP. The Human Factors Analysis and Classification System–
HFACS. Disponível em: <http://www.coloradofirecamp.com/swiss-cheese/introductio n.htm> 
Acesso em: 02 ago. 2011. 

DOD HFACS. A mishap investigation and data analysis tool. Department of Defense 
Human Factors Analysis and Classification System. jan. 2005. 35 p. Disponível em: 
<http://www.uscg.mil/safety/docs/ergo_hfacs/hfacs.pdf> Acesso em: 02 ago. 2011.  

DURÁN, R. T. El análisis de sistemas. Disponível em: 
<http://www.isdefe.es/monografias/docs/Analisis.pdf > Acesso em: 05 nov 2010. 

MANUELE, F. A. On the practice of safety. 3. ed. New Jersey: [s.n.], 2003. 

MARKÓCZY, L.; GOLDBERG, J. A method for eliciting and comparing causal maps. 
Journal of Management, v. 21,n. 2, p. 305-333, 1995. 

SALMERON, J. L; LOPEZ, C. Forcasting risk impact on ERP Maintenance with Augmented 
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. IEE Transactions on Software Engineering,, Manuscript ID. 2011. 

SALMERON, J. L. Modelling grey uncertainty with Fuzzy Grey Cognitive Maps. Journal of 
Expert Systems with Applications, 37, p. 7581–7588, 2010 

STOLZER, A. J.; HALFORD, C. D.; GOGLIA, J. J. Safety Management System in Aviation. 
Ashgate, 2008.  

VILELA, J. A. B. M. Aplicação de modelos causais na gestão da segurança operacional: 
o caso de ensaios em voo na aviação militar brasileira. 2011. 119f. Dissertação de Mestrado 
Profissionalizante em Segurança de Aviação e Aeronavegabilidade Continuada – Instituto 
Tecnológico de Aeronáutica, São José dos Campos. 

WIEGMANN, D. A.; SHAPPELL, S. A. A human error approach to aviation accident 
analysis: the human factors analysis and classification system. Cornwall: MPG Books 
Bodmin, 2003.  

WIEGMANN, D.; SHAPPELL, S. Human factors analysis of post-accident data: applying 
theoretical taxonomies of human error. International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 7, 
67-81, 1997. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          243 
 

USE OF THE HUMAN FACTORS MODEL (HFACS) IN THE STRUCTURING OF 
OPERATIONAL SAFETY CAUSAL MAPS  

 
ABSTRACT: The improvement of prospective tools to assist activities of proactive 
prevention of aeronautical occurrences demand the utilization of objective techniques 
that consider the interactions between risk factors in the context of aviation 
operational safety. Studies indicate that the cause-and-effect inter-relationship that 
characterize a complex system, such as aviation, may boost the risk of damage, and 
that the influences can be captured through appropriate causal mapping techniques. 
This work expands the analysis on the topic, evaluating the interaction between risk 
factors and defense barriers in the operational environment of the Instituto de 
Pesquisas e Ensaios em Voo – IPEV (Research and Flight Testing Institute), 
considering the risk factors defined by the Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
System - HFACS. The study concludes that the structuring of operational safety 
causal maps - MCSO, based on the HFACS model, brings benefits to the causal 
mapping technique, since it allows organizing the risk factors and defense barriers in 
accordance with the reality discussed in the Reason's organizational accident model. 
In this sense, one verifies that the improvement of safety structuring techniques, 
based on the prospective nature of the causal mapping, enhances the capability of 
pro-active prevention with objective tools, thus contributing to the improvement of 
operational safety management in the IPEV. 
 
KEYWORDS: Flight Test. Operational Safety Management. HFACS. Causal Maps. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



244           Artigo Científico 

APÊNDICE 

LISTA DE CONSTRUCTOS DO SISTEMA DE SEGURANÇA OPERACIONAL 
 

BARREIRAS DE DEFESA 
 

B1. Recursos tecnológicos  
o Referem-se aos recursos de prevenção de ocorrência de erros que atuam por meio 
de: a) fornecimento de informação atualizada, elevando a consciência situacional e 
provendo apoio à tomada de decisão no ambiente operacional; e b) dados que 
apresentem erros já ocorridos para que o evento seja esclarecido e prevenido. Algumas 
das principais ferramentas tecnológicas incluem os auxílios à navegação, as interfaces 
com os sistemas da aeronave e programas computacionais de monitoramento das 
condições de manutenção e operação da aeronave. A utilização de gravadores de voo 
para fins de prevenção de acidentes (Flight Operational Quality Assurance - FOQA) seria 
outro exemplo. 

B2. Normatização 
o Refere-se ao processo formal que visa à regulação e à padronização das operações, 
dos procedimentos e da fiscalização. O termo "operações" refere-se não apenas ao 
emprego dos meios aéreos, mas também às características  de trabalho que foram 
estabelecidas pela administração, como carga de trabalho, tempo para execução das 
tarefas, sistemas de incentivo e horários. Quanto mais específicos e sistematizados forem 
os processos oficiais /formais de execução dos trabalhos (padrões de desempenho, 
documentação e instruções), maior será a possibilidade de compreensão e longevidade 
dos procedimentos normatizados, uma vez que um dos objetivos da normatização como 
barreira de defesa é a redução de erros devido a dúvidas e falhas de interpretação. A 
doutrina estabelecida para execução dos voos dentro da Unidade deve ser considerada. 

B3. Treinamento: CRM, cursos, etc 
o Referem-se aos cursos realizados com o propósito de capacitar o indivíduo à 
operação de equipamentos/ sistemas ou de possibilitar a compreensão dos aspectos de 
segurança e de risco relacionados a essa operação. Como exemplos, cita-se ground 
school de aeronaves e treinamento de CRM (Corporate / Company / Crew / Cockpit 
Resource Management). Dentro desse contexto, como barreira de defesa, devem ser 
considerados não apenas os cursos iniciais, mas os de elevação de nível, de transição, 
de manutenção de conhecimentos, de apoio à atividade aérea (aprontos), e outros. 

B4. Fiscalização 
o Refere-se ao monitoramento e ao controle de recursos, clima e processos para 
garantir um ambiente de trabalho seguro e produtivo. A fiscalização pode ser realizada 
durante o acompanhamento e a verificação de todas as etapas de execução dos serviços, 
zelando pelo cumprimento dos padrões de qualidade fixados nas especificações técnicas, 
através de controles dos serviços, materiais empregados, pessoal designado e processo 
empreendido. No entanto, mecanismos de controle mais amplos também fazem parte da 
fiscalização, como vistorias e auditorias, com intuito de analisar o cumprimento das 
obrigações regulamentares e de procedimentos especificados em documentos 
relacionados à gestão de risco e à padronização das ações executadas. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          245 
 

FATORES DE RISCO (DoD-HFACS) 

 
ATOS INSEGUROS 

 
ERROS 

F1. Erros baseados em Habilidade  

o São fatores em um acidente quando ocorrem erros na execução de uma rotina do 
operador, de uma tarefa altamente praticada relativas procedimentos, treinamento ou 
proficiência e resulta em uma situação insegura. Erros baseados em habilidade são 
comportamentos não intencionais. 

o Ex: Operação Inadvertida, Erro de Check-list, Erro Processual, Perda de controle, 
Falha de Varredura Visual (visual scan), Manobra Inadequada com Carga “G” Imposta. 

F2. Erros de Julgamento e Tomada de Decisão 

o São fatores em um acidente quando o comportamento ou ações do indivíduo em 
proceder como intencionado ainda que o plano escolhido se mostre inadequado para 
alcançar o estado final desejado, resultando em uma situação de risco. 

o Avaliação de Risco - Durante a Operação, Erro de priorização de Tarefas, Ação 
Necessária não Realizada: Sentido de Agilizar, Ação Necessária não Realizada: Sentido 
de Atrasar, Avisos e Alarmes Ignorados, Tomada de Decisão Durante a Operação. 

F3. Erros de Percepção Equivocada 

o São fatores em um acidente quando a má percepção de um objeto, de uma ameaça 
ou situação (tais como visual, auditiva, proprioceptiva, ou ilusão vestibular, cognitiva ou 
falha de atenção) resulta em erro humano. 

o Erros devido a Falhas de Percepção. 

F4. VIOLAÇÕES 

o Violação - Com base na Avaliação de Risco, Violação - Rotineira / generalizada, 
Violação - Falta de Disciplina. 

 
PRÉ-CONDIÇÕES PARA ATOS INSEGUROS 

 
FATORES AMBIENTAIS  

F5. Ambiente Físico 

o Quando fenômenos ambientais, como condições meteorológicas e clima afetam as 
ações de indivíduos. 

o Restrição de Visibilidade por Congelamento / Vidros Embaçados / etc, Restrição de 
Visibilidade por Meteorologia, Vibração, Restrição de Visibilidade no Ambiente de 
Trabalho por Poeira / Fumaça / etc., Rajada de Vento, Estresse térmico – Frio, Estresse 
térmico – Calor, Forças geradas por Manobras em Voo, Iluminação de outras Aeronaves / 
Veículos, Interferência de ruído, Brownout / Whiteout. 

F6. Ambiente Tecnológico  

o Quando cockpit, aeronave, espaço de trabalho, fatores de projeto ou automação 
contribuem para resultar em erro humano ou em uma situação insegura.  

o Assentos e cintos, Instrumentação e Sistemas Sensores de Realimentação 
(Feedback), Restrições de Visibilidade, Controles e Switches, Automação, Ambiente de 
Trabalho Incompatível com Humanos, Interferência de Equipamento de Voo, 
Comunicações – Equipamentos. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



246           Artigo Científico 

CONDIÇÃO DO OPERADOR 

F7. Fatores Cognitivos  

o Quando o gerenciamento da atenção ou os aspectos cognitivos afetam a percepção 
ou o desempenho dos indivíduos e resultam em erro humano ou uma situação insegura.  

o Desatenção, Atenção Canalizada, Saturação de Tarefas Cognitivas, Confusão, 
Transferência Negativa, Distração, Desorientação Geográfica (Perdido), Interferência de 
Check-list. 

F8. Fatores Psicocomportamentais 

o Quando traços da personalidade de um indivíduo, problemas psicossociais, 
transtornos psicológicos ou motivação inadequada cria uma situação insegura.  

o Transtorno da Personalidade Pré-Existente, Transtorno Psicológico Pré-Existente, 
Problema Psicossocial Pré-Existente, Estado Emocional, Estilo de Personalidade, 
Excesso de confiança, Pressão, Complacência, Motivação Inadequada, Motivação 
Deslocada, Agressividade Excessiva, Motivação Excessiva para Execução da Tarefa, 
“Regressite”, Expectativa, Exaustão - Fatores Motivacionais. 

F9. Estados Fisiológicos Adversos  

o Quando um indivíduo vivencia um evento fisiológico que compromete o desempenho 
humano, diminuino o desempenho e resultando em uma situação insegura. 

o Efeitos de Força-G (G-LOC, etc), Medicamentos prescritos, Lesão / Doença 
Operacional, Súbita Incapacidade / Inconsciência, Doença / Lesão Física Pré-Existente, 
Fadiga – Física, Fadiga - Fisiológica / Mental, Ritmo Circadiano Dessincronizado, 
Vertigem Aérea (Motion Sickness), Distúrbios devido a Variações de Altitude, Distúrbios 
Envolvendo Gás no Sangue, Hipóxia, Hiperventilação, Adaptação Visual ao Ambiente 
Noturno, Desidratação, Supersaturação Física de Tarefas. 

F10. Limitações Físicas / Mentais 

o Quando um indivíduo não tem a capacidade física ou mental para lidar com uma 
situação e esta insuficiência provoca uma situação insegura. Por vezes, em característica 
de um indivíduo que não possui a capacidade física ou mental desejada para 
desempenhar as funções necessárias de forma segura. 

o Capacidade / Taxa de Aprendizagem, Capacidade / Lapsos de Memória, Limitações 
Antropométricas / Biomecânicas, Deficiência de Coordenação Motora, Conhecimento 
Técnico / de Procedimentos. 

F11. Fatores de Percepção 

o Quando a não percepção de um objeto, uma ameaça ou uma situação gera uma 
situação insegura. Se relacionado à desorientação espacial ou à ilusão, deve ser 
identificada qual condição motivou essa falta de percepção (condição visual, auditiva, 
proprioceptiva ou vestibular). 

o Ilusão – Cinestesia, Vestibular, Visual, Erro de Percepção das Condições 
Operacionais, Interpretação / Leitura Errada de Instrumento, Expectativa, Sensações 
(Cues) Auditivas, Desorientação Espacial (Tipo 1) - Não Reconhecida, (Tipo 2) – 
Reconhecida, (Tipo 3) – Incapacitante, Distorção Temporal. 

PRÁTICAS DO OPERADOR 

F12. Falha no Gerenciamento de Recursos  

o Quando as interações entre indivíduos, equipes e equipes envolvidas com a 
preparação e execução de uma missão resultam em erro humano ou uma situação de 
risco. 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



R. Conex. SIPAER, v. 3, n. 1, nov. 2011.          247 
 

o Liderança da Equipe / Tripulação, Monitoramento do Desempenho de Tripulação, 
Delegação de Tarefas, Diferença de Autoridade / Patente, Assertividade, Comunicar de 
Informações Críticas, Terminologia / Fraseologia Padrão / Adequada, Realimentação 
(Feedback), Planejamento de Missão, Briefing de Missão, Replanejamento de Tarefa / 
Missão em Execução, Falha de Comunicação (Interpretação). 

F13. Prontidão Pessoal (agentes estressores auto-impostos) 
o Quando o operador demonstra desrespeito de regras e instruções para manutenção 
da prontidão física/fisiológica ou quando apresenta falha no julgamento de ações 
relacionada aos agentes estressores autoiimpostos, ocasionando erro humano ou 
situação insegura.  

o Aptidão Física, Álcool, Drogas / Suplementos / Autommedicação, Nutrição, Repouso 
Insuficiente, Condição Médica Significante não Reportada. 

 
SUPERVISÃO INSEGURA 

 
F14. Supervisão Inadequada  

o Liderança / Supervisão inadequada, Supervisão – Aprendizado Influenciado pelos 
Demais, Programas de Treinamento/ Formação Local, Supervisão – Política, Supervisão - 
Conflito de Personalidade, Supervisão - Falta de feedback. 

F15. Operações Inapropriadamente Planejadas  

o Indicação para Missão além da Capacidade, Composição de Tripulação, Experiência 
Limitada Recente ou Total, Proficiência, Avaliação de Risco – Formal, Riscos 
Desnecessários Autorizados.  

F16. Falha para Corrigir Problemas Conhecidos 

o Gestão de Pessoas, Gestão de Operações.  

F17. Violações de Supervisão  

o Supervisão – Regras Aplicadas por Pessoal não Autorizado (omissão do supervisor), 
Supervisão - Política De facto (Política Informal), Supervisão – Violação Estrita de Regras, 
Permissão para Execução de Tarefas por Pessoal sem Treinamento Corrente.  

 
INFLUÊNCIAS ORGANIZACIONAIS 

 
F18. Gestão/Alocação de Recursos  

o Recursos do Controle de Tráfego Aéreo, Recursos do Aeródromo, Suporte ao 
Operador, Processos e Políticas de Aquisição de Equipamento, Políticas de Desativação 
de Equipamento, Políticas de Seleção para Tarefas/ Seções, Recurso e Alocação de 
Pessoal, Prestação de Informação ao Usuário, Recursos/ Apoios Financeiros.  

F19. Clima Organizacional  

o Cultura Organizacional, Avaliação / Promoção, Percepções dos Equipamentos 
Operados, Mudança de Equipamento/ Aeronave/ Missão ou Desativação da Unidade, 
Estrutura Organizacional. 

F20. Processos Organizacionais  

Carga de Trabalho, Programa e Política de Avaliação de Riscos, Publicações/ Orientação de 
Procedimentos, Programas de Formação Organizacional, Doutrina, Programa de Gestão de 
Supervisão. 
 
 

ISSN 2176-7777 
 



Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Ocean Engineering
Abbre
ted acy
FT; Fau
Factor,

n Corr
Kent Ri

E-m

0029-80
doi:10.1
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/oceaneng
Probability analysis of offshore fire by incorporating human
and organizational factor
Yan Fu Wang a,b,n, Min Xie a, Kien Ming Ng a, Mohamed Salahuddin Habibullah c

a Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore
b China University of Petroleum, Dongying 257061, China
c Institute of High Performance Computing, Singapore
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 19 December 2010
Accepted 10 September 2011
 (HOF). The multi-phase model allows different methods to be applied to different parts. In the first
Editor-in-Chief: A.I. Incecik phase, Fault Tree (FT) is used to model the factors how to contribute to the fire scenarios, which guide

Available online 14 November 2011

Keywords:
Offshore fire
Fault tree
Bayesian network
Human and organizational factor
viations: Bayesian Network, BN; Conditional
clic graph, DAG; Floating production storage
lt tree analysis, FTA; Minimal cut set, MCS; H
HOF; Quantitative risk analysis, QRA
esponding author at: ISE Department, Nation
dge Crescent, 119260 Singapore, Singapore. T
ail address: isewy@nus.edu.sg (Y.F. Wang).

18/$ - see front matter & 2011 Published by
016/j.oceaneng.2011.09.009
a b s t r a c t

In this paper, a probability analysis model of offshore fire is presented using the method of converting
fault tree (FT) into Bayesian Network (BN) to incorporate the effect of Human and Organizational Factor

the construction of BN model. In the second phase, BN is used to extend the causal chain of basic events
to potential HOFs and provide a more precise quantitative links between the event nodes. The distinct
advantages of BN making them more suitable than FTs are their ability in explicitly representing the
dependencies of events, updating probabilities, and coping with uncertainties, which cannot be
considered by FT. Finally, the integration algorithm is demonstrated on four offshore fire scenarios.
It clearly shows that the model integrates the power of FT for modeling deterministic causal paths with
the flexibility of BN for modeling non-deterministic HOF relationships.

& 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
1. Introduction

Offshore oil and gas production has increased fourfold in the
last three decades (Sandrea and Sandrea, 2007). As offshore
production surges, many related accidents also occurred. From
1980 to 2005, 7018 accidents occurred in fixed offshore units, out
of which, 6510 accidents occurred on offshore production plat-
form (Veritas, 2007). During the last 40 years, over 60 major fire
accidents have happened during offshore production with about
600 fatalities (Health and Safety Executive, 2007). Some examples
of these fire accidents, which include their causes and losses, are
summarized in Table 1.

From Table 1, it can be seen that offshore fire accidents have
caused serious consequences including the loss of lives, the
destruction of properties and damages to environment (Khan
and Amyotte, 2002). Thus, it is imperative to ensure that offshore
productions can be operated in a safe and efficient manner.
To identify the safety measures needed to prevent fire accidents,
it is crucial that the fire risk assessment of offshore production
probability table, CPT; Direc-
offloading, FPSO; Fault tree,
uman and Organizational

al University of Singapore, 10
el.: þ6597858666.

Elsevier Ltd.
should be carried out. The offshore installations regulation
(Health and Safety Executive, 1992) requires that the risk to
people on the installation should be reduced to as low as
reasonably practicable. To determine whether or not the risks
are as low as reasonably practicable, quantifying the probability
of accident should be carried out in the first place (Soares, 2000).
In offshore production, the risk analysis has provided valuable
information for decision-support for more than 20 years (Røed
et al., 2009). There are two models namely, Fault Tree (FT) and
Bayesian Network (BN), being widely used in probability risk
analysis (PRA) (Eleye-Datubo et al., 2008).

The benefits of FT are discovered by the nuclear power industry,
which may have contributed more to the development of FT than
any other single user group (Vesely and Goldberg, 1981). FT has
gained widespread acceptance for quantitative reliability and
safety analysis (Huang et al., 2004). Liang et al. (2010) adopted
FT to evaluate the reliability and safety of an underwater dry
maintenance cabin. In their paper, a numerical simulation method
based on the minimum cut set (MCS) was adopted. FT can offer an
efficient method of representing the fault causes and cope with the
existence of several faults at the same time (Hurdle et al., 2007). In
probability analysis and safety domain, FT is a well-known engi-
neering approach. However FT is difficult to be used for quantita-
tively assessing system reliability because of its limited expressive
power (Dutuit and Rauzy, 2004).

FT does not have the same capability of incorporating the
evidence into the reasoning as BN. Beyond the usual measures



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2043

Table 1
Major accident on offshore production platforms.

No. Facility Causes Losses

1 Ekofisk, Norway (1975) Blowout and oil riser failure resulted in major fire 6 dead
2 2 Piper Alpha, North Sea, UK (1988) Gas leak resulted in explosion 167 dead; $3 billion loss
3 Mobil Oil Rig, Nigeria (1995) Explosion of oil rig 13 dead
4 Morgan oil field, Gulf of Suez (1996) Explosion of oil rig 3 dead, 2 injured
5 Esso, Longford, Victoria, Australia (1998) Human error in gas production plant 2 dead; $1.3 billion loss
6 Glomar, Arctic IV, Invergerdon (1998) Explosion in rig 2 dead
7 Gabriel Passos Refinery in Minas Gerais (1998) Fire 3dead
8 Petrobras (2001) Explosion in platform 10 dead; $430 million loss
9 Bombay High North Platform (2005) Massive fire in process platform 22 dead

10 Kab Field, Bay of Campeche, Gulf of Mexico (2007) Strike the production platform causing riser release and fire 22 dead; 5000 bbls oil lost
11 Apache platform in the Gulf of Mexico (2010) Fire 1 dead
available in FT analysis, the BN methodology is able to perform a
diagnostic assessment given some observation, and to compute
the severity of each basic event conditioned on the occurrence of
the top event. For example, Cheng and Hadjisophocleous (2009)
described a model developed to calculate the fire spread prob-
ability from the fire compartment to other compartments using
BN. This model is important for fire risk analysis of big building.
Transforming FT into BN can address interesting questions allow-
ing both forward and backward analysis; moreover, BNs are more
suitable to represent complex dependencies among basic events
and to include uncertainty in modeling.

PRA is one of the main tools for risk management within oil
and gas industries. Much criticism, which has been given to the
limitations related to the PRAs, is that the PRAs do not include
HOF. Norway and UK offshore legislation and guidelines require
that the HOF factors are included in the PRAs (Skogdalen and
Vinnem, 2011). The prevalence of human error warrants the need
to incorporate human error analysis in probabilistic risk assess-
ment. Mohaghegh extended probabilistic risk assessment model
to include the effects of organizational factors (Mohaghegh et al.,
2009). In one study, a coherent approach to exploit BN in
developing better risk models of complex socio-technical systems
is proposed to consider the influences of HOFs (Trucco et al.,
2008). With regards to the elicitation of CPT for HOFs in BN, it is
worth noting that reliable HOF data are usually absent
(Grabowski et al., 2009). In such situations, CPT can be elicited
using judgments from experts. However, experts may find it
difficult to come up with precise probability values for the
relationships between nodes (Chen et al., 2007). Fuzzy AHP can
tackle fuzziness and uncertainty of vague decision-making more
efficiently using fuzzy sets, membership functions, and fuzzy
numbers (Lee et al., 2008).

In this paper, the probabilities of offshore fire are analyzed by
converting FT into BN and incorporating HOFs. The detailed descrip-
tions of other sections are organized as follows. Section 2 presents
the methodology of converting FT into BN and extending BN to
incorporate HOFs. Section 3 proposes a new method of developing
CPT for HOF node in BN. In Section 4, the probability of the most
credible fire scenarios is analyzed incorporating HOFs. Section 5
discusses the main flaws and strengths of the model presented.
2. Convert FT into BN to incorporate HOF

2.1. Fault tree

FT has been applied successfully in the field of fire safety
(Hanea and Ale, 2009). FT is a failure analysis technique in which
an undesired state of a system is studied using Boolean logic
to combine a series of lower-level events. The FT analysis is
usually carried out in two steps (Volkanovski et al., 2009): one is
a qualitative step in which the logical expression of the top event
is derived in terms of minimal cut sets; the other is a quantitative
one in which the probabilities of the top event are calculated on
the basis of the failure probability assigned to the basic events.
The top event of a FT represents system failure. The shortest
credible way through the tree from top event to basic event is
called a Minimal Cut Set (MCS) (Vesely and Goldberg, 1981).

If PTE be the probability of the top event, PMCSi is the
probability of each minimal cut set, then

Xn X
PTE ¼ PMCSi PMCSi\MCSj

i ¼ 1X io j

þ P n
MCSi\MCSj\MCSk. . .þð1 1

Þ P n ð1Þ
\ MCSi

io jok i ¼ 1

which can be simplified and approximated as

Xn

PTE ¼ PMCSi ð2Þ
i ¼ 1

Ym
PMCSi ¼ PBij ð3Þ

j ¼ 1

where m is the number of basic events in minimal cut set and PBij

is the probability of basic event j in MCSi.

2.2. Bayesian network

BN is a probabilistic graphical model that represents a set of
random variables and their conditional independencies via a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) (Jensen, 2001). BNs are known to
be useful in assessing the probabilistic relationships and identify-
ing probabilistic mappings between system events (Shijun et al.,
2001). The BN computation first inserts observations in the
observable nodes, and then uses the rules for probability calcula-
tion backward and forward along the edges, from the observable
nodes through the intermediate nodes to the target node (Jensen,
2001). Forward calculation is straightforward, while backward
computation is more complicated. Backward calculation is solved
using Bayesian methodology (Jensen, 1996).

Let G¼(V, E) be a DAG (V: vertex, E: edge) and X¼(Xv) vAV be
a set of random variables indexed by V. X is a BN with respect to G
if its joint probability density function can be written as a product
of the individual density functions, conditional on their parent
variablYes (Williamson, 2005):

PðxÞ ¼ Pðxv9xpaðvÞÞ ð4Þ
vAV

where pa(v) is the set of parents of v. For any set of random
variables, the probability of any member of a joint distribution
can be calculated from conditional probabilities using the chain



2044 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055
rule as follows (Trucco et al., 2008):

Yn

PðX1 ¼ x1,. . .,Xn ¼ xnÞ ¼ PðXv ¼ xv9Xvþ1 ¼ xvþ1,. . .,Xn ¼ xnÞ
v ¼ 1

ð5Þ

The importance degree of basic event to the top event can be
assessed using entropy reduction (mutual information). Intui-
tively, mutual information measures the information that X and Y
share: it measures how much knowing one of these variables
reduces our uncertainty about the other.

Formally, the mutual information of two random variables X
and Y can be defined as

XX pðx,yÞ
HðX;YÞ ¼ pðx,yÞlog2 ð6Þ

pðxÞpðyÞ
yAYxAX

where p(x,y) is the joint probability distribution function of X and
Y, and p(x) and p(y) are the marginal probability distribution
functions of X and Y, respectively.

BN model is a tool used to manage uncertainty using prob-
ability. The nodes are ranked in terms of the marginal posterior
conditional probability P (Xi9TE), which reflect the contribution to
the probability of the eventual fault. Updating the probability is
possible when observation is performed on the system (Fontana
and Maag, 2004). Furthermore, BN allows probabilistic modeling,
i.e. they can be easily changed to incorporate the hypothesis
of nodes.

2.3. Transforming fault tree into Bayesian network

Bayesian network (BN) has a strong similarity to FTs in many
respects, giving preference to BN due to its ability to update
probabilities. BN can also help incorporate multi-state variables,
dependent failures, functional uncertainty, and expert opinion,
which are frequently encountered in probability analysis, but
cannot be considered by FT (Khakzad et al., 2011). In order to
improve the deficiencies of FT, a method is developed by con-
verting FT into BN. Fig. 1 shows the conversion of OR gate and
AND gate into equivalent nodes of BN. The conversion process is
described as follows (Bobbio et al., 2001):
(1)
 Each basic event of FT is converted into a corresponding
binary child node of BN.
(2)
 The prior probability of every child node in BN is assigned the
failure probability of the corresponding basic event in FT.
Fault Tree: OR Gate

Fault Tree: AND Gate

Fig. 1. AND and OR gate of Fault
(3)
Ba

Ba

Tree
Each gate of FT is converted into a relevant node of BN in the
light of regulations in Fig. 1.
(4)
 Corresponding to each gate of FT, the equivalent CPT is
assigned to the relevant node of BN (given a generic binary
event X, we denote with X¼1(true/the faulty event happened)
and with X¼0(false/ the faulty event did not happen)).
(5)
 All the nodes of BN are linked according to the way of
connecting the corresponding events of FT.
2.4. Extend BN by incorporating HOFs

Given a set of FTs representing relevant hazards of the system
under analysis, the BN is used to modify the occurrence prob-
ability of those basic events affected by the level of critical HOFs
(Trucco et al., 2008). The strength of BN is the capability to deal
with non-deterministic cause–effect relationships and uncertain
knowledge. So BN is often used for causal representation of the
HOFs involved in a complex process, where information is based
on expert knowledge (Pedrali et al., 2004).

The BN, which is converted from FT, can be extended to
incorporate the effect of HOFs. The whole model can now be
integrated into one single BN as shown in Fig. 2. This model
extends BN to quantify the effect of HOFs in order to obtain a
better estimate for the occurrence probability of the top event,
given a specific configuration of critical HOFs. The influence of
HOFs on the occurrence probability of a failure event can also be
estimated by means of Bayesian inference.
3. Conditional probability table elicitation for HOF

CPT elicitation has been known to be a complicated issue due to a
large number of judgments required to fully quantify the relation-
ships in BN (Rajabally et al., 2004). The lack of data related with HOFs
prompts for CPT elicitation via expert judgments. However, expert
judgments are subjected to biases (Fox and Clemen, 2005). The
integration of AHP and a decomposition method can reduce sub-
jective biases and help domain experts to elicit the CPT in an efficient
manner (Chin et al., 2009). Fuzzy AHP enables domain experts to
avoid giving precise probability for the CPTs. Instead they give
triangular fuzzy number to perform pair-wise comparisons of the
states according to their relative occurrence probability (Haghighi,
2009). This section gives an illustration on how to integrate fuzzy
AHP with a decomposition method for the elicitation of CPT.
yesian Network: OR Node

yesian Network: AND Node

and Bayesian Network.



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2045

Fig. 2. Integration Fault Tree with Bayesian Network.

Table 2
Fuzzy scale in AHP.

Linguistic scales Triangular fuzzy Triangular fuzzy reciprocal
scale scale

Just equal (1,1,1) (1,1,1)
Equally probable (1/2,1,3/2) (2/3,1,2)
Weakly probable (1,3/2,2) (1/2,2/3,1)
Strongly more probable (3/2,2,5/2) (2/5,1/2,2/3)
Very strongly more (2,5/2,3) (1/3,2/5,1/2)
probable
Absolutely more probable (5/2,3,7/2) (2/7,1/3,2/5)
3.1. Prior probabilities for a node without parents

Suppose a node X has no parent and has k states (S1,S2,. . .,Sk).
To elicit prior probabilities that X is at each state (w¼ ½w1,w2,. . .,
ws,. . .,wk, where ws is the probability when X is at state Ss).
Traditionally, ws is specified directly by experts, using their
knowledge and experiences. When the number of states is small,
such a method may be feasible. With the increase of states,
estimating probabilities directly to all states at one time may
inevitably involve biases and inaccuracies. An alternative way is
giving triangular fuzzy number to perform pair-wise comparisons
between states for generating their probabilities. The fuzzy AHP
method is able to solve uncertain ‘fuzzy’ problems. In this model,
the prior probability of each state can be determined by the
following pair-wise comparison matrix:

1 c~12 . . . c~1k
c~21 1 . . . c~2k

A¼ ^ ^ ð1Þ
. . . ^

c~k1 c~k2 . . . 1

where A is the pair-wise comparison matrix. C~ ij is the comparison
value of the likelihood of the presence of Si over that of Sj. C~ ij is a
triangular fuzzy number.

C~ ij is fuzzy linguistic scale specified by asking the domain
experts questions like ‘‘comparing states Si and Sj, which one is
more likely to occur and how much more?’’ Domain experts will
answer the question using the following fuzzy linguistic scale in
Table 2 (Magdy and David, 2001).

The fuzzy weight matrix is calculated by Chang’s Extent
Analysis Method (Chang, 1996; Haghighi et al., 2010) as follows.

The value of fuzzy synthetic extent with respect to ith object is
defined as

Xk Xk Xk

Si C~
j

¼ i½ C~
j
i
1 ð9Þ

j ¼ 1 i ¼ 1Pj ¼ 1

To obtain k ~ j
j ¼ 1 C i , perform the fuzzy addition operation of k

extent an0alysis values for a particular matrix such that

Xk
j @Xk X X 1

k k

C~ j
i ¼ li , mj

i , ujA
i ð10Þ

j ¼ 1 j ¼ 1 j ¼P1 j ¼ 1

k P
and to obtaPin

k j
½ 1

i ¼ 1 j ¼ 1 Ci , perform the fuzzy addition
k ~ j

operation of j ¼ 1 C i(i¼1.2,yk) values such that

Xk X  
k Xk Xk X !

k

C~
j
i ¼ li, mi, ui ð11Þ

i ¼ 1 j ¼ 1 i ¼ 1 i ¼ 1 i ¼ 1

2and then compute the inverse of the vector:

4XX 31 "
k

C~
j5 #

k P 1 1
i ¼ ,

k P P 1
, ð12Þ

k
i ¼ 1 j ¼ 1 i ¼ 1 ui i ¼ 1 m k

i i ¼ 1 li

The degree of possibility of C~ 2 ¼ ðl2,m2,u2ÞZC~ 1 ¼ ðl1,m1,u1Þ is
defined as

VðC~ 2ZC~ 1Þ ¼ supy i
Zx½m nðmC~ ðxÞ,m ~ ð Þ

2 C y  ð13Þ
1

and can be equivalently expressed a8s follows:

><1, if m2Zm1

VðC~ 2ZC~ 1Þ ¼ hgtðC~ ~
1 \ C 0, if l

2Þ ¼ m 1Zu2
C~ ðdÞ ¼2 >: l1u2

ðm2u2Þðm1l , otherwise
1Þ

ð14Þ

where d is the ordinate of the highest intersection point D
between mC~ and mC~2 1

To compare mC~ andmC~ , we need both the values of VðC~ 2ZC~ 1Þ
2 1

and VðC~ ~
1ZC 2Þ. The degree of possibility for a convex fuzzy



2046 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055
number to be greater than k convex fuzzy number C~ i (i¼1, 2, y,
k) can be defined by

VðC~ZC~ 1,C~ 2,. . .,C~ kÞ ¼ V ½ðC~ZC~ ~
1Þ and ðC~ZC 2Þ and. . .andðC~ZC~ kÞ

¼minVðC~ZC~ 1iÞ,i¼ 1,2,. . .,k ð15Þ

Assume that d0ðAiÞ ¼minVðSiZSnÞ n¼1, 2,y, k; na i. Then the
weight vector is given by w0 ¼ ðd0ðA1Þ,d

0
ðA2Þ,. . .,d

0
ðA T

kÞÞ where
Aiði¼ 1,2,. . .,kÞ are k elements.
Offshore production process
description

The most credible fire scenarios

Fault tree analysis inp

Repeat  the next Scenario

Bayesian network inference ou

Extend BN to incorporate HOF

Occurrence probability of each
scenario can be estimated and the importance

degree of basic events can be ranked  

Fig. 3. Flowchart of th

Fuel gas for main generator

Gas

Centrifugal 
compressor

Gas

Slug catcher Oil separator Condensate 

Oil

Wellhead Pump

Riser Main oil line

Fluid from the well
Oil, gas, condensate, 
water

Fig. 4. Process flow of o
Via normalization, the normalized weight vectors are w¼
ðdðA1Þ,dðA2Þ,. . .,dðA

T
kÞÞ (where w is a nonfuzzy number), which is

the prior probability of the node X.

3.2. Conditional probabilities for a node with multiple parents

A node X has k states (S1,S2,. . .,Sk). The node X has n parents,

Tð1Þ,T ð2Þ,. . .,T ðjÞ,. . .,T ðnÞ. The node TðjÞ has the states of T ðjÞ1 ,T ðjÞ2 ,. . .,
Basic events of FT are converted into
ut corresponding child nodes of BN

CPT of child node is assigned the same prior
probability as the failure probability of basic events

gate of FT is converted into a parent node of BN

tput For each gate of FT, the equivalent CPT is
assigned to the relevant node in the BN

e principal steps.

Reciprocating 
Gas drier

compressor
Dried gas

Condensate Condensate 
Turbo expander

separator

Gas

Flash drum

Gas

Pump module
Reciprocating 
compressor of 
second stage

Lift gas at the well
Flare

Export gas

ffshore production.

Condensate 



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2047

Table 3
Basic events of the fault tree for the most credible scenario of oil separator.

Basic event Failure frequency Important
(per year) degree

of
probability

X0 Outlet line/valve chocked 0.0111 0.000009
X1 Excessive high pressure in separator 0.095 0.000018
X2 Unwanted chemical reaction 0.04 0.000018
X3 Excess flow in separator 0.125 0.000018
X4 safety/relief valve failed 0.0515 0.000018
X5 High temperature in separator 0.038 0.000018
T ðjÞtj (tj is the state number of node TðjÞ; j¼1, n).
It will be difficult for experts to directly estimate the prob-

ability of each state of X conditional on the combination of the
states of its parents, which is defined by the following equation:

PðX ¼ Si9T
ð1Þ
¼ Tð1Þp ,T ð2Þ n

¼ T2 ð Þ
p ,. . .,T n

¼ T Þ
j j Pj

ði¼ 1,2,. . .,k; pj ¼ 1,2,. . .,tj; j¼ 1,2,. . .,nÞ ð9Þ

When a node A in a Bayesian network has two parents B and C,
its probability conditional on B and C can be approximated by

PðA9B,CÞ ¼ aPðA9BÞPðA9CÞ ð10Þ

wPhere a is a normalizing constant to ensure that

aAAPða9B,CÞ ¼ 1.
According to Eq. (10), Eq. (9) can be simplified as

PðX ¼ Si9T
ð1Þ
¼ Tð1Þp , Tð2Þ n

¼ T2 ð Þ
p ,. . .,T n

¼ T Þ

Y j j Pj

n

¼ a P ð
ðX ¼ S ð Þ j

i9T
j Þ
¼ Tp Þj

j ¼ 1

ði¼ 1,2,. . .,k; pj ¼ 1,2,. . .,tj; j¼ 1,2,. . .,nÞ ð11Þ

where a is a normalizing constant to ensure that

Xk

P 2
ðX ¼ S Þ

i9T
ð1Þ
¼ Tð1Þ 2

p , Tð ¼ T ,. . .,TðnÞ ¼ Tn
j pj P Þ ¼ 1 ð12Þ

j
i ¼ 1

In cases for nodes with multiple parents as shown in Fig. 2, the
decomposition method greatly simplifies the CPT elicitation by
allowing conditioning to be done on each parent separately.
X6 Ignition due to Explosion energy 0.15 0.00001
X7 Ignition due to external heat from 0.2 0.00001

surrounding
X8 Electric spark as source of ignition 0.25 0.00001
X9 Pressure controller system failed 0.02 0.00031
X10 Safety release inadequate 0.0015 0.004264
4. Probability analysis of offshore fire scenarios

In this section, the probabilities of the most credible fire
scenarios are analyzed using the model mentioned above. Firstly,
Fig. 5. Fault tree of BLEVE follow
the most credible fire scenarios of four hazardous units are
analyzed using FT. Secondly, the FTs are converted to BNs and
the BNs are extended to incorporate HOFs. Thirdly, the probability
of the most credible fire scenarios and the importance degree
of each basic event are estimated according to BN inference.
The principal steps are shown in Fig. 3.

4.1. Fire scenarios of offshore production

Offshore production involves extracting the hydrocarbons
from offshore fields and transporting them from wells through
flow lines to a processing facility for separation (Elgsæer et al.,
2010). A simplified process flow diagram is presented in Fig. 4.

The sources of major hazards in offshore production are
flammable materials in the risers, slug catchers, separators and
high speed rotating equipments such as turbines, compressors
ed by fire for oil separator.



2048 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055
and export pumps (Khan and Amyotte, 2002). There are mainly
seven offshore units, such as oil pipeline, gas pipeline, separator,
pump, flash drum, drier and compressor. The fire and explosion
hazard of oil separator, condensate separator, flash drum and
compressor are larger than other units. So fire and explosion risk
of those four units should be assessed in the first place. The most
credible scenarios of these four units are identified as follows
(Khan et al., 2002):

 Scenario 1 (oil separator unit): Excessive pressure in oil
separator might cause boiling liquid expanding vapor explo-
sion (BLEVE). BLEVE would cause oil/gas releasing. If the
releasing oil/gas meets with ignition source, it generally
causes fire.



Table 4
Basic events of the fault tree for the most credible scenario of condensate
separator.

Basic event Failure frequency Important degree
Scenario 2 (condensate separator unit): The release of flam-
mable material from the condensate separator or its pipeline
might form vapor cloud. If the vapor cloud is ignited with
delay, it would generally cause vapor cloud explosion (VCE).
Thereafter, unreleased liquid left in the condensate separator
is liable to be ignited by external heat. This regularly leads to
pool fire.
(per year) of probability

X0 Release from valve 0.0455 0.03208
X1 Release from separator 2 0.0084 0.03999
X2 Release from pipeline 0.096 0.03999
X3 Excessive pressure in vessel 0.203 0.03999
Scenario 3 (compressor unit): The flammable gas is likely to
continuously release from compressor or its pipeline. If the
released gas is ignited along with releasing, it would cause a
jet fire. The jet fire is easy to bring about the failures of
other units.
release of chemical


X4 Ignition due to external heating 0.2 0.02191

from surroundings
X5 Ignition due to explosion energy 0.15 0.02335
X6 Ignition due to electric spark 0.25 0.02334
X7 Ignition due to explosion energy 0.2 0.02985
X8 Ignition due to fire heat load 0.25 0.03123
X9 Release from vessel after 0.05 0.09232

explosion
X10 Release from pipe after 0.1 0.09263

explosion
Scenario 4 (flash drum unit): Gas release from the flash drum
or its pipeline. Released gas might product a flammable vapor
cloud. The vapor cloud is liable to meet with ignition source
with delay, it will generally cause vapor cloud explosion.

4.2. Fault tree analysis

FTs of the most credible scenarios are built to analyze the causal
effect of fire escalation in this section. The failure probability data
Fig. 6. Fault tree of Vapor Cloud Explosion fo
of basic events were collected from Offshore Reliability Data
Handbook (Anon, 2002.), World-wide Offshore Accident Databases
(Veritec, 1998) and reports by HSE (Veritas, 2007).

The FT of scenario 1 is constructed as shown in Fig. 5. These
basic events, together with their important degree of probability
and yearly failure probability, are shown in Table 3. According to
the quantitative analysis of FT, the occurrence probability of
scenario 1 is 0.0000064.

In Fig. 6, the FT of scenario 2 (VCE followed by fire for
condensate separator) is built. The basic events, their important
degree of probability and yearly failure probability are shown in
Table 4. According to the inference of FT, the probability of
scenario 2 is 0.0139.

The inherent causes of jet fire for compressor unit are analyzed
and its FT is constructed in Fig. 7. The basic events together with
llowed by fire for condensate separator.



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2049

Fig. 7. Fault tree of jet fire for compressor unit.

Table 5
Basic events of the fault tree for the most credible scenario of compressor.

Basic event Failure frequency Important degree
(per year) of probability

X0 Release from joints of upstream 0.045 0.00865
pipeline

X1 Compressor completely failed 0.07 0.00865
causing release

X2 Release from impeller 0.1 0.00865
X3 Release from seal 0.12 0.00865
X4 Release from casing of 0.05 0.00865

compressor
X5 Release from upstream pipeline 0.048 0.00865
X6 Ignition due to explosion 0.15 0.01231

energy
X7 Ignition due to external heat 0.2 0.0124

from surrounding
X8 Ignition due to electric spark 0.25 0.01314
X9 Release from junction of pump 0.01 0.00865

and pipeline
X10 Release from rotor 0.06 0.00865
X11 Pump failed to operate and 0.15 0.00865

causing release
X12 Release from casing 0.2 0.00865
X13 Release from downstream 0.0065 0.00865

pipeline
X14 Release from joints of 0.09 0.00865

downstream pipeline
X15 Jet fire cause pipeline failed 0.01 0.50562

leading to release
X16 Jet fire cause vessel failed 0.005 0.54206

leading to release
their important degree of probability and yearly failure probabil-
ity are shown in Table 5. From the computing results, it can be
concluded that the probability of jet fire for the compressor unit is
0.00777.

The FT of scenario 4 (VCE with fire for flash drum unit) is
constructed as shown in Fig. 8. The basic events, their important
degree of probability and yearly failure probability are shown in
Table 6. According to the quantitative analysis results, the
occurrence probability of scenario 4 is 0.0882.

From the above computation results, it can be seen that
scenario 4 (VCE with fire for flash drum unit) is the most common
fire accident scenario. The next in order is scenario 2 (VCE
followed by fire for condensate separator). So the two units
should be paid more attention during safety design and security
monitoring.
4.3. Bayesian network inference

The discrete BNs corresponding to the above FTs are extended
to incorporate HOFs in Figs. 9–12. The computation of the
posterior marginal probabilities of root nodes given the scenario
occurrence, which is the advantage of BN, indicates the impor-
tance degree of basic events. The mutual information can calcu-
late quantitatively the effect of basic events to the top event.
Which basic events should be paid more attention and what
safety measures should be adopted can be induced based on the
sequence of importance degree.

In Fig. 9, the BN of scenario 1 is constructed. The occurrence
probability of scenario 1 is computed as 0.0572. According to
Bayesian inference, mutual information and the conditional
probability of each basic event given the fire happened are shown
in Table 7. The results reveal that the basic events X6, X8 and X7
contribute greatly to the occurrence of accident. Mutual informa-
tion and the posterior probability of each HOF given the fire
happened are shown in Table 8, from which, it can be concluded
that ‘‘not_obey_standards’’ and ‘‘improper_safety_organization’’
generally contribute mostly to the occurrence of scenario 1. Thus,
the probability of fire accidents would drastically be reduced by
controlling these important causes.

The BN of scenario 2 is mapped in Fig. 10. The occurrence
probability of scenario 2 is 0.0021. Mutual information and the
conditional probability of basic events given the fire happened are
shown in Table 9, from which, it can be seen that basic events X3,
X9 and X10 are the most crucial causes. Mutual information and
the marginal probabilities of HOFs given the fire happened are
shown in Table 10. It can be concluded that ‘‘not_obey_standards’’
and ‘‘not_comply_with_instruction’’ generally contribute mostly
to the occurrence of scenario 2. Controlling these crucial events
would reduce the probability of fire accident.

In Fig. 11, the BN of jet fire in compressor unit is con-
structed. The occurrence probability of jet fire in compressor
unit is estimated to be 0.102. The quantitative computation
results of BN inference are presented in Table 11. It is can be
seen that X6, X7, X11 and X12 have the larger contribution to
the probability of eventual fire accident. Mutual information
and the posterior probability of HOFs given the fire happened
are shown in Table 12, from which, it can be concluded that
‘‘not_comply_with_instruction’’ and ‘‘inefficient_emergency_
plan’’ generally contribute mostly to the occurrence of scenario
3. This analysis concludes that attention should be focused
on X6, X7, X11, X12, ‘‘not_comply_with_instruction’’ and



2050 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055

Fig. 8. Fault tree of Vapor Cloud Explosion with fire for flash drum.

Table 6
Basic events of the fault tree for the most credible scenario of flash drum.

Basic event Failure frequency Important degree
(per year) of probability

X1 Release from other units 0.2 0.14778
X2 Ignition due to electric spark or external heat from surrounding 0.35 0.15624
X3 Release from joint of gas pipeline 0.065 0.51895
X4 Release from gas pipeline 0.0045 0.51895
X5 Release from upstream pipeline 0.003 0.51895
X6 Release from joints of upstream pipeline 0.045 0.51895
X7 Release from downstream pipeline 0.00003 0.51895
X8 Release from joints of downstream pipeline 0.045 0.39168
X9 High-pressure in vessel causing rupture of vessel 0.003 0.5221
X10 Release from joints or flange 0.0075 0.51895
‘‘inefficient_emergency_plan’’ as these six events are most
likely to cause this accident.

The BN of scenario 4 is built in Fig. 12. The occurrence
probability of scenario 4 is computed as 0.0221 per year. Mutual
information and the conditional probability of basic events given
fire happened are shown in Table 13. From Table 14, it can be
concluded that basic events X1, X2 and X3 have the largest
contribution to the probability of the eventual accident. Mutual
information and the marginal probabilities of each HOF given the
fire happened are shown in Table 14. It can be concluded that
‘‘inefficient_emergency_plan’’ and ‘‘not_comply_with_instruc-
tion’’ generally contribute mostly to the occurrence of scenario
2. Controlling these crucial events would reduce the probability of
fire accident.

4.4. Discussion

From Table 7 to 14, it can be seen that the occurrence
probability of scenario 3 is the largest, incorporating the effect
of HOFs. We can also see that the importance ranking based on
posterior probability is different from the one based on prior
probability. In fact, for diagnostic purposes, it is more suitable to
consider the posterior joint probability given the fire scenario
happened as evidence. Thus, the most probable causes, which
have the larger contribution to the probability of the eventual
accident, are really identified. Controlling these crucial causal
events would reduce the probability of eventual accident con-
siderably. Some safety measures associated with these crucial
causal events are proposed as follows:
1.
 For the oil separator unit, the most important safety measure is
to install appropriate safety valve, pressure controller and to
ensure that they can work efficiently. The second important
measure is installing flow controller to prevent excess flow in
separator. The most important HOF is obeying safety standards.
2.
 For the condensate separator unit, it is crucial to prevent
release by controlling the pressure and to detect immediately
the release by installing efficient detectors. At the same time,
some measures and special material should be adopted to
prevent electric spark, such as insulator, ceramic wool and
silicone resin coat. The most important HOF is obeying safety
standards.



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2051

Fig. 9. Bayesian network of BLEVE followed by fire for oil separator.

Fig. 10. Bayesian network of Vapor Cloud Explosion followed by fire for condensate separator.
3.
 For the compressor unit, it is most important to take measures
to protect the pipeline and vessel from fire heat, such as
fireproof coatings and installing water spray system. It is also
important to take measures to prevent electric spark. The most
important HOF is complying with instructions.
4.
 For the flash drum unit, the most important safety measure
is to prevent release from pipeline, especially for the joint of
gas pipeline. Measures of eliminating the ignition source
are also important. Such as adopting explosion proof electric
apparatus, installing fire detection, alarm and water spray
system. The most important HOF is also complying with
instructions.
5. Conclusions

In this paper, the probability of offshore fire is analyzed by
integrating FT with BN. Firstly the most credible scenarios of



2052 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055

Fig. 11. Bayesian network of jet fire for compressor unit.

Fig. 12. Bayesian network of vapor cloud explosion with fire for flash drum unit.
offshore fire are modeled by FT, which provides a systematic
guideline for the construction of BN. This is then followed by
converting FT into BN. Subsequently, the BN is extended to
incorporate the effect of HOFs to fire scenario and provide a more
precise quantitative links between the event nodes. At last, the
probability of the most credible offshore fire scenarios and the
importance degrees of all basic events are estimated according to
historical data and BN inference. Based on the above analysis, the
corresponding safety measures are proposed to prevent the
accidents reoccurring.

In this paper, Fuzzy AHP helps reduce the subjective biases by
avoiding the need to spell out explicit probability values for the
variables’ states. The decomposition method simplifies greatly the
CPT elicitation by allowing conditioning to be done on each
parent separately. The new model integrates the power of FT for
modeling deterministic causal paths with the flexibility of BN for



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2053

Table 7
Conditional probability of basic event comparing with FT results for oil separator.

Important degree Prior fail. P(TE/X) Posterior fail. Mutual Importance
of probability Prob. P(X) Prob. P(X/TE) information degree sequence

X0 0.000009 0.0111 1.47E05 0.0113 2.637e007 9
X1 0.000018 0.095 1.47E05 0.0971 2.266e006 5
X2 0.000018 0.04 1.47E05 0.0409 8.69e007 7
X3 0.000018 0.125 1.47E05 0.128 3.067e006 4
X4 0.000018 0.0515 1.47E05 0.0528 1.166e006 6
X5 0.000018 0.038 1.47E05 0.0388 7.988e007 8
X6 0.00001 0.15 9.42E06 0.206 0.001002 1
X7 0.00001 0.2 9.42E06 0.256 0.0008217 3
X8 0.00001 0.25 9.42E06 0.316 0.0009725 2
X9 0.00031 0.02 0.000231 0.0203 1.409e007 10
X10 0.004264 0.0015 0.003078 0.0015 1.409e007 10

Table 8
Mutual information and Importance degree of HOFs in oil separator.

Basic event Prior Posterior Mutual Importance
probability (%) probability (%) information degree

not_obey_standards 14.87 23 0.002006 1
improper_safety_organization 9.54 14 0.00089 2
deficient_maintenance 8.24 10.6 0.0003039 4
wrong_risk_assessment 24.17 28.5 0.0004395 3
Not_hear_alarm 6.48 6.58 7.851e007 9
Not_properly_identify_alarm 8.32 8.39 2.535e007 10
Alarm_panic 12.87 12.9 1.462e007 11
no_check_rules 5.31 5.49 2.645e006 6
inefficient_emergency_plan 8.62 21.1 6.588e005 5
not_comply_with_instruction 19.54 8.84 2.637e006 7
deficient_training 4.87 5 1.636e006 8

Table 9
Conditional probability of basic event comparing with FT results for condensate separator.

Important degree Prior fail. P(TE/X) Posterior fail. Mutual Importance
of probability Prob. P(X) Prob. P(X/TE) information degree sequence

X0 0.03208 0.0455 0.02842 0.143082 0.0009452 10
X1 0.03999 0.0084 0.02842 0.026415 0.0001642 11
X2 0.03999 0.096 0.02842 0.301887 0.002186 6
X3 0.03999 0.203 0.02842 0.638365 0.005878 2
X4 0.02191 0.2 0.018444 0.408163 0.001487 8
X5 0.02335 0.15 0.018444 0.306122 0.001023 9
X6 0.02334 0.25 0.018444 0.510204 0.002046 7
X7 0.02985 0.2 0.0225939 0.5 0.002944 5
X8 0.03123 0.25 0.0225939 0.625 0.004123 4
X9 0.09232 0.05 0.062328 0.344828 0.00562 3
X10 0.09263 0.1 0.062328 0.689655 0.01329 1

Table 10
Mutual information and Importance degree of HOFs in condensate separator.

Basic event Prior Posterior Mutual Importance
probability (%) probability (%) information degree

no_detect_rules 1.23 1.31 1.4e006 7
not_comply_with_instruction 29.9 87.3 0.00214 1
inefficient _emergency_plan 8.78 11.8 1.52e005 3
deficient_training 4.58 6.65 1.29e005 4
improper_safety_organization 9.21 11.5 8.86e006 5
not_obey_standards 15.4 19.9 2.15e005 2
deficient _maintenance 7.82 9.75 7.13e006 6
modeling non-deterministic cause–effect relationships. It can also
be used for predicting mutual information and the marginal
posterior probabilities of each basic event, which is often used
to identify the criticality of basic events. But the failure
probability data of the basic events are likely to vary with time
and individual companies. So these generic data need to be
replaced with process-specific (time-dependent) data and be
modeled using probability distributions to account for the



2054 Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055

Table 11
Conditional probability of basic event comparing with FT results for compressor.

Important degree Prior fail. P(TE/X) Posterior fail. Mutual Importance
of probability Prob. P(X) Prob. P(X/TE) information degree sequence

X0 0.00865 0.045 0.007324 0.0743 0.001412 11
X1 0.00865 0.07 0.007318 0.114 0.002122 8
X2 0.00865 0.1 0.007344 0.163 0.003152 6
X3 0.00865 0.12 0.007329 0.195 0.003885 5
X4 0.00865 0.05 0.007326 0.325 0.001478 10
X5 0.00865 0.048 0.000453 0.005 8.951e005 15
X6 0.01231 0.15 0.009248 0.693 0.03732 2
X7 0.0124 0.2 0.009248 0.653 0.04529 1
X8 0.01314 0.25 0.009248 0.865 0.0008877 12
X9 0.00865 0.01 0.073439 0.653 0.0002782 13
X10 0.00865 0.06 0.007329 0.0975 0.001773 9
X11 0.00865 0.15 0.007314 0.244 0.005 4
X12 0.00865 0.2 0.007321 0.325 0.007179 3
X13 0.00865 0.0065 0.07323 0.0106 0.000186 14
X14 0.00865 0.09 0.007304 0.147 0.002856 7

Table 12
Mutual information and Importance degree of HOFs in compressor unit.

Basic event Prior Posterior Mutual Importance
probability (%) probability (%) information degree

no_check_rules 5.79 6.65 0.0001072 4
inefficient_emergency_plan 7.85 14.3 0.004003 2
deficient_training 5.76 11 0.003436 3
not_comply_with_instruction 19.12 69 0.1014 1
not_obey_standards 14.87 15.5 2.822e005 5
improper_safety_organization 9.54 9.9 1.251e005 6
deficient_maintenance 8.24 8.48 6.195e006 7
wrong_risk_assessment 24.17 24.6 8.6e006 8

Table 13
Conditional probability of basic event comparing with FT results for flash drum.

Important degree Prior fail. P(TE/X) Posterior fail. Mutual Importance
of probability Prob. P(X) Prob. P(X/TE) information degree sequence

X1 0.14778 0.2 0.16276 0.6 0.0134 1
X2 0.15624 0.35 0.16276 0.675 0.007606 2
X3 0.51895 0.065 0.48 0.242 0.005621 3
X4 0.51895 0.0045 0.48 0.0168 0.0003486 7
X5 0.51895 0.003 0.48 0.0104 0.0001981 9
X6 0.51895 0.045 0.48 0.157 0.003191 4
X7 0.51895 0.0003 0.48 0.001 1.974e005 10
X8 0.39168 0.045 0.48 0.157 0.003191 4
X9 0.5221 0.003 0.48 0.0112 0.0002311 8
X10 0.51895 0.0075 0.48 0.0279 0.0005821 6

Table 14
Mutual information and Importance degree of HOFs in flash drum unit.

Basic event Prior Posterior Mutual Importance
probability %) probability (%) information degree

not_obey_standards 14.87 15.3 1.331e006 6
improper_safety_organization 9.54 10.2 6.58e007 9
deficient_maintenance 8.24 8.14 4.685e007 11
wrong_risk_assessment 24.17 25.3 6.584e007 8
Not_hear_alarm 6.48 6.19 2.511e006 5
Not_properly_identify_alarm 8.32 8.12 9.105e007 7
Alarm_panic 12.87 12.7 4.886e007 10
no_check_rules 5.31 4.76 1.084e005 3
inefficient_emergency_plan 8.62 7.88 1.236e005 2
not_comply_with_instruction 19.54 14.8 0.0002613 1
deficient_training 4.87 4.43 7.599e006 4



Y.F. Wang et al. / Ocean Engineering 38 (2011) 2042–2055 2055
uncertainties of risk estimates in future work. Furthermore, the
offshore production is too complicated to be represented using a
single fault tree. How to represent the whole offshore production
system adequately needs to be further researched.
Acknowledgments

This paper is part of Singapore-Poland Joint Research Project
entitled ‘‘Safety and Reliability of Complex Industrial System and
Process’’ (SERC grant number 0721340050) granted by Singapore’s
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (AnSTAR) and
Poland’s Ministry of Science and Higher Education (MSHE).

References

Anon, 2002. Offshore Reliability Data Handbook, 4th ed. DNV, Norway.
Bobbio, L., Portinale, M., Minichino, E., Ciancamerla, 2001. Improving the analysis

of dependable systems by mapping fault trees into Bayesian Networks.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 71, 249–260.

Chang, D.Y., 1996. Applications of the extent analysis method on fuzzy AHP.
European Journal of Operational Research 95, 649–655.

Chen, H.H., Lee, A.H.I., Tong, Y.H., 2007. Prioritization and operations NPD mix in a
network with strategic partners under uncertainty. Expert Systems with
Applications 33, 337–346.

Cheng, H., Hadjisophocleous, G.V., 2009. The modeling of fire spread in buildings
by Bayesian network. Fire Safety Journal 44, 901–908.

Chin, K.S., Tang, D.W., Yang, J.B., Wong, S.Y., Wang, H.W., 2009. Assessing new
product development project risk by Bayesian network with a systematic
probability generation methodology. Expert Systems with Applications 36,
9879–9890.

Dutuit, Y., Rauzy, A., 2004. Approximate estimation of system reliability via fault
trees. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 87, 163–172.

Eleye-Datubo, A.G., Wall, A., Wang, J., 2008. Marine and offshore safety assessment
by incorporative risk modeling in a Fuzzy-Bayesian Network of an induced
mass assignment paradigm. Risk Analysis 28, 95–112.

Elgsæer, S.M., Slupphaug, O., Johansen, T.A., 2010. A structured approach to
optimizing offshore oil and gas production with uncertain models. Computers
and Chemical Engineering 34 (2010), 163–176.

Fontana, M. Maag, T., 2004. Fire risk assessment based on Bayesian networks.
In: Proceedings of the Fifth SFPE Conference on Performance-Based Codes and
Fire Safety Design Methods, pp. 238–249.

Fox, C.R., Clemen, R.T., 2005. Subjective probability assessment in decision
analysis: partition dependence and bias toward the ignorance prior. Manage-
ment Science 51, 1417–1432.

Grabowski, M., You, Z.Y., Zhou, Z., Song, H.W., Steward, M., Steward, B., 2009.
Human and organizational error data challenges in complex large-scale
system. Safety Science 47, 1185–1194.

Haghighi, M., Divandari, A., Keimasi, M., 2010. The impact of 3D e-readiness on
e-banking development in Iran: a fuzzy AHP analysis. Expert Systems with
Applications 37, 4084–4093.

Hanea, D., Ale, B., 2009. Risk of human fatality in building fires: a decision tool
using Bayesian networks. Fire Safety Journal 44, 704–710.

Health and Safety Executive, 1992. Offshore installations (safety case) regulations.
HMSO, London.

Health and Safety Executive, 2007. Offshore Accident/Incident Statistics Reports.
London, UK.
Huang, H.Z., Tong, X., Zuo, M.J., 2004. Posbist fault tree analysis of coherent
systems. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 84 (2004), 141–148.

Hurdle, E.E., Bartlet, L.M., Andrews, J.D., 2007.System fault diagnostics using fault
tree analysis. In: Proceedings of the IMECHE, Part O: Journal of Risk and
Reliability, Loughborough, U.K., p. 221.

Jensen, F.V., 1996. An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. Springer, New York.
Jensen, F.V., 2001. Bayesian Networks and Decision Graphs. Springer, New York.
Khakzad, N., Khan, F.I., Amyotte, P., 2011. Safety analysis in process facilities:

comparison of fault tree and Bayesian network approaches. Reliability Engi-
neering and System Safety 96, 925–932.

Khan, F.I., Amyotte, P.R., 2002. Inherent safety in offshore oil and gas activities:
a review of the present status and future directions. Journal of Loss Prevention
in the Process Industries 15, 279–289.

Khan, F.I., Sadiq, R., Husain, T., 2002. Risk-based process safety assessment and
control measures design for offshore process facilities. Journal of Hazardous
Materials A94, 1–36.

Lee, S.K., Mogi, G., Kim, J.W., Gim, B.J., 2008. A fuzzy analytic hierarchy process
approach for assessing national competitiveness in the hydrogen technology
sector. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 33, 6840–6848.

Liang, X.F., Yi, H., Zhang, Y.F., Li, D., 2010. Reliability and safety analysis of an
underwater dry maintenance cabin. Ocean Engineering 37, 268–276.

Magdy, G.A., David, D., 2001. Evaluating investments in advanced manufacturing
technology: a fuzzy set theory approach. The British Accounting Review 33,
455–489.

Mohaghegh, Z., Kazemi, R., Mosleh, A., 2009. Incorporating organizational factors
into Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) of complex socio-technical systems:
a hybrid technique formalization. Reliability Engineering and System Safety
94, 1000–1018.

Pedrali, M., Cagno, E., Trucco, P., Ruggeri, F., 2004. Towards the integration of
human and organizational factors in risk assessment. A case study for the
marine industry, 2nd International Asranet Colloquium, Barcelona, Spain.

Rajabally, E., Sen, P., Whittle, S., Dalton, J., 2004. Aids to Bayesian belief network
construction. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International IEEE Conference
‘Intelligent Systems’, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
Varna, Bulgaria.

Røed, W., Mosleh, A., Vinnem, J.E., Aven, T., 2009. On the use of the hybrid causal
logic method in offshore risk analysis. Reliability Engineering and System
Safety 94, 445–455.

Sandrea, I., Sandrea, R., 2007. Growth expected in global crude oil supply. Oil and
Gas Journal 105 (10), 34.

Shijun, Q., Agogino, A.M., Song, S., Wu, J., Sitarama, S., 2001. A fusion of Bayesian
and fuzzy analysis for print faults diagnosis. In: Proceedings of the 16th
Conference on Computers and Their Applications, pp. 229–232.

Skogdalen, J.E., Vinnem, J.E., 2011. Quantitative risk analysis offshore—human and
organizational factors. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 96, 468–479.

Soares, C.G., 2000. Probabilistic modelling of offshore fires. Fire Safety Journal 34,
25–45.

Trucco, P., Cagno, E., Ruggeri, F., 2008. A Bayesian Belief Network modeling of
organizational factors in risk analysis: a case study in maritime transportation.
Reliability Engineering and System Safety 93 (6), 823–834.

Veritas, D.N., 2007. Accident statistics for Fixed Offshore Units on the UK
Continental Shelf 19802005. Statistics Reports, HSE, Norway.

Veritec, 1998. World-wide Offshore Accident Databank, Oslo, Norway.
Vesely, W.E., Goldberg, F.F., 1981. Fault Tree Handbook. U.S.N.R. Commission,

Washington, D.C.
Volkanovski, A., Cepin, M., Mavko, B., 2009. Application of the fault tree analysis

for assessment of power system reliability. Reliability Engineering and System
Safety 94, 1116–1127.

Williamson, J., 2005. Bayesian Nets and Causality: Philosophical and Computa-
tional Foundations. Oxford University Press, New York.



J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Wind Engineering
and Industrial Aerodynamics
n Corr
E-m

http://d
0167-61
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jweia
Floating offshore wind turbine reliability analysis based on system
grading and dynamic FTA
Xu Zhang a, Liping Sun a, Hai Sun a,b,n, Qiang Guo a, Xu Bai c
a Harbin Engineering University, China
b Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering, University of Michigan, USA
c School of Naval Architecture & Ocean Engineering, Jiangsu University of Science and Technology, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China
a r t i c l e i n f o

Article history:
Received 29 April 2015
Received in revised form
13 April 2016
Accepted 19 April 2016

Keywords:
Floating offshore wind turbine
Reliability analysis
Dynamic fault tree analysis
System grading
esponding author at: Harbin Engineering Uni
ail address: sunhai2009@gmail.com (H. Sun).

x.doi.org/10.1016/j.jweia.2016.04.005
05/& 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
a b s t r a c t

Currently, floating offshore wind power acts as a new form of marine renewable energy, attracting much
attention all over the world. Due to constraints of technology and cost, floating wind turbines are still at
the stage of preliminary trials. Reliability analysis on floating wind turbines is essential and urgent for
solving the issues caused by high cost and challenges in searching failure causes. Primarily, this research
proposes the scientific, systematic grading of floating wind power equipment system based upon its
structure and function, providing with explicit internal relation of system and the precondition of failure
modes analysis. Dynamic fault tree analysis on floating wind turbines is conducted to discuss sequen-
tially dependent failures and redundancy failures. Furthermore, failure rates of relevant offshore struc-
tures are searched according to previous studies, databases and reports. Different modules of floating
wind turbines take respective proper failure cases for references. The overall reliability results of floating
wind turbines has been achieved. The research contributes to designing, construction and maintenance
of floating wind turbines to control investment and enlarge economic benefits.

& 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

Offshore wind power installation is predicted to occupy
increasing capacity in clean energy industry, which takes the
advantage of space availability, less problems with public accep-
tance and more steady winds (Pinson et al., 2008). Large-scale
wind farms have been established in many countries, such as
Spanish, U.S., Denmark, Germany and China. In Europe, the wind
energy capacity is expected to grow up to more than 130 GW
within the next decades (Dörenkämper et al., 2015). Compared
with fixed wind turbines, the concept of Floating Offshore Wind
Turbine (FOWT) was firstly adopted in the 1990s.

Reliability analysis on FOWT is necessary. On one hand, FOWT
is usually designed to operate at deep sea, where the system's
maintenance costs too much and is difficult to be implemented
(Tong, 1998; Galanis and Christophides, 1990; Cockerill et al.,
2001). FOWT's downtime and maintaining cost will be decreased
once reliability promotion is processed with the assumption of
invariant devices’ cost. On the other hand, the conventional design
of FOWT is unreliable based on demands of structural strength and
reliability analysis is merely referred in this area. The primary
versity, China.
reasons that limit the reliability through the strength based
designing are related to the following issues: (i) deviation exists in
prediction of extreme waves in the simulation because there is
little methods addressing strong stochastic characteristics of
extreme waves; (ii) motion and stress responses of FOWT's
mooring system are evaluated with uncertainty due to non-linear
effects causing by the motion of mooring line is influenced by
ocean environment, and floating bodies appears obvious non-
linearity (Webster, 2009; Dong and Sang, 2015; Agarwal and
Manuel, 2011; Marino et al., 2011a, 2011b, 2013; Hieu et al., 2013;
Kareem, 1983).

Reliability of wind turbine (WT) on land has been analyzed for
many years. Arabian-Hoseynabadi et al. (2010) carried out a
comprehensive Failure Modes and Effect Analysis (FMEA) on a
complete 2 MW WT, and identified the ten top most frequent
Failure Modes and Root Causes. Márquez et al. (2012) described
the different maintenance strategies, condition monitoring tech-
niques and methods of wind turbines. They analyzed failure
modes of wind turbine qualitatively via a Fault Tree Analysis (FTA).
Pérez et al. (2013) compared failures rates and downtimes repor-
ted independently for different types of WTs across the world, and
concluded that failure rates vary lightly in different studies for
some elements, such as hubs, generators, sensors, brakes, systems
and structure. Both Ribrant and Bertling (2007) and Pérez et al.



22 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33
(2013) summarized that gearbox's downtime per failure is high in
comparison to other components in WTs, and larger WTs tend to
appear more failures than smaller ones. Chou and Tu (2011)
reviewed the historical accidents of tower collapse worldwide and
their causes.

Precious efforts on reliability analysis on offshore WTs have
been developed. Dai et al. (2013) concluded that collisions
between turbines and service vessels even at low speed might
cause structural damage to the turbines. Bai et al. (2012) presented
the risk assessment of offshore wind turbine in transportation and
installation using Risk Priority Number method. Hameed et al.
(2011) outlined and categorized potential challenges and issues
pertaining to the reliability and maintainability data collection of
offshore wind turbines. Due to less experience with offshore WTs,
it is necessary to collect on-hand information involving the
existing models to ensure reliability.

Floating wind power equipment has attracted increasing
attention in terms of cost and safety optimal. Laura and Vicente
(2014) put forward that the main costs of all the types of floating
platforms are related to manufacturing, maintenance and instal-
lation. Myhr et al. (2014) presented a comprehensive analysis and
comparison of the levelised cost of energy (LCOE) for several types
of FOWT concepts. There are also some papers focusing on the
dynamic performances and optimal design of FOWTs (Zhang et al.,
2013).

Nevertheless, there has been little reported research on
dynamic reliability evaluation for a complex system like FOWT. So
the reliability condition has not been acknowledged and little
comprehensive research on FOWT failure diagnosis and prog-
nostics has been conducted. So effective suggestions during
design, construction and operation phases for FOWT system are
needed through the systematic reliability analysis. However, large-
scale and complexity of technology has raised challenges in
reliability evaluation of FOWT system. These challenges are dis-
played as follows. (i) Complicated structural composition and
operating principle, which restricts the efficiency of failure locat-
ing of FOWT system. (ii) Dynamic characteristics of failure modes
should be considered, such as redundancy parts and sequentially
dependent faults. (iii) Insufficient failure data. Failure data can
hardly be gathered in the prototype testing stage. And the main
innovative features introduced in this paper are the approaches to
addressing the challenges for reliability analysis for FOWT system
as a whole.

System grading provides a disciplined, applicable approach to
clarify system composition. Interactive grading information
deduced from the two perspectives assists efficient failure loca-
tion. Thus the reliability analysis of FOWT based on system grading
is feasible and issue (i) can be solved.

Qualitative FTA is used in future research on fault diagnosis
(Márquez et al., 2012). FTA is an effective, promising methodology
for analyzing reliability and safety. Which makes it possible to
search for failure modes and weak links. Quantitative assessment
is conducted by evaluating the occurrence probability of the
minimal cut sets, therefore deducing the probability of occurrence
of the top event according to the logical relationship. And it allows
indication of system reliability at operational time and deriving
maintenance references. FTA is an alternative technique for large-
scale systems, such like FOWT. However, conventional static FTA is
inadequate to describe the dynamic relations between failure
events. Bechta Dugan et al. (1992) and Dugan et al. (2015)
imported dynamic logic gates into fault trees to address sequence
failure, dependent failure and redundancy allocation. So dynamic
FTA is an optional methodology to capture the dynamic behaviors
of FOWT system's failure mechanisms (Bechta Dugan et al., 1992).

Historical failure data of basic events is required as an abso-
lutely necessary element to implement system reliability analysis
via dynamic quantitative FTA. However, as for FOWT systems,
inadequate data makes the reliability analysis difficult. It can be
noted that there are few variations from floating WTs devices to
on-land ones. Thus, failure rates of on-land WTs are summarized
by reviewing Refs. Arabian-Hoseynabadi et al. (2010), Márquez
et al. (2012), Pérez et al. (2013), Ribrant and Bertling (2007); Chou
and Tu (2011); Dai et al., 2013), Hai et al., (2011) and Bai et al.
(2012), relevant reports (GWEC (Global wind report annual market
update, 2013)) and database (OREDA–Offshore Reliability Data
Handbook (OREDA, 2009)), which supply references for FOWTs.
Considering influences of marine environment conditions on
FOWTs, the derived WT's failure probability based on on-land data
should be modified. Meanwhile, failure data of FOWTs’ floating
foundation and mooring system can be evaluated by taking failure
cases of other offshore structures as reference. Relevant failure
data is achieved through the database of OREDA.
2. FOWT system grading

A FOWT system consists of many various modules, which are
either independent or auxiliary to each other to guarantee normal
operation of the whole system. It is difficult to obtain independent,
proper failure modes due to the intersections among modules.
Convenient location of failure causes and efficient, authentic
reliability analysis will be achieved if FOWT system's modules are
classified reasonably in advance. Previous work has been con-
centrated on studies of onshore WTs, but little work of system
grading for FOWT has been addressed. This work is expected to
propose systematic FOWT system grading in multi-dimension.

According to the structural levels and functional relevance, the
FOWT system is respectively divided into subsystems and equip-
ment. Thus system levels and the correlation between various
modules are displayed as follows.

2.1. Function based system grading

Fig. 1 illustrates the operating principles of the FOWT, based
upon which the resulting functional modules of the FOWT are
determined as energy receiving/transmission/conversion system,
control system, support system and auxiliary system, as shown in
Fig. 2.

2.1.1. Energy receiving/transmission/conversion system
The marine environment makes blades vulnerable to salt-spray

corrosion and vibration damage. Serious damage can result in
voids, cracks and even fracture. For long time of operation without
timely detection and maintenance, blades will face the risk of
quality degradation. The hub failure results mostly from fatigue,
wear and imbalance.

The major risks for transmission system are vibration, main
shaft/ bolt damage, high-speed coupling damage, shafting bearing,
and overwarming. For gearbox, failure reasons can be identified at
gear fatigue/fracture, bearing failure, shaft bending, cooling system
failure, etc. The generator failure is generally attributable to
abnormal speed, high temperature, bearing damage, stator insu-
lation damage, inter turn short circuit, collector ring fault etc. The
failures of transmission system and generator may decrease the
efficiency of generator, in which circumstances, the profits
obtained by power enterprises are likely to be lower than their
investments.

2.1.2. Control system
The control system is the most versatile part of the FOWT. Its

primary failure causes are feedback error, application error, time
error, record error, the battery failure, temperature control cabinet



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 23

Wind
Generating 

Drive system Braking system Transformer 

Pitching Speed control
Rotor system Power 

networks

Wind speed 
& wind Power measurement

Supporting foundation and direction
mooring system

Control system

Aerovane

Yawing

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of FOWT.
failure and sensor failure. Any communication link failure in the
loop of control system will lead the system running into errors.

2.1.3. Support system
Support system involves mechanical supporting parts, for

instance, the nacelle, chassis, tower, floating foundation and
mooring system. Its main failure modes of the tower and floating
foundation can be shown as: fatigue, corrosion, welding cracking
and hull collision. Upon extreme sea conditions, the floating
foundation, the mooring lines and the tower vibrates intensely to
make the WT unstable. And even severe accidents may occur, for
example, tower fracture, mooring system failure and blades
damage.

2.1.4. Auxiliary system
Auxiliary system serves as a supporting role for specific com-

ponents or modules. When lubrication system or cooling system is
broken down, overwarming of gears, short circuits, and even fires
will happen. If the lightning protection module fails, components
of FOWT system may be burned out by lightning, which can cause
serious economic losses. Hydraulic system's failure modes are
primarily hydraulic pressure error, temperature error, timeout of
hydraulic pump, low oil level, motor failure, pressure of high-
speed braking failure and increasing main force of filter. Personnel
auxiliary devices refer to workbench, ladder/safety chain, lighting
devices, etc. These devices’ failures may delay the time for
detection and maintenance.

2.2. Structure based system grading

For reliability analysis, the system grading based on structure
ensures spatial integrity. Thus it is easy to keep the continuity of
the structure and determine the failure causes. In our case, FOWT
system is divided into four parts: wind turbine, tower, floating
foundation and mooring system, as shown in Fig. 3.

2.2.1. Wind turbine
Variable pitch WTs are selected for case study in this research.

Three blades with their respective drivers adjust pitch to obtain
maximum power. It is mainly consisted of rotor system, nacelle
and yawing, among which, the internal structures of nacelle are
crucial and complicated, which have a high failure rate. In the
nacelle, control system, blades/ pitching and gear's failure rates are
the three highest ones (Pérez et al., 2013). In addition, the possible
failures of the wind turbine can be described as rotor system
failure, bearing or shaft failure, gearbox failure, braking system
failure, generator failure, sensors failure, yawing failure, drive train
failure, control system failure, hydraulics failure, structural failure
and electrical failure.

2.2.2. Tower
Tower is used to support the WT. In addition to the supporting

function, tower is also expected to resist force and moment pro-
duced by the wind load. The failure of tower occurs mainly at the
flange bolt and weld area, caused by fatigue loads. Meanwhile,
failure modes like hit by blades, the braking system failed, strong
wind/ wave, lighting strike, ice storm, Storm, and Material fatigue
also exist under the effect of extreme loads. Severe consequences,
such as tower collapses, will result in sinking of the WT and ser-
ious losses. Detailed investigation of failure analysis and risk
management of collapsed large WT tower can be seen from Chou
and Tu (2011).

2.2.3. Floating foundation structure and mooring system
Floating foundation is the most important support compo-

nents. Considering that different types of floating foundations
have corresponding mooring systems, the two modules are illu-
strated as a whole section as follows.

Floating foundation structure is similar to marine oil and gas
platforms. The main types are Spar, Tension Leg Platform (TLP) and
Semi-platform. The entire risk of Semi- platform FOWT is the
lowest of the three types of floating platforms. When the fixed
anchor fails, the platform is likely to keep afloat. The operating risk
of Spar is the lowest. Spar's gravity center is much lower than
buoyant center, which helps it survive even when the setting of
anchor is damaged. Although the risk of stranding and running on
rocks exists, Spar is unlikely overall overturned. For TLP platform,
if it uses solid tube tendon and vertical anchor, its risk will stay at a
low level at the time of installation and extreme weather. Semi-
floating foundation is chosen after a comprehensive consideration.



24 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33

Blades
Energy acceptor Hub

Spindle system
Energy Transmission
receiving/ system Gearbox

transmission/
conversion Generator
system Generator system

Transformer
Signal acquisition Converter
and processing

Maximum power Yawing system
point tracking control Automatic untwist control

Braking system Pitching system
Aerodynamic braking

Control Variable speed control
system Mechanical braking

Local /remote
supervisory control
Safety protection Safety chian

Floating system control
offshore Paralleling in and Braking
wind paralleling off control
turbine Gearbox lubrication
system Hydraulics

Yawing driven
Auxiliary Lubrication
system Workbench

Personnel
demand Lighting

Lightning Ladder stand and Catenary Mooring lines/
shielding safety chains tension legs

Cooling system Permanent ballast tank
Nacelle cover Temporary buoyancy

Nacelle tank
Chasis

Anchor
Tower Spar type Diagonal bracing

Column
Support
system Semi- Mooring lines

submersible Anchor
type

Floating Cylindrical buoy
structure and Rectangular buoy
mooring system

Suction anchor/pile
TLP type foundation anchor

Tension legs

Fig. 2. Functional system grading.
Accordingly, its possible failures are pillar damage, corrosion of
pipe joint, weld defect of pipe joint, fatigue of pipe joint, insuffi-
cient detection, typhoon, crash of planes, biological collision and
capsize.

Floating foundations fracture results in the unbalance of upper
structures. Floating foundation is tightly relative to mooring sys-
tem. As for the mooring system for Semi-floating foundation, the
possible failures are the limit state of sea, corrosion of fairlead,
fatigue of fairlead, mooring lines broken, unsatisfied sea state for
operation, insufficient emergency measures for abrupt scenes and
analysis and calculation fault. When either of the two modules
fails, the system will be in jeopardy.
3. Dynamic fault tree (DFT)

DFT analysis has been one of the most promising techniques for
the reliability evaluation of complex dependable systems (Manno
et al., 2014). For a complex system like FOWT, dynamic behaviors
like sequence failure of events, redundancy equipment and trig-
gered failure of other events. However, conventional fault tree is
unable to describe the dynamic behaviors leading to deviation
from the real conditions. So when this paper conducts reliability
analysis of FOWT system, dynamic FT is introduced to acquire
more credible results than static FT.

On the basis of the original static FT (SFT) technique, the con-
struction of a DFT is a TOP-DOWN exercise where a Top Event (TE)
is related to its basic causes (i.e., basic events, BEs) by logical gates.
BEs are the leaves of the Fault Tree and represent the elementary
events, not requiring further investigations. The differences of DFT
from SFT appear when dynamic logic gates are used.

When the failure data of BEs are given, the failure probability of
the TE can be derived by mathematical theory. According to the
logic relations among the events in a fault tree, minimum cut sets
can be obtained. Minimum cut sets stand for the minimum sets of
all basic events triggering occurrence of the top event. Based on
the assumption of none repeated basic events, all the cut sets are



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 25

Blades Lightning shielding
Rotor Blade tip turbulator
system

Hub Pitching system Shafting

Internal structure Gearbox
Wind
turbine Acoustic lining/lighting/ventilation Generator

Nacelle Hydraulics
Nacelle cover and chasis

Lubrication
Aerovane

Control cabinet
Fairing

Cooling system
Minor crane

Yawing Controller
Electric cables Power amplifier

Floating Internal Workbench Counter

offshore structure Central control cabinet Brakes
wind Tower

Lighting Motor
turbine
system Converter Bearing

Tower Upper, middle, bottom parts
cover Flanges

Permanent ballast tank
Floating Spar type Temporary buoyancy tank
foundation

Semi-submersible type Diagonal bracing
Column

TLP type Cylindrical buoy
Rectangular buoy

Leadfair
Anchor Chain

Wire
Mooring Mooring lines Gravity
system Anchors shackle Buoy

Winch Tension leg(TLP)
Hydraulics

Fig. 3. Structural system grading.
described as fðK1Þ; ðK2Þ;⋯ðKnÞg, n is the number of the minimum
cut sets.

The failure probability of the basic events is P(t), the function is
established as follows with the assumption of exponential dis-
tribution.

PðtÞ ¼ 1eλt ð1Þ
The cut set, Ki, has the occurrence probability as follows, which

means the simultaneous probability of basic events in this cut set.

PðK Þ ¼  
i ∏ f h ði¼ 1;2;⋯;nÞ; ðh¼ 1;2⋯;mÞ ð2Þ

f h AKi

And when any minimum cut set occurs, the top event is trig-
gered. After getting the failure probability of every basic event, the
failure probability of the top event can be calculated as follows.

Xn Xn
PðTÞ ¼ 

PðKiÞ ð 
iÞ


P K P Kj

i ¼ 1 i¼ 1; j¼ 2

X io j

n
þ 

Pð 
KiÞ

 
P Kj PðKkÞ þ⋯

i¼ 1; j¼ 2; k¼ 3
io jok

X 2 3
n

þð1Þn2 64P|fflðfflfflKfflfflfflifflÞi¼ 1 fflfflfflfflffl 
PfflfflfflK{jzfflffl⋯fflfflfflfflPfflfflfflðfflKfflfflfflfflsffl}Þ75

; j¼ 2; Ls¼ n 1
io jo⋯o n1

s

þð1Þn1½PðK1ÞPðK2Þ⋯PðKnÞ ð3Þ
The resolution of a DFT is much different than the one of the

SFT because temporal and cross dependencies cannot be modeled
and solved through Boolean algebra (Akers, 2007). For SFT, there
are common logic gates, such as “AND” gate and “OR” gate,
regardless of time dependent failure and redundancy configura-
tion failure mechanisms, which are involved using dynamic logic
gates, namely Priority And Gate (PAND), The Spare Gate (SP) and
The Functional Dependency gate (FDEP), Sequence enforcing gate
(SEQ) and so on (Manno et al., 2014).

At the state of the art several techniques have been proposed to
solve dynamic FTs when addressing complex dynamic FT models.
And a dynamic fault tree always need to be converted to Markov
chain, Bayesian network or Petri net with the workload increased
largely (Manno et al., 2012; Chiacchio et al., 2011; Boudali et al.,
2009; Montani et al., 2006; Bechta Dugan et al., 1997, 2000; Sul-
livan et al., 1999; Sahner and Trivedi, 1986). The method proposed
by Suprasad Amari simplified the process for computing the fail-
ure probability of the top event of the dynamic logic gates without
transformation to other graphic forms (Rauzy, 2011). So this paper
applies the method and conduct quantitative analysis of the FOWT
system. In this paper, the dynamic FT of FOWT system has used
two kinds of dynamic logic gates, Priority And Gate (PAND) and
Cold Spare Gate (CSP) (Spare Gates include Cold Spare Gate, Warm
Spare Gate and Hot Spare Gate). So we provide the theories of
these two dynamic logic gates. The schematic diagrams of PAND
and CSP are shown in Fig. 4.

3.1. Priority And Gates (PAND)

The failure of a Priority-AND (PAND) gate occurs only if its
inputs fail in the order from left to right in the gate graphical
notation (Manno et al., 2014). A PAND over events E1…Ek is rea-
lized if E1…Ek occur in this order. Priority And Gates are



26 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33
interpreted as asymmetric shuffles.
PAND ðE1;…; EkÞ ¼ ð…ðE1; E2Þ; E3Þ…; EkÞ ð4Þ

A PAND gate has two input events. Input event 1 follows the
distribution of G1(t) at the time T1, and input event 2 follows the
distribution of G2(t) at the time of T2. The output event follows the
distribution of G(t) at tZhe time of T. G(t) is expressed as follows.

t Z t
GðtÞ ¼ PZfT1rT2rtg ¼ dG2ðx2ÞdG1ðx1Þ

x1 ¼ 0 x2 ¼ x1
t

¼ ½G2ðtÞG2ðx1ÞdG1ðx1Þ
Xx1 ¼0M

 
G1ðihÞG1ðði1Þ Þh G2ðtÞG2ðihÞ

 ð5Þ
i ¼ 1

3.2. Cold Spare Gates (CSP)

A SPARE gate can have only one primary input and an unde-
fined number of spare components which could be shared with
other SPARE gates (Manno et al., 2014). Components of SPARE
gates have the following characteristics:

(1) They are ordered (from left to right in the graphical
notation), and

(2) They can be active or stand-by, where “active” means oper-
ating in a SPARE gate and “stand-by” means not operating in
any SPARE gate.

When the primary input is operating, the spare inputs are in
stand-by state. And when the primary input fails, available spare
inputs are used in order until none is left, at which time the gate
occurs. Spares can be shared among spare gates, in which case the
first spare gate to utilize the spare makes the spare inaccessible to
the other spare gates.

When the primary input is right, the spare inputs are in stand-
by state. When the primary input fails, available spare inputs are
used in order until none is left, at which time the gate fails. Spares
can be shared among spare gates, in which case the first spare gate
to utilize the spare makes the spare inaccessible to the other spare
gates (Rauzy, 2011).

Primary input follows the distribution of G1(t) at the time T1,
and cold spare part follows the distribution of G2(t) at the time of
T2. The output event follows the distribution of G(t) at the time of
Fig. 4. Priority And Gate (left) and Cold Spare Gate (right).

W

W2 W3 W4 W1 W5 W6

--
Fig. 5. FT of WT m
T. G(t) is expressed as Zfollowt Zs.y
GðtÞ ¼ PfT1þ" T2rtg ¼ G0

1ðxÞG0
2ðyxÞdxdy

XM X y ¼ 0 x ¼ 0 #
i1

 G0
1ði2hÞG0

2ði1 i2Þh h2 ð6Þ
i1 ¼ 1 i2 ¼ 1
4. DFTA analysis of FOWT

As for a large-scale system like FOWT, a static FT is incapable of
modeling dynamic behaviors, including spare components and
time dependent failure mechanisms. Dynamic logic gates, such as
“Priority and Gate” (PAND gate) and “Cold Spare Parts Gate” (CSP)
are employed. The FT of FOWT system can be divided into several
subtrees for simplification of construction and analysis. Regarding
the aforementioned system grading in two perspectives, the FTs
taking four structural modules failure as top events are established
respectively, as shown in Figs. 4–9.

Failure data of wind turbine module and tower module in
FOWT is collected referring to the failure data of WTs on land.
Through integration of failure cases of offshore structures, failure
data of the FOWT's floating foundation and mooring system are
estimated. Most failure data involves information review of OREDA
and some relative Refs. (Arabian-Hoseynabadi et al., 2010; Már-
quez et al., 2012; Pérez et al., 2013; Ribrant and Bertling, 2007;
Chou and Tu, 2011; Dai et al., 2013; Global wind report annual
market update, 2013; OREDA, 2009). Expert elicitation is intro-
duced to evaluate the remaining failure rates which are unavail-
able through historical cases.

 OREDA

OREDA is a project organization sponsored by oil and gas
companies with world-wide operations. Its main purpose is to
collect and exchange reliability data among the participating
companies and act as The Forum for co-ordination and manage-
ment of reliability data collection within the oil and gas industry. It
has established a comprehensive databank with reliability and
maintenance data for exploration and production equipment from
a wide variety of geographic areas, installations, equipment types
and operating conditions. Offshore subsea and topside equipment
are primarily covered, but onshore equipment is also included.

Data collected are in general not covering the whole lifetime of
equipment, but typically a time window of 2–4 years of operation.
Infant mortality failures are a rule not collected for topside
equipment; hence, the data collected are from the normal steady-
state operating time period.

 GWEC's Global Wind Report

Annual Market Update on the status of the global wind
industry is the authoritative source of information on wind power
W7 W8 W9 W10 W11 W12

--
odule failure.



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 27

T

Collapse due to
serious T1 T2 T3 T10 T4 T9

environment

T5 T6 T7 T8

Fig. 8. FT of tower failure.

F

markets around the world. The report gives a comprehensive
snapshot of the global industry, now present in over 80 countries
with 24 countries having more than 1000 MW installed.

 Failure rate

The failure rate function expresses how likely it is that an item
that has survived up to time t, will fail during the next unit of time.
The failure rate function is usually a function of the time.

zð Þ ¼ 1 
t lim P toTrtþΔtjT4tÞ ð

Δt-1Δ 7Þ
t

This implies the approximation

zð ÞUΔt  
t P toTrtþΔtjT4tÞ ð8Þ
Actually, the life of a technical item may generally be split into

three different phases: the burn-in ('or early failure') phase, the
useful、phase and the wear-out phase. the failure rate function
may be decreasing in the burn-in phase, close to constant in the
useful life phase and increasing in the wear-out phase. The curve
of failure rate with time can be seen like a bath-tub shape.

Many of the items covered in OREDA are subject to some
maintenance or replacement policy. The items will therefore often
be replaced or refurbished before they reach the wear-out phase.
W1

Pitching
R1 failure R9

Fault Driver
location R8 alarm

R2 R3 R7 R4 CSP

R5 R6

Fig. 6. FT of rotor system failure.

W5

Sta
G1 wi

Abnormal
phenomena G2 Shut down

G9 G10 G11 G12 G13 G4 G5

Fig. 7. FT of gene
The main part of the failure events will therefore be in the
OREDA database useful life phase, where the failure rate is close to
constant. All the failure rate estimates presented in this handbook
are therefore based on the assumption that the failure rate
F1 Watertight ness Hit by dropped
error objects F9

Pipe joint
failure F5 F6 F7 F8

F2 F3 F4

Fig. 9. FT of Semi-floating foundation failure.

rt properly but
th problems in

operation

Abnormal
out put

G3 G14 G15

G6 G7 G8

--
rator failure.



28 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33

Table 1
Failure rates and codes of basic events in FTs of four structural modules of FOWT (Arabian-Hoseynabadi et al., 2010; Márquez et al., 2012; Pérez et al., 2013; Ribrant and Bertling
2007; Chou and Tu 2011; Dai et al., 2013; GLOBAL WIND REPORT ANNUAL MARKET UPDATE and 2013 2013; OREDA 2009).

Wind turbine Rotor system Generator

Events’ Basic or undeveloped Failure Events’ Basic or undeveloped Failure Events’ Basic or undeveloped events Failure
codes events rate codes events rate codes rate

W1 Rotor system failure 3.94E-05 R1 Hub failure 0.000003 G1 Fail to start 1.60E-06
W2 Bearing or shaft failure 0.000008 R2 Encoder 1 failure 0.000011 G2 Structural deficiency 1.40E-06
W3 Gearbox failure 0.000010 R3 Encoder 2 failure 0.000011 G3 Fail to synchronize 2.58E-07
W4 Braking system failure 0.000010 R4 Lighting protection failure 0.000010 G4 Fail to stop on demand 0.000001
W5 Generator failure 1.27E-05 R5 Power 1 failure 0.000057 G5 Spurious stop 2.20E-06
W6 Sensors failure 0.000009 R6 Power 2 failure 0.000057 G6 Breakdown 1.60E-06
W7 Yawing failure 0.000016 R7 Limit switch fails 0.00001 G7 Low output 4.00E-07
W8 Drive train failure 0.000002 R8 Safety chain cut off 0.00001 G8 Faulty output voltage 0.000001
W9 Control system failure 0.000039 R9 Blade failure 0.000007 G9 Noise 5.80E-08
W10 Hydraulics failure 0.000013 G10 Parameter deviation 1.20E-06
W11 Structural failure 0.000004 G11 Abnormal instrument reading 2.00E-07
W12 Electrical failure 0.000033 G12 Vibration 1.96E-07

G13 Overheating 2.00E-07
G14 Other causes 1.96E-07
G15 External leakage-utility 1.15E-06

medium
Tower Semi-floating foundation

Events’ Basic or unde- Failure rate Events’ Basic or unde- Failure rate
codes veloped codes veloped

events events

T1 Resonance 0.000005 F1 Pillar damage 0.000005
T2 Faulty welding 0.000007 F2 Corrosion of 0.000013

of tower pipe joint
T3 Hit by blades 0.000011 F3 Weld defect of 0.000003

pipe joint
T4 The braking 0.000007 F4 Fatigue of pipe 0.000003

system failed joint
T5 Strong wind/ 0.000050 F5 Insufficient 8.65E-06

wave detection
T6 Lighting strike 0.000007 F6 Typhoon 0.000100
T7 Ice storm 0.000015 F7 Crash of 0.000001

planes
T8 Storm 0.000055 F8 Biological 0.000005

collision
T9 Material 0.000011 F9 Capsize 0.000001

fatigue
T10 Unidentified 0.000007

causes
Mooring system Mooring lines broken

Events’ Basic or unde- Failure rate Events’ Basic or unde- Failure rate
codes veloped events codes veloped

events

M1 The limit state 0.000018 L1 Picking cables 5.56E-06
of sea wear/ tripping

M2 Corrosion of 0.000010 L2 Transitional 1.01E-05
fairlead chain Wear

M3 Fatigue of 0.000017 L3 Buoys of fric- 4.19E-06
fairlead tion chain's

wear/ tripping
M4 Mooring lines 0.000076 L4 Not effective 3.78E-05

broken maintenance
M5 Unsatisfied sea 0.000078 L5 Mooring lines 0.000016

state for wear
operation

M6 Insufficient 0.000001 L6 Mooring lines 0.000017
emergency fatigue
measures for
abrupt scenes

M7 Analysis and 0.000006 L7 Mooring lines 5.38E-06
calculation corrosion
fault

L8 Abnormal 4.07E-05
stress

L9 Friction chain 6.93E-06
wear/ tripping

L10 Mooring 0.000008
winch failure



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 29

Table 2 Table 4
Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of the FT of WT module failure. Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of FT of generator failure.

Minimum cut Failure Components of cut Descriptions Minimum cut Failure Components of Descriptions
sets probability set sets probability cut set

1 6.91E-06 W1 Rotor system failure 1 3.85E-07 G5, ()G1 Normal start and Spur-
2 6.83E-06 W9 Control system ious stop

failure 2 2.80E-07 G6, ()G1 Normal start and
3 5.78E-06 W12 Electrical failure Breakdown
4 2.80E-06 W7 Yawing failure 3 2.80E-07 G1, ()[G2–G15] Fail to start and non-
5 2.28E-06 W10 Hydraulics failure occurrence of other
6 2.22E-06 W5 Generator failure events
7 1.75E-06 W3 Gearbox failure 4 2.45E-07 ()G1, G2 Normal start and Struc-
8 1.75E-06 W4 Braking system tural deficiency

failure 5 2.10E-07 ()G1, G10 Normal start and Para-
9 1.58E-06 W6 Sensors failure meter deviation
10 1.40E-06 W2 Bearing or shaft 6 2.02E-07 ()G1, G15 Normal start and External

failure leakage-utility medium
11 7.01E-07 W11 Structural failure 7 1.75E-07 ()G1, G8 Normal start and Faulty
12 3.50E-07 W8 Drive train failure output voltage

8 1.75E-07 ()G1, G4 Normal start and Fail to
stop on demand

9 7.01E-08 ()G1, G7 Normal start and Low
output

Table 3 10 4.52E-08 ()G1, G3 Normal start and Fail to
Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of FT of rotor system failure. synchronize

11 3.50E-08 ()G1, G13 Normal start and
Minimum cut Failure Components of cut Descriptions Overheating
sets probability set 12 3.50E-08 ()G1, G11 Normal start and Abnor-

mal instrument reading
1 1.75E-06 R7 Limit switch fails 13 3.43E-08 ()G1, G12 Normal start and
2 1.75E-06 R4 Lighting protection Vibration

failure 14 3.43E-08 ()G1, G14 Normal start and Other
3 1.75E-06 R8 Safety chain cut off failure causes
4 1.23E-06 R9 Blade failure

15 1.02E-08 ()G1, G9 Normal start and Noise
5 5.26E-07 R1 Hub failure
6 9.97E-11 R5, R6 Both encoder 1 and

2 fails
7 3.71E-12 R2, R3 Both power 1 and

2 fails Table 5
Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of FT of tower module failure.

Minimum cut Failure Components of cut Descriptions
sets probability set

1 9.64E-06 T8 Storm
2 8.76E-06 T5 Strong wind/wave
3 2.63E-06 T7 Ice storm
4 1.93E-06 T9 Material fatigue
5 1.93E-06 T3 Hit by blades
6 1.23E-06 T6 Lighting strike
7 1.23E-06 T10 Unidentified causes
8 1.23E-06 T4 The braking system

failed
9 1.23E-06 T2 Faulty welding of

tower
10 8.76E-07 T1 Resonance
function is constant and independent of time, in which case z
(t)¼λ, i.e. the failure rates are assumed to be exponential dis-
tributed with parameter λ.

The uncertainty of the estimate λ may be presented as a 90%
confidence interval. This is an internal ðλL; λUÞ, such that the "true
value" of λ fulfils:
P λLrλoλU ¼ 90% ð9Þ

With n failures during an aggregated time in service τ, this 90%
confidence interval is given by:
1 1
Z

2 0:95;2n; Z ð 0
2τ 0:05;2ðnþ1Þ 1 Þ

τ

n stands for observed number of failures, τ stands for the aggre-
gated time in service. The values are collected as original data for
the OREDA database.

With the assumption of constant failure rate for every event in
the FT of FOWT system, mean failure rates are chosen for reliability
calculation that are obtained by the OREDA estimator and used
commonly in engineering. And the relation between failure
probabilitRy and failure rate is shown as below.

t

RðtÞ ¼ e λðtÞdt
0 ¼ eλt ð11Þ

RðtÞ ¼ 1PðtÞ ð12Þ

PðtÞ ¼ 1eλt ð13Þ
Where P(t) means failure probability or unreliability, and R(t)
means reliability.

The failure rates of basic events in FTs of four structural mod-
ules are displayed in Table 1. For convenience, the expressions of
basic events are substituted as corresponding codes in the Tables
and the FTs.

Once the subtrees are completed and the probability tables are
filled, it is straight forward to compute the failure probabilities of
four modules according to the theories described in Section 3.

Fig. 5 presents the FT of WT module failure. Once anyone of the
twelve events (W1-W12) fails, the top event malfunction will occur.
An “OR” gate can connect the twelve events with the top event
appropriately. Regardless of the sea state, as shown in Table 2, rotor,
control and electrical system failure, are most likely to occur, and
failure of mechanical system, structure and drive train, is less
probable to occur than other assembly units. Due to the constitu-
tional complexity and high-risk level, rotor system and generator
are studied emphatically to ascertain root causes (Figs. 6 and 7).

Though the quantitative analysis on FTs in Figs. 6 and 7, the
minimum cut sets and failure probability are solved. Probabilities
ranking (from high to low) of the three FTs’ minimum cut sets are



30 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33

Table 7
Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of FT of mooring system module failure.

(a) Lines broken

Minimum Failure Components of Descriptions
cut sets probability cut set

1 4.07E-08 L8 Abnormal stress
2 1.01E-08 L2 Transitional chain Wear
3 8.00E-09 L10 Mooring winch failure
4 6.93E-09 L9 Friction chain wear/ tripping
5 5.56E-09 L1 Picking cables wear/ tripping
6 4.19E-09 L3 Buoys of friction chain's

wear/ tripping
7 6.43E-16 (L4, L6) Not effective maintenance

occurs and then Mooring
lines fatigue

8 6.43E-16 (L4, L5) Not effective maintenance
occurs and then Mooring
lines wear

9 1.87E-16 (L4, L7) Not effective maintenance
occurs and then Mooring
displayed in Tables 2–4, respectively. Table 2 demonstrates that
rotor system is the most hazardous in “WT structure module”. As
shown in Fig. 6, the accumulator acts as a cold spare part of
external power supply applying a “CSP” to describe the link
between them. The “Fault location” occurs if both Encoder 1 and
Encoder 2 fail. Results shown in Table 3 reveal that, the three most
likely minimum cut sets are limit switch fails, lighting protection
fails and safety chain cut off. As shown in Table 3, there are seven
minimum cut sets leading to rotor system failure, and the first one
“Limit switch fails” has the highest occurrence probability, 1.75E-
06. For generator failure shown in Table 4, (-)G1 means G1 does
not occur, and the cut set “Normal start and Spurious stop” ranks
the first likely occurred event among the 15 cut sets.

“Fail to start” and “Start normally but run with error” are two
likely reasons resulting in generator failure (Fig. 7). It is impossible
for either event to occur simultaneously with the other. An
exclusive-or gate (XOR gate) is employed to demonstrate the
relation. Results in Table 4 reveal that spurious stop, breakdown
and fail to start are primary failure modes of the generator. Eco-
nomic losses are serious upon generation outage. Proper operation
of condition monitoring system of generator should be guaran-
teed. The event–“Structural deficiency” should be prevented in the
design stage and monitoring timely in the operation is necessary.
Table 6
Failure probabilities ranking of cut sets of FT of semi-floating foundation module
failure.

Minimum cut Failure Components of Descriptions
sets probability cut set

1 1.75E-05 F6 Typhoon
2 8.76E-07 F8 Biological collision
3 8.76E-07 F1 Pillar damage
4 1.75E-07 F7 Crash of planes
5 1.75E-07 F9 Capsize
6 9.54E-25 F2, F5, F3, F4 Corrosion of pipe joint,

Weld defect of pipe joint,
Fatigue of pipe joint and
Insufficient detection

M

Devices Weather and environment
M7 failure control error

Anchor failure or Other devices
dragging failure M5 M6

M1 Fairlead M4 A
failure

M2 M3

Fig. 10. FT of moorin
4.1. FTA of tower

The tower occupies most cost of a WT on land (Chou and Tu,
2011). Once a FOWT's tower breaks off, sinking of nacelle and rotor
lines corrosion

(b) Mooring system failure

Minimum Failure Components of Descriptions
cut sets probability cut set

1 1.33E-05 M4 Mooring lines broken
2 3.15E-06 M1 The limit state of sea
3 2.98E-06 M3 Fatigue of fairlead
4 1.75E-06 M2 Corrosion of fairlead
5 1.05E-06 M7 Analysis and calculation fault
6 2.39E-12 (M5,M6) Unsatisfied sea state for

operation appears and then
Insufficient emergency mea-
sures taken for abrupt scenes

M4 A

Mooring lines
L1 L2 L3 broken off L9 L10

L8 Mooring
lines wear

Accumulating
L4 wear

L5 L6 L7

g system failure.



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 31
will bring unrecoverable losses to power enterprises and supply
system.

Fig. 8 presents the FT of tower module failure. Influences of sea
conditions on the tower have been taken into consideration in the
FT. The failure of anyone of twelve events (T1–T10) triggers the
failure of tower, where an “OR” gate is employed. “Extreme
typhoon/storm” at sea has the highest failure probability of 9.64E-
6 leading directly to tower collapse. As shown in Table 5, extreme
environments, such as storm, strong wind/ waves and ice storm,
are principal threatening factors to tower's safety. Sufficient
investigation of extreme environment conditions at operation site
contributes to risk management and action plans.
4.2. FTA of Floating foundation

The FT of floating foundation failure is shown in Fig. 9. Taking
the advantages of low risk, semisubmersible (short for semi-)
foundation of FOWT is selected for analyzing its reliability. The
floating foundation system is significantly affected by wind load
(Myhr et al., 2014; Tran and Kim, 2015a, 2015b). In order for “Pipe
joint” to fail, the three events –“Corrosion of pipe joint”, “Weld
defect of pipe joint” and “Fatigue of pipe joint”, need to happen.
“Water tightness error” will be triggered when both “Insufficient
detection” and “Pipe joint failure” happen simultaneously. Table 6
shows that fallen things (such as biologics, planes and objects
brought by typhoon) present the highest failure probability. The
conclusions are then generated that installation of collision pro-
tection measures are required. Besides, degradation state of pillars’
strength demands periodic detection and proper maintenance to
prevent serious accidents.
3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00
Wind Tower Floating Mooring

turbine foundation system
Structural modules

Fig. 11. Calculated failure rates of four structural modules.

Floating wind
turbine system

failure

W T F M Collision
with other
structures

FW4 FW5 FW

Fig. 12. FT of semi-floating

Failure rate/10-4
4.3. FTA of mooring system

The FT of mooring system failure is shown in Fig. 10. As shown
in Table 7, broken lines’ failure probability is uppermost among all
causes, followed by unsatisfied sea state for operation. “Weather
and environment control error” has two input events–“Unsatisfied
sea state for operation” and “Insufficient emergency measures for
abrupt scenes”. When the left-hand side event fail before (or at the
same time as) the right-hand side one, the output event will occur,
i.e. PAND gate. The minimum cut sets with parentheses mean the
events inside is sequenced. Further discussion on reasons for
mooring lines fractured is carried out in detail via FTA. The PAND
gate is also employed between “Mooring lines wear” and its input
events–“Not effective maintenance” and “Accumulating wear”.
Fracture of partial mooring lines strikes system balance, which
results in stress increase of remaining mooring lines. The number
of fractured mooring lines should be restricted to less than two for
sustaining relatively reliable state of FOWT system. Results
demonstrate that “Abnormal stress”, “Transitional chain wear”,
and “Mooring winch failure” are main factors that must be con-
sidered when evaluating risk for the lifecycle of mooring lines
safety.
5. FTA of FOWT system

According to the consequences of the analyzed fault trees, the
failure rates are derived for the four structural modules, namely
wind turbine module, tower, floating foundation and mooring
system. In Fig. 11, the calculated failure rates of four structural
modules are illustrated.

FOWT system failure is not just caused by four failures of
structural module, when considering it as a whole system. The FT
of "Floating wind turbine failure" is established in Fig. 12 involving
three kinds of failure reasons. The first one is interaction between
four structural modules, such as tower's resonance with floating
foundation. The second one is environmental effect on the overall
system, such as fire and ice rainfall. The third one is other factors,
for example, transport and collision with other floating bodies
(Márquez et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2012).

Compared with onshore WTs, risk bearing capability of FOWT
system should be improved to handle severe circumstance, for
instance, salt-spray corrosion, moisture and condensation. High
possibility of erosion when exposed to salt-spray, surfaces of
blades and hub would result in serious consequences on the per-
formance. Meanwhile, under high humidity circumstance, water
existing in the inner of control cabinet and electrical system
increases the possibility of electrical accidents like short circuit. So
appropriate dehumidifiers and timely maintenance is essential for
prevention for dehumidify and gel.
FW7 FW1 FW2 FW3

6

offshore WT failure.



32 X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33
Generally, as for FOWTs, failure probability of WT module
failure and tower is higher than WTs on land. Given sea state has
been involved in FT of tower failure, modification can be ignored.
According to relative research and expert estimation, a correction
coefficient of 1.6 is assessed to promote accuracy of failure rate of
WT module. Processed failure rates of basic events in FT of FOWT
failure are shown in Table 8.

The Fig. 13 describes 20 highest-ranked occurrence prob-
abilities of minimum cut sets. Results reveal that collision with
non-service vessels is the predominant factor affecting FOWT's
reliability. And FOWT's collision with vessels is usually fatal acci-
dents. It is necessary to suggest the operators to monitor location/
examine/repair in time. Besides, in order to prevent the damage of
collision, the approach of installing collision protection devices is
indispensable. The following factor is WT module's degradation,
which relates to complexity of operation principle.

The unreliability of FOWT has been calculated for twenty years.
For hypothesis of failure period is in the middle section of the
bathtub curve of the life cycle, reliability of the FOWT is propor-
tional to time. The final value of unreliability of FOWT is 3.1548e-4
Table 8
The input data for the FT of FOWT system.

Events’ codes Basic or undeveloped events Failure rate

FW1 Transport 2.00E-06
FW2 Fire 6.00E-06
FW3 Ice rainfall 1.00E-06
W Wind turbine module failure 1.94E-04
M Mooring system failure 1.27E-04
F Floating foundation failure 1.12E-04
FW4 Collision with vessels in regular lines 2.60E-04
FW5 Collision with vessels in abnormal lines 8.00E-04
FW6 Collision with supply vessels 3.00E-06
T Tower failure 1.75E-04
FW7 Resonance 9.80E-07

Fig. 13. Probabilities ranking of the top mo
after twenty years, and the failure rate is 1.6805e-3 h1. The Mean
Time Between Failure (MTBF) is 595.06 hours. So maintenance
once every 24 days is appropriate for the safety of the FOWT. And
the detected elements should be emphasized on the aforemen-
tioned 20 minimum cut sets.

According to the method for evaluating the 90% confidence
internal mentioned above, for the input failure rates in this work,
the deviation of their values are roughly evaluated to be 20% as a
whole. In order to estimate the sensitivity of final results to input
data, when all the failure rates increase by 20%, the unreliability of
FOWT system is calculated to be 3.4100E-04 by repeating the
whole analysis process. Compared with the aforementioned result,
3.1548E-4, the deviation for the unreliability of the system is
8.09%, revealing that the sensitivity of the final results to failure
rates data is not obvious, and the calculation error is in the same
order of magnitude with 8.09%. So the consequences of the relia-
bility analysis on FOWT system via dynamic FTA method are
credible to some extent.
6. Conclusions

System grading and dynamic FTA are applied to predict the
reliability of FOWT. The FOWT system is graded scientifically based
on structure and function respectively in a top-down approach,
which decomposes the system down to subsystem and equipment
levels. Failure modes of FOWT system are analyzed comprehen-
sively, therefore, laying a foundation for the following dynamic
FTA. Furthermore, the dynamic FT of “Semi-FOWT system failure”
has been established. A series of qualitative and quantitative
results are derived. Relevant failure data are achieved from some
referring literatures and failure databases (OREDA) considering
insufficient failure data of FOWT. Failure data of WTs and towers
on land is used to estimate FOWTs. Failure data of offshore
structures and devices is employed to evaluate FOWTs’ floating
foundation and mooring system. The top event's failure rate is
st frequent twenty minimum cut sets.



X. Zhang et al. / J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 154 (2016) 21–33 33
1.6805E-3 h1, and the average detection maintenance cycle
should be less than 576 hours. Regarding to WT module, rotor
system and generator's failure has been stressed. Driver alarm of
pitching, failing to start, downtime of the generator should be paid
enough attention. The tower is easily affected by storm/ strong
wind. Semi-foundation is mostly affected by dropped objects, and
installations of protective devices are essential. Broken lines are
primary issues of the mooring system. Lines’ stress and transi-
tional chain should be detected in time.

With deviation between the estimation and reality, the FOWT
system's reliability is predicted generally. An approach has been pro-
vided for achieving sufficient failure data and provides reference for
reliability studies of newly sprouted products. The results propound
suggestions for future risk investment. For further research, the defi-
nition of the modification factor reflects environment loads at sea, and
should be deliberated for optimization.
Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from National
International Science and Technology Cooperation Specific Project,
Development of risk assessment software for floating offshore
wind turbine (No. 2013DFE73060); The Development of Failure
Database and Risk Assessment System for FPSO (No. G014614002);
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51409128) and
University Natural Science Research Project of Jiangsu Province
(No. 14KJB570001).
References

Agarwal, P., Manuel, L., 2011. Incorporating irregular nonlinear waves in coupled
simulation and reliability studies of offshore wind turbines. Appl. Ocean. Res.
33 (33), 215–227.

Akers, S.B., 2007. Binary decision diagrams. IEEE Trans. Comput. 24 (6), 117–126.
Arabian-Hoseynabadi, H., Oraee, H., Tavner, P.J., 2010. Failure modes and effects

analysis (FMEA) for wind turbines. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 32 (7),
817–824.

Bai, X., Sun, L., Sun, H., et al., 2012. Process risk analysis of lifting transportation for
offshore structure based on FMEA and FTA. Shipbuild. China.

Bai, X., Sun, L., Sun, H., et al., 2012. Risk assessment of hoisting aboard and instal-
lation for offshore wind turbine. In: Proceedings of the ASME International
Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering. pp. 107–114.

Bai, Xu, Hai, Sun, Liping, Sun, 2012. Process Risk Assessment for Transportation and
Installation of Jacket Considering Correlation. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-
second International Offshore and Polar Engineering Conference. International
Society of Offshore and Polar Engineers.

Bechta Dugan, J., Bavuso, S.J., Boyd, M.A., 1992. Dynamic fault-tree models for fault-
tolerant computer systems. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 41 (3), 363–377.

Bechta Dugan, J., Sullivan, K.J., Coppit, D., 2000. Developing a low-cost high-quality
software tool for dynamic fault-tree analysis. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 49 (1), 49–59.

Bechta Dugan, J., Venkataraman B., Gulati R, 1997. DIFtree: a software package for
the analysis of dynamic fault tree models. Reliability and Maintainability
Symposium. 1997 Proceedings, Annual. IEEE. pp. 64–70.

Boudali, H., Nijmeijer, A.P., Stoelinga, M.I.A., 2009. DFTSim: a simulation tool for
extended dynamic fault trees Spring Simulation Multiconference. Soc. Comput.
Simul. Int., 1–8.

Chiacchio F., Compagno L., D'Urso D., et al. An open-source application to model
and solve dynamic fault tree of real industrial systems// Software, Knowledge
Information, Industrial Management and Applications (SKIMA), 2011 5th
International Conference on. IEEE, 2011:1-8.

Chou, J.S., Tu, W.T., 2011. Failure analysis and risk management of a collapsed large
wind turbine tower. Eng. Fail. Anal. 18 (1), 295–313.

Cockerill, T.T., Kühn, M., van Bussel, G., Bierbooms, W., et al., 2001. Combined
technical and economic evaluation of the Northern European offshore wind
resource. J. Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 89 (7–8), 689–711.

Dörenkämper, M., Witha, B., Steinfeld, G., et al., 2015. The impact of stable atmo-
spheric boundary layers on wind-turbine wakes within offshore wind farms. J.
Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 144, 146–153.
Dai, L., Ehlers, S., Rausand, M., et al., 2013. Risk of collision between service vessels
and offshore wind turbines. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 109 (1), 18–31.

Dong, H.K., Sang, G.L., 2015. Reliability analysis of offshore wind turbine support
structures under extreme ocean environmental loads. Renew. Energy 79 (1),
161–166.

Dugan, B.J.B., Bavuso, S.J., Boyd, M.A., 2015. Dynamic fault trees for fault-tolerant
computer systems. IEEE Trans. Reliab.

Galanis, N., Christophides, C., 1990. Technical and economic considerations for the
design of optimum wind energy conversion systems. J. Wind. Eng. Ind. Aero-
dyn. 34 (2), 185–196.

Global wind report annual market update, 2013. Global wind energy council 2013.
Hai, S., Sun, L., Fan, H., 2011. Reliability and risk analysis of a broken FPSO cable in

tandem. Harbin Gongcheng Daxue Xuebao/J. Harbin Eng. Univ. 32 (1) 11-10.
Hameed, Z., Vatn, J., Heggset, J., 2011. Challenges in the reliability and maintain-

ability data collection for offshore wind turbines. Renew. Energy 36 (8),
2154–2165.

Kareem, A., 1983. Nonlinear dynamic analysis of compliant offshore platforms
subjected to fluctuating wind. J. Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 14 (1–3), 345–356.

Laura, C.S., Vicente, D.C., 2014. Life-cycle cost analysis of floating offshore wind
farms. Renew. Energy 66 (3), 41–48.

Márquez, F.P.G., Tobias, A.M., Pérez, J.M.P., et al., 2012. Condition monitoring of wind
turbines: techniques and methods. Renew. Energy 46 (5), 169–178.

Manno, G., Chiacchio, F., Compagno, L., et al., 2012. MatCarloRe: an integrated FT
and Monte Carlo Simulink tool for the reliability assessment of dynamic fault
tree. Expert. Syst. Appl. 39 (39), 10334–10342.

Manno, G., Chiacchio, F., Compagno, L., et al., 2014. Conception of repairable DFT
and resolution by the use of RAATSS, a Matlab Toolbox based on the ATS
formalism. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 121 (121), 250–262.

Marino, E., Borri, C., Lugni, C., 2011a. Influence of wind–waves energy transfer on
the impulsive hydrodynamic loads acting on offshore wind turbines. J. Wind.
Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 99 (99), 767–775.

Marino, E., Borri, C., Peil, U., 2011. A fully nonlinear wave model to account for
breaking wave impact loads on offshore wind turbines. J. Wind. Eng. Ind.
Aerodyn. 99 (4), 483–490.

Marino, E., Lugni, C., Borri, C., 2013. The role of the nonlinear wave kinematics on
the global responses of an OWT in parked and operating conditions. J. Wind.
Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 123 (6), 363–376.

Marino, E., Hieu, Nguyen, Lugni, C., et al., 2013. Irregular nonlinear wave simulation
and associated loads on offshore wind turbines. In: International Conference on
Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering. V008T09A066-V008T09A066.

Montani, S., Portinale, L., Bobbio, A., et al., 2006. Automatically translating dynamic
fault trees into dynamic Bayesian networks by means of a software tool. In:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
Security. IEEE Computer Society. pp. 804–809.

Myhr, A., Bjerkseter, C., Ågotnes, A., et al., 2014. Levelised cost of energy for offshore
floating wind turbines in a lifecycle perspective. Renew. Energy 66 (6),
714–728.

OREDA, 2009. Offshore reliability data handbook distributed by Det Norske Veritas,
Høvik. 5th ed. SINTEF Industrial Management, Norway.

Pérez, J.M.P., Márquez, F.P.G., Tobias, A., et al., 2013. Wind turbine reliability ana-
lysis. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 23 (23), 463–472.

Pinson, P., Christensen, L.E.A., Madsen, H., et al., 2008. Regime-switching modelling
of the fluctuations of offshore wind generation. J. Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 96
(12), 2327–2347.

Rauzy, A.B., 2011. Sequence algebra, sequence decision diagrams and dynamic fault
trees. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 96 (7), 785–792.

Ribrant, J., Bertling, L.M., 2007. Survey of failures in wind power systems with focus
on swedish wind power plants during 1997–2005. Energy Convers. IEEE Trans.
22 (1), 167–173.

Sahner, R.A., Trivedi, K.S., 1986. Reliability modeling using SHARPE. IEEE Trans.
Reliab. 36 (2), 186–193.

Sullivan, K.J., Dugan, J.B., Coppit, D., 1999. The Galileo fault tree analysis tool. In:
Proceedings of the Digest of Papers Fault-tolerant Computing 29th Annual
International Symposium. p. 232–235.

Tong, K.C., 1998. Technical and economic aspects of a floating offshore wind farm. J.
Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 74 (98), 399–410.

Tran, T.T., Kim, D.H., 2015a. The coupled dynamic response computation for a semi-
submersible platform of floating offshore wind turbine. J. Wind. Eng. Ind.
Aerodyn. 147, 104–119.

Tran, T.T., Kim, D.H., 2015. The platform pitching motion of floating offshore wind
turbine: a preliminary unsteady aerodynamic analysis. J. Wind. Eng. Ind.
Aerodyn. 142, 65–81.

Webster, William C., 2009. Evolution And Kinematics Of Steep, Random Seas, A
Comparison With Usual Engineering Estimates. IWAOH, Brazil.

Zhang, R., Tang, Y., Hu, J., et al., 2013. Dynamic response in frequency and time
domains of a floating foundation for offshore wind turbines. Ocean. Eng. 60 (1),
115–123.