NATIONAL
TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY
BOARD
                       WASHINGTON, D.C. 20594



AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT REPORT

AIR FLORIDA, INC.
BOEING 737- 222, N62AF
COLLISION WITH 14TH STREET BRIDGE,
NEAR WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT
WASHINGTON, D.C.
JANUARY 13,1982




UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
                               CONTENTS

      SYNOPSIS     .......................... 1
      FACTUAL INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      History of the Flight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Injuries t o Persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Damage t o Aircraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Other Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Personnel Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Aircraft Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Meteorological Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Aids t o Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Aerodrome and Ground Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Flight Recorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Wreckage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Medical and Pathological Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Survival Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Tests and Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Tests of Flight Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Sound Spectrum Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Engine Tests With Blocked Inlet Pressure Probe (Pt2) . . . . . . .
      Flight Simulator Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Tests on Deicer Fluid Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Metallurgical Examination of Wing Leading Edge Slat Skin . . . . .
       Additional Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Engine Anti-ice System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       History of the Use of Ethylene Glycol as a Deicing Agent . . . . . .
      The Trump Deicer Vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       American Airlines Deicing Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      J e t Exhaust Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Boeing 737 Maintenance Manual Instructions for Ice
       and Snow Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Air Florida Maintenance Manual Instructions for Winter Operations .
       Boeing 737 Wing Leading Edge Contamination and Roughness . . . .
       Other Boeing 737 Operations Manual Information . . . . . . . . .
       Air Florida Flightcrew Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Air Traffic Control Handling of Flight 90 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          ATC Information t o Pilots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          Separation Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          Controller Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          Gate-Hold Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Ground Proximity Warning System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       Human Performance Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       New Investigative Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.     ANALYSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
2.1    Aircraft and Crew . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
2.2    The Accident . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
2.3    Factors Affecting Aircraft Acceleration and Climb Performance . . 46

                                   iii
                    NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
                            WASHINGTON, D.C. 20594

                            AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT REPORT

Adopted: August 10,1982

                     AIR FLORIDA, INC., BOEING 737-222, N62AF,
                       COLLISION WITH 14TH STREET BRIDGE
                      NEAR WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT
                               WASHINGTON, D.C.
                                JANUARY 13,1982

                                        SYNOPSIS

          On January 13, 1982, Air Florida Flight 90, a Boeing 737-222 (N62AF) was a
scheduled flight t o Fort Lauderdale, Florida, from Washington National Airport,
Washington, D.C. There were 74 passengers, including 3 infants, and 5 crewmembers on
board. The flight's scheduled departure time was delayed about 1 hour 45 minutes due t o
a moderate t o heavy snowfall which necessitated the temporary closing of the airport.

            Following takeoff from runway 36, which was made with snow and/or ice
adhering t o the aircraft, the aircraft crashed at 1601 e.s.t. into the barrier wall of the
northbound span of the 14th Street Bridge, which connects the District of Columbia with
Arlington County, Virginia, and plunged into the ice-covered Potomac River. It came t o
rest on the west side of the bridge 0.75 nmi from the departure end of runway 36. Four
passengers and one crewmember survived the crash.

            When the aircraft hit the bridge, i t struck seven occupied vehicles and then
tore away a section of the bridge wall and bridge railing. Four persons in the vehicles
were killed; four were injured.

            The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause
of this accident was the flightcrew's failure t o use engine anti-ice during ground operation
and takeoff, their decision t o take off with snow/ice on the airfoil surfaces of the
aircraft, and the captain's failure t o reject the takeoff during the early stage when his
attention was called t o anomalous engine instrument readings. Contributing t o the
accident were the prolonged ground delay between deicing and the receipt of ATC takeoff
clearance during which the airplane was exposed t o continual precipitation, the known
inherent pitchup characteristics of the B-737 aircraft when the leading edge is
contaminated with even small amounts of snow or ice, and the limited experience of the
flightcrew in jet transport winter operations.

                               1. FACTUAL INFORMATION

1.1        History of the Flight
            On January 13, 1982, Air Florida, Inc., Flight 90, a Boeing 737-222 (N62AF),
was a scheduled passenger flight from Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C., t o
the Fort Lauderdale International Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, with an intermediate
stop a t the Tampa International Airport, Tampa, Florida. Flight 90 was scheduled t o
depart Washington National Airport at 1415 e.s.t. I/ The Boeing-737 had arrived at
gate 12, Washington National Airport, as Flight 95 from Miami, Florida, a t 1329. Snow
was falling in Washington, D.C., in the morning and in various intensities when Flight 95
landed and continued t o fall throughout the early afternoon.
           Because of the snowfall, Washington National Airport was closed for snow
removal from 1338 t o 1453 and Flight 90's scheduled departure was delayed. At 1359:21,
Flight 90 requested and received an instrument flight rules (IFR) clearance from
clearance delivery.
            Seventy-one passengers and 3 infants were boarded on the aircraft between
1400 and 1430; there were five crewmembers - captain, first officer, and three flight
attendants. About 1420, American Airlines 21 maintenance personnel began deicing the
left side of the fuselage using a model ~ 4 0 ~ ~ r u   vehicle
                                                            r n ~
                                                                (No. 5058) containing Union
Carbide Aircraft Deicing Fluid I1 PM 5178. The deicing truck operator stated that the
captain told him that he would like t o start deicing just before the airport was scheduled
t o reopen a t 1430 so that he could get in line for departure. American maintenance
personnel stated that they observed about one-half inch of wet snow on the aircraft
before the deicing fluid was applied. Fluid had been applied t o an area of about 10 feet
when the captain terminated the operation because the airport was not going t o reopen at
1430.     At that time, the flightcrew also informed the Air Florida maintenance
representative that 11 other aircraft had departure priority and that there were 5 or 6
aircraft which had departure priority before Flight 90 could push back from the gate.
            Between 1445 and 1450, the captain requested that the deicing operation be
resumed. The left side of the aircraft was deiced first. According t o the operator of the
deicing vehicle, the wing, the fuselage, the tail section, the top part of the engine pylon,
and the cowling were deiced with a heated solution consisting of 30 t o 40 percent glycol
and 60 t o 70 percent water. No final overspray was applied. The operator based the
proportions of the solution on guidance material from the American Airlines maintenance
manual and his knowledge that the ambient temperature was 24O F, which he had obtained
from current weather data received a t the American Airlines line maintenance room. The
operator also stated that he started spraying a t the front section of the aircraft and
progressed toward the tail using caution in the areas of the hinge points and control
surfaces t o assure that no ice or snow remained a t these critical points. He also stated
that it was snowing heavily as the deicinglanti-icing substance was applied t o the l e f t side
of the aircraft.
            Between 1445 and 1500, the operator of the deicing vehicle was relieved from
his deicing task, and he told his relief operator, a mechanic, that the left side of the
aircraft had been deiced.
            The relief operator proceeded t o deice the right side of the aircraft with
heated water followed by a finish anti-ice coat of 20 t o 30 percent glycol and 70 t o 80
percent water, also heated. He based these proportions on information that the ambient
temperature was 28OF. (The actual temperature was 24O F.) The operator stated that he
deicedlanti-iced the right side of the aircraft in the following sequence: the rudder, the
stabilizer and elevator, the a f t fuselage section, the upper forward fuselage, the wing

-I/ All times herein are eastern standard time, based on the 24-hour clock.
-21 American Airlines Inc., provided, certain services t o Air Florida, Inc.,          under a
contractual agreement.
section (leading edge t o trailing edge), the top of the engine, the wingtip, and the nose.
Afterwards, he inspected both engine intakes and the landing gear for snow andlor ice
accumulation; he stated that none was found. The deicinglanti-icing of Flight 90 was
completed a t 1510. At this time about 2 or 3 inches of wet snow was on the ground
around the aircraft. Maintenance personnel involved in deicinglanti-icing the aircraft
stated that they believed that the aircraft's trailing and leading edge devices were
retracted. American Airlines personnel stated that no covers or plugs were installed over
the engines or airframe openings during deicing operations.

            At 1515, the aircraft was closed up and the jetway was retracted. Just before
the jetway was retracted, the captain, who was sitting in the left cockpit seat, asked the
Air Florida station manager, who was standing near the main cabin door, how much snow
was on the aircraft. The station manager responded t h a t there was a light dusting of snow
on the left wing from the engine t o the wingtip and that the area from t h e engine t o the
fuselage was clean. Snow continued t o fall heavily.

            A tug was standing by t o push Flight 90 back from gate 12. The operator of
the tug stated that a flight crewmember told him that the tower would call and advise
them when pushback could start. At 1516:45, Flight 90 transmitted, "Ground Palm
Ninety -
       31 like t o get in sequence, we're ready." Ground control replied, "Are you ready t o
push?"    Flight 90 replied, "Affirmative," a t 1511337.      At 1517:01, Ground control
transmitted, "Okay, push approved for Palm Ninety-better still, just hold i t right where
you are Palm Ninety, I'll call you back." At 1523:37, Ground control transmitted, "Okay
Palm Ninety, push approved."
           At 1525, the tug attempted t o push Flight 90 back. However, a combination of
ice, snow, and glycol on the ramp and a slight incline prevented the tug, which was not
equipped with chains, from moving the aircraft. When a flight crewmember suggested t o
the tug operator that the aircraft's engine reverse thrust be used t o push the aircraft
back, the operator advised the crewmember that this was contrary t o the policy of
American Airlines. According t o the tug operator, the aircraft's engines were started and
both reversers were deployed. He then advised the flightcrew t o use only "idle power."

           Witnesses estimated that both engines were operated in reverse thrust for a
period of 30 t o 90 seconds. During this time, several Air Florida and American Airlines
personnel observed snow and/or slush being blown toward the front of the aircraft. One
witness stated that he saw water swirling a t the base of the left (No. 1) engine inlet.
Several Air Florida personnel stated that they saw an area of snow on the ground melted
around the left engine for a radius ranging from 6 t o 15 feet. No one observed a similar
melted area under the right (No. 2) engine.

            When the use of reverse thrust proved unsuccessful in moving the aircraft
back, the engines were shut down with the reversers deployed. The same American
Airlines mechanic that had inspected both engine intakes upon completion of the
deicinglanti-icing operation performed another general examination of both engines. He
stated that he saw no ice or snow a t that time. Air Florida and American Airlines
personnel standing near the aircraft after the aircraft's engines were shut down stated
that they did not see any water, slush, snow, or ice on the wings.

           At 1533, while the first tug was being disconnected from the towbar and a
second tug was being brought into position, an assistant station manager for Air Florida
who was inside the passenger terminal between gates 11 and 12 stated that he could see

3/ Palm 90 is an air traffic control (ATC) designation for Air Florida Flight 90.
-
the upper fuselage and about 75 percent of the l e f t wing inboard of the tip from his
vantage point, which was about 25 f e e t from the aircraft. Although he observed snow on
top of the fuselage, he said i t did not appear t o be heavy or thick. He saw snow on the
nose and radome up t o the bottom of the windshield and a light dusting of snow on the left
wing.
           At 1535, Flight 90 was pushed back without further difficulty. After the tug
was disconnected both engines were restarted and the thrust reversers were stowed. The
aircraft was ready t o taxi away from the gate a t 1538.

            At 1538:16 while accomplishing after-start checklist items, the captain
responed "off" to the first officer's callout of checklist item "anti-ice." At 1538:22 the
                                                                        .      .
ground controller said: "Okay and the American that's towing there. .let's. .six twenty
four can you.  ..     .
                  get. .around that. ..  Palm on a pushback?" Flight 90 replied, "Ground
Palm Ninety, we're ready t o taxi out of his way." Ground control then transmitted, "Okay
                                                    .
Palm Ninety, Roger, just pull up over behind that. .TWA and hold right there. You'll be
falling in line behind a.   .. Apple 41   ..  .DC Nine."      Flight 90 acknowledged this
transmission at 1538:47. Flight 90 then fell in behind the New York Air DC-9. Nine air
carrier aircraft and seven general aviation aircraft were awaiting departure when Flight
90 pushed back.

             At 1540:15, the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) recorded a comment by the
captain, "..  .go over t o the hangar and get deiced," t o which the first officer replied
"yeah, definitely." The captain then made some additional comment which was not clear
but contained the word "deiced,?' t o which the first officer again replied "yeah--that's
about it." At 1540:42, the first officer continued to say, "it's been a while since we've
been deiced." At 1546:21, the captain said, "Tell you what, my windshield will be deiced,
don't know about my wings." The first officer then commented, "well--all we need is the
inside of the wings anyway, the wingtips are gonna speed up on eighty anyway, they'll
shuck all that other stuff." At 1547:32, the captain commented, lt(Gonna) get your wing
now." Five seconds later, the first officer asked, "D'they get yours? Did they get your
wingtip over 'er?" The captain replied, "I got a little on mine." The first officer then
said, "A little, this one's got about a quarter t o half an inch on i t all the way."

            At 1548:59, the first officer asked, "See this difference in that left engine and
right one?" The captain replied, "Yeah." The first officer then commented, "I don't know
why that's different -                                                              --
                         less it's hot air going into that right one, that must be i t  from
                                                                   .
his exhaust - i t was doing that at the chocks 51 awhile ago.. .ah." At 1551:54, the
                            -
captain said, "Don't do that Apple, I need to g e t the other wing done."

                                                     .
            At 1553:21, the first officer said, "Boy. .this is a losing battle here on trying
t o deice those things, i t (gives) you a false feeling of security that's all that does."
Conversation between the captain and the first officer regarding the general topic of
deicing continued until 1554:04.

            At 1557:42, after the New York Air aircraft was cleared for takeoff, the
captain and first officer proceeded t o accomplish the pretakeoff checklist, including
verification of the takeoff engine pressure ratio (EPR) setting of 2.04 and indicated

-41 Air traffic control designation for New York Air.
-51 Chocks are blocks placed by tires to prevent a parked aircraft from moving---also    the
designation for the area where the aircraft is parked for passenger loading.
airspeed bug settings of 138 kns (V ) 6/; 140 kns (V ) 7/ and 144 kns (v2). 81 Between
1558:26 and 1558:37, the first officerasked, "Slush ^sic) runway, do you want me to do
anything special for this or just go for it." (The first officer was the pilot flying the
aircraft.) The captain responded, "unless you got anything special you'd like t o do." The
first officer replied, "Unless just take off the nosewheel early like a soft field takeoff or
something; I'll take the nosewheel off and then we'll l e t i t fly off."

            At 1558:55, Flight 90 was cleared by local control t o "taxi into position and
hold" on runway 36 and t o "be ready for an immediate [takeoff]            ."Before Flight 90
started to taxi, the flightcrew replied, "...position and hold," a t 1558:58. As the aircraft
was taxied, the tower transmitted the takeoff clearance and the pilot acknowledged,
"Palm 90 cleared for takeoff." Also, at 1559:28, Flight 90 was told not t o delay the
departure since landing traffic was 2 1/2 miles out for runway 36; the last radio
transmission from Flight 90 was the reply, "Okay" at 1559:46.

            The CVR indicated that the pretakeoff checklist was completed at 1559:22.
At 1559:45, as the aircraft was turning to the runway heading, the captain said, "Your
throttles." At 1559:46, the sound of engine spoolup was recorded, and the captain stated,
"Holler if you need the wipers.   ..."At 1559:56, the captain commented, "Real cold, real
cold," and at 1559:58, the first officer remarked, "God, look at that thing, that don't seem
right, does it?"

             Between 1600:05 and 1600:10, the first officer stated, 'I.             ..
                                                                                   that's not
      .
right. .,'I to which the captain responded, "Yes i t is, there's eighty." The first officer
reiterated, "Naw, I don't think that's right." About 9 seconds later the first officer,
added, ".. .  maybe i t is," but then 2 seconds later, after the captain called, "hundred and
twenty," the first officer said, "I don't know."
            Eight seconds after the captain called "Vee one" and 2 seconds after he called
'Vee two," the sound of the stickshaker 9/ was recorded. At 1600:45, the captain said,
"Forward, forward," and a t 1600:48, "weonly want five hundred." At 1600:50, the captain
continued, "Come on, forward, forward, just barely climb." At 1601:00, the first officer
said, "Larry, we're going down, Larry,'' t o which the captain responded, "1 know it."

             About 1601, the aircraft struck the heavily congested northbound span of the
14th Street Bridge, which connects the District of Columbia with Arlington County,
Virginia, and plunged into the ice-covered Potomac River. It came t o rest on the west
end of the bridge 0.75 nmi from the departure end of runway 36. Heavy snow continued t o
fall and visibility a t the airport was varying between 114 mile and 518 mile.

           When the aircraft struck the bridge, i t struck six occupied automobiles and a
boom truck before tearing away a 41-foot section of the bridge wall and 97 feet of
the bridge railings. As a result of the crash, 70 passengers, including 3 infants, and
4 crewmembers were killed. Four passengers and one crewmember were injured seriously.
Four persons in vehicles on the bridge were killed; four were injured, one seriously.

-t61o Takeoff decision speed - The speed at which, if an engine failureoccurs, the distance
      continue the takeoff t o a height of 35 f e e t will not exceed the usable takeoff distance,
or the distance to bring the airplane to a full stop will not exceed the acceleration - stop
 distance available. V must not be greater than the rotation speed, or less than the
ground minimum control speed, V          .
 11Rotation speed - The speed at SEfS&hrotation is initiated during the takeoff t o attain
-climb speed at the 35-foot-height.
-8/ Climb speed - The scheduled target speed t o be attained a t the 35-foot-height.
-9/ A device which activates t o warn the flightcrew of an impending stall.
           At 1603, the duty officer a t the airport fire station notified crash/fire/rescue
(CFR) equipment based on his monitoring of a radio transmission between Washington
National Tower and the operations officer that an aircraft was possibly off the end of
runway 36.
           Safety Board investigators interviewed more than 200 witnesses t o establish
the sequence of events from the start of the takeoff until impact, and more than 100
written statements were obtained. (See figure 1 for witness locations and flightpath.
Numbers correlate t o the locations of 10 of the witnesses interviewed.)
               Ground witnesses generally agreed that the aircraft was flying a t an unusually
low altitude with the wings level and attained a nose-high attitude of 30" t o 40Â before i t
hit the bridge. (See figure 2.) Four persons in a car on the bridge within several hundred
f e e t from t h e point of impact claimed that large sheets of ice fell on their car.
             A driver whose car was on the bridge a t about the wingtip of the aircraft
stated, "I heard screaming jet engines. . ..   The nose was up and the tail was down. It was
like the pilot was still trying t o climb but the plane was sinking fast. I was in the center
left lane...  about 5 or 6 cars lengths from where (the red car) was. I saw the tail of the
plane tear across the top of the cars, smashing some tops and ripping off others.       .. .  I
            .                .
saw i t spin. .(the red car). .around and then hit the guardrail. All the time i t was going
across the bridge it was sinking but the nose was pretty well up.   .. .  I got the impression
that the plane was swinging around a little and going in a straight direction into the river.
               .
The plane.. seemed t o go across the bridge a t a slight angle and the dragging tail
seemed t o straighten out. It leveled out a little. Once t h e tail was across the bridge the
plane seemed t o continue sinking very fast but I don't recall t h e nose pointing down. If i t
was, i t wasn't pointing down much. The plane seemed t o hit the water intact in a
combination sinking/plowing action. I saw the cockpit go under the ice. I got the
impression it was skimming under the ice and water.     . ..  I did not see the airplane break
apart. It seemed t o plow under the ice. I did not see any ice on the aircraft or any ice
fall off the aircraft. I do not remember any wing dip as the plane came across the bridge.
I saw nothing fall from the airplane as i t crossed the bridge."
           Between 1519 and 1524, a passenger on an arriving flight holding for g a t e
space near Flight 90 saw some snow accumulated on the top and right side of the fuselage
and photographed Flight 90. (See figure 3.)
            No witnesses saw the flightcrew leave the aircraft t o inspect for snow/ice
accumulations while a t the gate. Departing and arriving flightcrews and others who saw
Flight 90 before and during takeoff stated that the aircraft had an unusually heavy
accumulation of snow or ice on it. An airline crew taxiing parallel to, but in the opposite
direction of, Flight 90's takeoff, saw a portion of Flight 90's takeoff roll and discussed the
extensive amount of snow on the fuselage. The captain's statment t o the Board included
the following: "I commented t o my crew, 'look at the junk on that airplane,I.. Almost the
entire length of the fuselage had a mottled area of snow and what appeared t o be
   ...
ice along the top and upper side of the fuselage above the passenger cabin windows...."
None of the witnesses a t the airport could positively identify the rotation or liftoff point
of Flight 90; however, they testified that it was beyond the intersection of runways 15 and
36, and that the aircraft's rate of climb was slow as it left the runway. Flightcrews
awaiting departure were able t o observe only about the first 2,000 feet of the aircraft's
takeoff roll because of the heavy snowfall and restricted visibility.
Figure 1.-Flightpath and witness locations.
Figure 2. -- Aircraft Impact Attitude.
                                         Photo b y :   Edward J . Kovarik

Figure 3.-Flight   90 between 1519 and 1524.
            At 1600:03, as Flight 90 was on the takeoff roll, the local controller had
transmitted t o an approaching Eastern 727, Flight 1451,   "...
                                                             the wind is zero one zero a t
one one, you're cleared t o land runway three six; the runway visual range touchdown two
thousand eight hundred rollout one thousand six hundred." At 1600:ll Eastern Flight 1451
acknowledged,  "...  cleared t o land, over the lights." At 1600:56, the local controller
transmitted, "Eastern fourteen fifty-one, turn left at the next taxiway, advise when you
clear the runway, no delay clearing."
            During witness interviews, one witness on the airport stated, "Immediately
after I noticed the Air Florida 737, an Eastern 727 landed unbelievably close after (Air
Florida) 737. I felt i t was too close for normal conditions - let alone very hard snow."
            Flight 90 crashed during daylight hours at 1601:Ol at 38' 51' N longitude and
77O 02' W latitude. Elevation was 37 feet mean sea level.
1.2        Injuries to Persons
           Injuries              -
                                 Crew         Passengers            Other*         -
                                                                                   Total

           Fatal                  4               70**                4             78
           Serious                1                4                  1              6
           Minor                  0                 0                 3              3
           None
           Total
* Persons in vehicles on the bridge.
* * Including three infants
1.3        Damage to Aircraft
           The aircraft was destroyed by impact with the bridge, ice, and water.
           Other Damage
           Seven vehicles in the northbound span of the 14th Street Bridge were
destroyed. A section of the bridge sidewall barrier structure and bridge railing were torn
away.
1.5        Personnel Information
            Both pilots were trained and certificated in accordance with current
regulations. (See appendix B.)
            The captain was described by pilots who knew him or flew with him as a quiet
person. According t o available information, he did not have any sleep or eating pattern
changes recently; the 24 t o 72 hours before January 13 also were unremarkable. Pilots
indicated that the captain had good operational skills and knowledge and had operated
well in high workload flying situations. His leadership style was described as not different
from other captains. On May 8, 1980, during a line check in B-737 the captain was found
t o be unsatisfactory in the following areas: adherence t o regulations, checklist usage,
flight procedures such as departures and cruise control, approaches and landings. As a
result of this line check, the captain's initial line check qualification as a B-737 captain
was suspended. On August 27, 1980, h e received a satisfactory grade on a line check and
was granted the authority t o a c t as pilot-in-command.   On April 24, 1981, the captain
received an unsatisfactory grade on a recurrent proficiency check when he showed
deficiencies in memory items, knowledge of aircraft systems, and aircraft limitations.
Three days later, the captain took a proficiency recheck and received a satisfactory
grade. On October 21, 1981, the captain satisfactorily completed a B-737 simulator
course in lieu of a proficiency check. His last line check was satisfactorily completed on
April 29, 1981.

            The first officer was described by personal friends and pilots as a witty,
bright, outgoing individual. According t o available information, he had no recent sleep or
eating pattern changes. The 24 to 72 hours before January 13 were spent with his family
and were unremarkable. On the morning of January 13, the first officer was described as
well rested and in a good mood. Acquaintances indicated that he had an excellent
command of the physical and mental skill in aircraft piloting. Those who had flown with
him during stressful flight operations said that during those times he remained the same
witty, sharp individual "who knew his limitations." Several persons said that he was the
type of pilot who would not hesitate t o speak up if he knew something specific was wrong
with flight operations. He had completed all required checks satisfactorily.

           Neither pilot had any record of FAA violations.

            The Safety Board reviewed the winter operations conducted by the captain and
first officer and found that the captain, after upgrading t o captain in B-737 aircraft, had
flown eight takeoffs or landings in which precipitation and freezing or near-freezing
conditions occurred, and that the first officer had flown two takeoffs or landings in such
conditions during his employment with Air Florida, Inc. The captain and first officer had
flown together as a crew only 17 112 hours.

1.6        Aircraft Information

            The aircraft, a Boeing 737-222, serial No. 19556, was acquired by Air Florida
from United Airlines on July 28, 1980. It had been certificated, equipped, and maintained
in accordance with current Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements. The
aircraft's gross takeoff weight was 102,300 pounds; the maximum authorized takeoff
weight was 109,000 pounds. The flight was fueled with 26,000 pounds of Jet-A fuel. The
aircraft center of gravity was within prescribed limits. (See appendix C.)

               The aircraft was equipped with two Pratt & Whitney JT8D-9A turbo-fan
engines with a takeoff thrust rating of 14,500 pounds each at sea level on a standard
day. 101 Engine power settings for Flight 90's takeoff from Washington National Airport
w e r e t o be 2.04 EPR Ill with air conditioning packs "off." Normal operating procedures
for Air Florida require that air conditioning packs be off for takeoff. The following
takeoff data for this flight were extracted from the FAA-approved flight manual for the
Boeing 737-222 aircraft:

           Takeoff gross weight        102,300 pounds
           Vl speed                    137 kns
           V speed                     139 kns
            R
           V2 speed                    144 kns

101 Standard day temperature for engine performance calculation is 59O F.
-
111 Engine pressure ratio is the turbine discharge total pressure (Pt7) divided by the total
-
pressure a t the compressor inlet (Pt ).
                                     2
           The Safety Board computed the required field length for takeoff for the
following conditions, using the aircraft flight manual.

           Outside air temperature                    +24?
           Wind                                      020Â°/1 kns
           Flaps                                     5
           Air conditioning packs                    Off
           Antiskid System                           Operative

           The zero wind field length was determined t o be 5,900 feet.

1.7        Meteorological Information
           The following terminal forecast was issued by the National Weather Service
(NWS) Forecast Office, Washington, D.C., at 0940 on January 13, and was valid 1000,
January 13 through 1000, January 14:

           Ceiling -- 1,500 feet overcast, visibility -- 3 miles reduced by light
           snow, variable ceiling 500 feet obscured, visibility -- 3/4 mile reduced
           by light snow. After 1300: ceiling 600 feet obscured, visibility -- 1 mile
           reduced by light snow, wind -- 1 3 0 10 kns, occasionally ceiling 300 feet
           obscured, visibility -- 1/2 mile reduced by moderate snow. After 1700:
           ceiling 400 feet obscured, visibility -- 1 mile reduced by light snow,
           occasionally visibility-- 1/2 mile reduced by moderate snow, chance of
           light freezing rain, light ice pellets, and moderate snow. After 0100:
           ceiling 1,500 feet overcast, visibility -- 4 miles reduced by light snow,
           wind   -- 310Â 10 kns. After 0400: marginal visual flight rules due t o
           ceiling and snow.

            The following SIGMET 12/ ALPHA-3 was issued at 1347 on January 13 by the
NWS, Washington, D.C., and was valid from 1340 through 1740 for Ohio, West Virginia,
Virginia, District of Columbia, Maryland, and Delaware:

           From 20 miles northwest of Erie to 60 miles northeast of Parkersburg t o
           Atlantic City t o Hatteras t o Savannah t o 60 miles east of Chattanooga
           t o York (Kentucky) t o Cincinnati. Moderate occasional severe rime or
           mixed icing in clouds and in precipitation above the freezing level
           reported by aircraft. Freezing level from the surface over Ohio sloping
           t o multiple freezing levels surface to 6,000 feet over central Carolinas,
           southeast Virginia, and the Delmarva Peninsula. Freezing level 7,000 t o
           9,000 feet over the coastal Carolinas. Continue advisory beyond 1740.

           The following surface observations were taken before and after the accident
by observers under contract t o the NWS at Washington National Airport.

           1558:        t y p e ~ r e c o r d special; c e i l i n g ~ i n d e f i n i t e 200 feet obscured;
           visibility -- 112 mile; weathere-moderate snow; temperature                          --     24OF.;
           dewpoint -- 24 OF; wind - 010' 11 kns; altimeter -- 29.94 inches;
           r e m a r k s ~ r u n w a y36 visual range 2,800 feet, variable 3,500 feet.



-2 1 Significant meteorological information.
1
           1614: type-special;        c e i l i n g ~ i n d e f i n i t e 200  feet    obscured;
           visibility -- 318 mile; w e a t h e r ~ r n o d e r a t esnow; temperature -- 24 F.;
           dewpoint -- 24 OF.; wind -- 020' 13 kns; altimeter -- 29.91 inches;
           remarks--runway 36 visual range 2,000 feet, variable 3,500 feet,
           pressure falling rapidly (aircraft mishap).

           The precipitation intensities recorded before and after the accident were a s
follows:
           Precipitation                                            Ended
                                         (time)                    'time)
           Moderate snow                   1240
           Heavy snow                      1320
           Moderate snow                   1525
           Light snow                      1540
           Moderate snow                   1553

          The following are the synoptic observations of precipitation water equivalent
and measured snow accumulation:
           Time (From - To)              Water Equivalent            Snow Accumulation
           0650 - 1252                        0.07 inch                     2.1 inches
           1252 - 1851                        0.32 inch                     3.8 inches
           Midnight - Midnight                0.42 inch                     6.5 inches
               There were two transmisometers in operation before and during the time of
the accident. The center of the baseline of the transmissometer for runway 36 was
located about 1,600 feet down the runway from the threshold and about 600 feet t o
the right of the runway centerline. The center of the baseline of the transmisometer for
runway 18 was located about 1,700 feet down the runway from the threshold and about
800 f e e t t o the left of the runway centerline. Both transmissometers had a 250-foot
baseline.

           Runway visual range (RVR) was measured as follows for the times indicated:

           -
           Time




           Air Florida Flight 90 received weather briefing information from American
Airlines at Washington National. The operations agent stated that they did not keep
copies of weather information or a log of what was delivered t o the flightcrew. In a
written statement, the operations agent noted that, in addition t o destination information,
Air Florida Flight 90 would have received current surface observations a t Washington
National Airport (excluding a field condition report).
           Aids to Navigation

           Aids t o navigation were not a factor in this accident.

           Communications

           There were no communications difficulties.

           Aerodrome and Ground Facilities

           Washington National Airport is located a t Gravelly Point, Virginia, on the west
                                              County, Virginia, is to the immediate west, while
bank of the ~ o t o m i cRiver. ~ r l i n ~ t o n
the City of Alexandria, Virginia, is to the south. The east boundary of the airport is the
Potomac River while the District of Columbia is directly t o the north. The areas
surrounding the airport are populated, and the general center of Washington, D.C., is
about 3 miles north of the airport. Washington National Airport is owned by the U.S.
Government and operated by the Federal Aviation Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation. Washington National Airport was opened in 1941.

            The landing area consists of three runways: 18-36, 15-33 and 3-21. Runway 36
is served by a Category I1 instrument landing system (ILS), high intensity runway lights,
high intensity approach lighting system with sequenced flashing lights, touchdown zone
lights, and centerline lights. Runway 18-36 is hard surfaced with asphalt and grooved; i t
is 6,869 feet long and 150 feet wide. Edge lights on runway 18-36 are displaced 35 f e e t on
each side of the runway.
            Runway 36 at Washington National Airport has a runway safety area (overrun)
which complies with current FAA design criteria for existing runway safety areas. The
design criteria require that the safety area be 500 f e e t wide and extend 200 feet beyond
the end of the runway. The runway 36 safety area is 500 feet wide and extends 335 feet
beyond the end of the runway.
              However, FAA design criteria for newly constructed runways require an
extended runway safety area in addition t o the runway safety area. The extended runway
safety area is that rectangular area along the extended runway centerline that begins
200 feet from the end of the usable runway (the 200 feet area is the runway safety area)
and extends outward in conformance with criteria in effect at the time of construction.
Current FAA criteria for new airports require that the extended runway safety area be
800 f e e t long and 500 f e e t wide. The total length of the two safety areas must be 1,000
feet beyond the end of the runway.

           FAA Airport Bulletin DCA 7/45, dated October 9, 1981, contains snow and
slush emergency procedures which were in effect from date of issue through April 1, 1982.
The purpose of the Bulletin was t o assign responsibilities and t o establish procedures t o be
followed in removing and controlling snow, slush, ice, sand, and water a t Washington
National Airport. (See appendix D.)
            At 1245 on January 13, airport personnel measured the snow on runway 18-36
and found i t to be about 2 inches. Shortly thereafter, the airport operations office
decided t o remove the snow from the runway. At 1250, an Airport Advisory was issued
stating, "Airport will be closed 1330 - 1430 for snow removal." Snow was to be removed
using snow plows with rubber boots on the blades. Plows removed snow down t o the
surface. Brooms were used t o sweep away any remaining loose snow after the plows
passed, and the runway surface was then sanded.
           At 1450, snow removal on runway 18-36 was completed and the airport was
reopened. At this time, the air traffic control tower was told "runway 18-36 plowed full
length and width, sanded 50 feet each side of centerline. All other surfaces covered with
3 114 inches of dry snow."

            At 1525, the airport operations officer issued the following Airport Field
Report: "runway 18/36 plowed, swept full length and width, sanded 50 feet each side of
centerline. All other surfaces covered with 3 114 inches of dry snow. Use caution". At
1600, an airport operation officer "estimated that the snow cover on the last 1,500 feet of
runway 36 amounted t o about three-fourths inch." At 1600:22, the local controller made
a general transmission "brakes poor" on runway 36. At 1607, American Airlines Flight
508, a B-727 aircraft, landed on runway 36, and the captain reported that braking action
was "poor" and that snow was rapidly covering the runway.

           Under the requirements of 14 CFR 139, Certification and Operations: Land
                       -
Airports Serving CAB Certificated Air Carriers, certificated airports a r e required t o
provide primary crash/fire/rescue protection within the geographical boundaries of the
airport. There is no requirement t o respond t o off-airport accidents.

            Advisory Circular 150/5210-13, "Water Rescue Plans, Facilities, and
Equipment," dated May 4, 1972, suggests the planning procedures and necessary facilities
and equipment t o effectively perform rescue operations when an aircraft lands in a body
of water, swamp, or tidal area where normal aircraft firefighting and rescue service
vehicles are unable t o reach the accident scene. The AC states that special water rescue
services, where possible, should be under the jurisdiction of the airport management and
located on or near the airport. In this and all other situations, i t should be coordinated
with local emergency services.

            With regard t o vehicles, the AC states that air cushion vehicles have high
speed capabilities over water and adverse terrain conditions which make them ideally
suitable for rescue service. If this type of vehicle is available, its use should be included
in the emergency rescue plan.

1.11       F l w t Recorders
           A total of 82 divers trained t o dive in icy waters were brought from various
U.S. Navy, U.S. Army, and U.S. Coast Guard units t o conduct salvage operations and
rescue operations. Divers searched for the flight data recorder (FDR) and cockpit voice
recorder (CVR) using an acoustic sound device t o home in on the discrete signals emitted
from the recorders. Underwater visibility was 8 inches. Both recorders were recovered
from the Potomac River on January 20-7 days after the crash.
           The aircraft was equipped with a Fairchild model 5242 FDR, serial No. 6135,
and a Sundstrand V-557 CVR, serial No. 2282.

           The recorders were only superficially damaged. The foil recording medium
was removed from the FDR and examination disclosed that all parameters and binary
traces were present and active. The altitude and airspeed traces were derived from the
aircraft central air data computer. Other data recorded were magnetic heading, vertical
acceleration, and radio transmitter (microphone) keying, all as a function of time. (The
FDR readout is presented in appendix E.)
            A timing discrepancy was found in the FDR which made i t necessary t o
evaluate carefully all values obtained from this unit. The first two radio transmissions
were timed correctly and matched the timing obtained from the CVR and the ATC
transcript within 1 second. The third transmission ("okay") came only a measured
3 seconds after takeoff acknowledgement, instead of the 6 seconds indicated by the other
sources. This discrepancy affected all recorded traces simultaneously and probably
occurred a number of times throughout the accident flight. Examination of data from
previous flights showed that i t was irregular in occurrence and duration; the foil slowed
for short periods of time then speeded up, thus rendering the overall timing correct while
leaving short-term timing errors. This was caused by a malfunction of the foil takeoff
drive system. Therefore, FDR data were considered reliable only if validated by the other
two data sources.
            The CVR tape quality was good. Since there is no timing signal recorded on a
CVR tape, timing was accomplished by adjusting the tape speed so that the 400 Hz
aircraft power signal, which leaks onto the area microphone channel, was of the correct
frequency. Copy tapes were made with a standard encoded time signal recorded on one
channel. A timed tape was then compared t o the tower tapes; tower tapes are recorded
with a standard time reference signal from WWV. (WWV is a radio station operated by the
National Bureau of Standards which transmits standard radio frequencies, standard time
intervals, and time announcements. Timing of CVR data is accurate t o WWV time plus or
minus 1 second.)
         A timed transcript of the cockpit area microphone channel and of radio
communications data from the CVR was made. (See appendix F.)
           During preparation of the CVR transcript, members of the CVR group could
not agree on the response t o the checklist callout "anti-ice". The majority believed that
the response was "off," but that word was put in parentheses in the transcript t o indicate
questionable text. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Audio Laboratory was
requested t o perform an independent examination of that portion of the tape. The FBI
concluded that the response t o the checklist callout "anti-ice" was "off." -
                                                                            13/
            Events as recorded on the CVR and FDR were compared, and an overall
matchup of the data from these two sources was compiled. There was no definitive way
t o correct absolutely the short-term timing problems of the FDR, so some discrepancies
occur in the description below. In addition, FDR altitude and airspeed values are given as
recorded, and are not corrected for aircraft static port position error a t high angles of
attack.
            At 1559:24, the tower cleared Flight 90 for takeoff. At 1559:50 (0001:19
elapsed time on the FDR graph), the turn t o the runway heading was completed, and 1
second later the captain said, "It's spooled." Airspeed data were not recorded by the FDR
below 80 kns, so all plotted values before 1600:lO (001:39) should be disregarded. The
first valid airspeed reading was 82 kns a t 1600:lO. About 1 second earlier, the captain
called 80 kns ("yes i t is, there's eighty"), and 11 seconds later he called 120 (at that time
the FDR read 116 kns; the FDR indicated 120 kns about 4.4 seconds after the CVR
callout). The V callout occurred a t 1600:31, or 10 seconds after the 120 kns callout.


13/ Federal Bureau of Investigation File No. 95-247269. (See appendix G.)
-
           The FDR showed a sharp decrease and then a gentle rise in the altitude trace
beginning a t 1600:31.6 (0002:00.6); this is characteristic of the change in static pressure
caused by aircraft rotation. Airspeed at this time was recorded as 130 knots. The V2
callout occurred a t 1600:37, and the sound of the stall warning (stickshaker) began
2 seconds later and continued until impact.
            After rotation, the aircraft began t o climb at a fairly constant but slightly
decreasing airspeed; between 1600:37.6 and 1600:46.0, airspeed decreased from 147 t o
144 kns. Altitude a t the end of this period was 240 feet and heading had changed about 3'
t o the right. During the next 7 seconds ending a t 1600:53.8, airspeed decreased
significantly, from 144 t o 130 kns, while heading changed t o the left, from 009' t o 002.4';
the maximum recorded altitude of 352 feet was achieved a t the end of this period. The
heading then continued changing t o the left, reaching 347.5' 6.6 seconds later; the
recording ended 0.6 second beyond this point with a heading of 354.4'.

            The altitude trace beyond 1600:54.0 is jagged, with rapid excursions up and
down. The FDR altitude stylus was calibrated so that a movement of 0.0033 inch
corresponds t o a change in altitude of 100 feet (between 1,000 f e e t and 8,000 feet); hence,
any vibration-induced stylus movement such as might be produced by stall buffet would
produce significant changes in the altitude trace with respect t o the maximum value of
352 feet.
1.12        Wreckage
           Wreckage recovery was initiated immediately after the accident and
simultaneously with the recovery of victims. Recovery operations were conducted in
coordination with the National Transportation Safety Board by various segments of the
Department of Defense, Department of Transportation, and Metropolitan Washington
Police Department, all under the general direction of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
            As the aircraft descended, the right wing was structurally damaged when it hit
the boom truck, and shortly thereafter, the aircraft struck the steel barrier and railing on
the west side of the 14th Street Bridge at an elevation of about 37 feet mean sea level.
Fragments of the right wing remained on the bridge. The remainder of the wreckage sank
in the Potomac River in about 25 t o 30 f e e t of water. The wreckage area was confined t o
the south side of the river between the 14th Street Bridge and the Center Highway Bridge
of the George Mason Memorial Bridge. (See figure 4.)

            After initial impact, the aircraft broke into several major pieces. The
fuselage broke into four major pieces which included: (1)nose section with cockpit; (2)
fuselage section between nose section and wing center section; (3) fuselage-to-wing
intersection; and (4) a f t body structure with empennage attached. The wing structure was
separated into three major pieces which included: (1) left wing outboard of the No. 1
engine, including all associated flight control surfaces; (2) wing center section, lower
surface, including wing lower surface stubs between the No. 1 engine mounts and the
No. 2 engine mounts; and (3) right wing outboard of the No. 2 engine with the outboard
20 feet mostly disintegrated. The left main landing gear was separated from the wing,
and the right main gear remained attached except for the wheels and oleo piston. The
nose landing gear and its attaching structure were separated from the nose section. Both
engines and their pylon structures were separated from the wings. There was no evidence
of fire on any of the recovered structure.
                                                  SCALE (APPROXIMATE)




Figure 4.   -- P o s i t i o n of Wreckage i n t h e Water.
            The horizontal stabilizer jackscrew measured 7.75 inches between the upper
stop and the traveling nut. The 7.75-inch measurement corresponds t o 2.3O stabilizer
leading-edge-down, or 5.3 units of trim. This stabilizer setting is in the green band for
takeoff.
            The B-737 aircraft has four leading edge flaps and six leading edge slats.
Erosion was minimal on all of the leading edges and was within specified limits. Actuator
extension for leading edge slats 1 and 2 was measured a t 8 112 inches and 8 inches,
respectively, which is consistent with trailing edge flaps 5 extended position. The
actuator for No. 3 leading edge slat was bent with about 8 114 inches of rod extension,
which is consistent with the trailing edge flaps 5 position. The aileron trim assembly (in
the wheel well) was found with the rig pin holes aligned. This corresponds with a zero
trim setting for the ailerons. All segments of the trailing edge flaps sustained varying
degrees of impact damage. Measurements taken between the travel nut and plastic cap at
the trailing end of the flap jackscrews corresponded t o trailing edge flaps 5 extension. All
spoiler actuators were in the retracted (down) and locked position.
             The right elevator and its trim tab were intact and were attached t o the right
stabilizer a t all hinge points. The left elevator remained relatively intact and attached t o
the stabilizer. The rudder remained intact and attached t o the vertical stabilizer, but no
valid rudder trim measurements could be obtained.
            Because of the extensive fragmentation, the integrity of the flight control
system before impact could not be determined. Nearly all bellcranks, sector pulleys, and
other mechanisms were broken, distorted, and separated from their attachment
structures.
           The nose landing gear was separated from its fuselage attachment structure.
The nose gear strut and tires remained intact. There was no visible damage t o the tires,
and both wheels were free t o rotate. The nose gear retract actuator was attached t o the
nose gear assembly, and the actuator was in the extended position.
           The left and right main landing gear was torn loose from the aircraft. The
right gear was recovered as a unit; the left gear oleo strut, piston, brakes, wheels, and
tires were not recovered. Uplock mechanisms were undamaged and were in a position
consistent with a gear-extended position.
            Both EPR transmitters had been damaged by impact. By comparing the
transmitters from the aircraft with a like-new transmitter, i t was determined that the
accident aircraft's left transmitter was at the 2.20 EPR position. The transmitter was
electrically operated t o verify the position for a 2.20 EPR reading. This could not be
accomplished since the synchros would not stabilize. The right EPR transmitter was
checked. The synchros were found t o be moveable and could not be used t o determine
impact position.
            The angle-of-air flow sensor for the stall warning system had been severely
damaged by impact. The vane heater was tested and found t o be operational. The flap
position transmitter had also been damaged severely by impact. The drive motor and
synchro had been dislodged by impact and were loose in their case. The stall warning
panel module had not been damaged. The switch was in the "normaln position. When
electrical power was applied t o the stickshaker motor, i t operated normally.
            The engine instruments were damaged slightly by impact and remained
attached t o their panels. The gauges indicated the following:
       Indication                  Engine No. 1(Left)           Engine No. 2 (Right)

       ^
       EGT
                                    0 percent
                                    2.9, Bug at 2.02
                                    820'
                                    23 percent
                                                                78 percent
                                                                2.98 Bug at 2.26
                                                                2200'
                                                                0
        2 flow
       Fuel                         3,800 lbslhr.               1,200 lbs/hr.
       Oil Pressure                 72 psi                      53 psi
       Oil Temperature              Off scale -40%              150ÂC
       Oil Quantity                 4 gallons                   3.5 gallons
             The antiskid switches were on and guarded in the on position.


            The engines were examined on scene and their condition documented. They
were then taken t o the facilities of Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Group, Hartford,
Connecticut, for disassembly and inspection. No evidence of preimpact malfunction was
noted. External and internal examination of both engines1 high pressure and low pressure
compressors and turbine sections disclosed varying degrees of damage consistent with
rotation a t impact. There was no evidence of any lack of lubrication on any bearings.
The oil systems were not contaminated.
           Each of the two engines was equipped with a thermal anti-ice system,
composed of three anti-ice valves which a r e designed t o open when the respective engine
anti-ice switch is placed ON. The inlet guide vanes and nose cones use 8th stage
compressor bleed air and the cowl anti-ice system uses 13th stage air. The left engine's
8th and 13th stage engine bleed air dueling on the right side of the engine was crushed
between the 1:30- and 4:OO- o'clock positions. The engine's nose cowl thermal anti-ice
valve was closed. The main bleed air valve was closed. The fuel heat valve was closed.
The left inlet guide vane anti-ice valve was closed. The right inlet guide vane anti-ice
valve was open and free t o rotate. The air turbine starter was not visibly damaged.
            The right engine's right inlet guide vane anti-ice valve was closed. The left
inlet guide vane anti-ice valve was not recovered. The nose cowl anti-ice valve was
closed. The engine bleed valve was closed. The modulationlshutoff valve was closed.
The fuel heat valve was closed. The air turbine starter exhibited no visible damage. The
pressurization and bleed control was not visibly damaged. The control was disassembled
and no mechanical discrepancies were noted, except that i t was clogged with water and
dirt. The 8th stage and two 13th stage antisurge bleed valves functioned normally.
1.13         Medical and Pathological Information
            There was no evidence of pre-impact incapacitation or preexisting physical or
physiological problems which could have affected the flightcrew's judgment or
performance. The results of toxicological examinations disclosed no abnormal conditions.
The captain sustained fatal head injuries and the first officer sustained fatal head and
neck injuries.
           One flight attendant sustained a fatal head injury and a fracture of the right
upper extremity. Another flight attendant sustained fatal injuries t o the thorax and
abdomen.
           Of the 70 passengers killed in the crash, 69 suffered severe injuries considered
by the medical examiner t o be directly related t o the cause of death. One passenger
sustained only minor superficial injuries and death apparently resulted from drowning.
The most predominant fatal injury suffered was t o the head, occurring in 36 of the
70 passengers. Nine of the passengers had fatal injuries of the neck. Twenty-nine
passengers sustained injuries t o the chest considered t o be fatal. There were four f a t a l
abdominal injuries and one fatal injury of the pelvis. Some passengers suffered more than
one type of fatal injury. Seventeen passengers received injuries not considered t o be
immediately fatal. However, except for the person who apparently drowned, all suffered
incapacitating injuries due t o secondary impact forces, making escape impossible.
            Four passengers and one flight attendant received varying degrees of serious
injuries and were rescued and hospitalized. Four persons in vehicles on the bridge were
killed, one person on the bridge was injured seriously, and three persons on the bridge
escaped with only minor injuries.
1.14       -
           Fire

            There was no fire.
1.15        Survival Aspects
            At 1603 January 13, the duty officer a t the Washington National Airport fire
station dispatched CFR equipment based on an intercepted radio transmission between the
Washington National Airport Tower air traffic control and the airport operations officer.
While he was alerting the CFR crews, the crash phone rang a t 1604, reporting the loss of
visual and voice communication with an aircraft. The assistant fire chief on duty directed
CFR vehicles R-373 and R-397 t o respond t o the end of runway 36 and directed R-374,
R-376, and R-396 t o respond north on the George Washington Parkway beyond the airport
boundary.
             R-396 was the first CFR vehicle t o arrive on the river bank nearest t o the
scene of the crash and the assistant fire chief set up a command post on the shore of t h e
river a t 1611. The fire chief arrived on the scene and assumed command of the crash site
a t 1620. At 1622, the airport airboat was launched. The boat launching ramp was covered
with ice and the boat was literally picked up and moved t o the frozen river and launched.

           In addition t o the Washington National Airport CFR equipment, District of
Columbia, Arlington County, Fairfax County, and City of Alexandria Fire Departments
responded.
            For the six occupants who escaped from the aircraft, temperature, both water
and air, was the major factor which affected their survivability. Water temperature
4 feet below the surface was 34' F. The survivors were in the icy water from 22 t o
35 minutes before being rescued.        Survival time noted on the Survival in Cold
--
Water  141 chart showed  that, based on the water temperature, a t least 50 percent of the
survivors should have lost consciousness during that time period. All five survivors
reported that the cold was so intense that they quickly lost most of the effective use of
their hands; however, none reported loss of consciousness.

141 Bioastronautics Data Book, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
-
SP-3006, Page 121.
            All but one of the survivors managed t o cling t o pieces of the floating
wreckage. The one exception was the most seriously injured passenger, and she was kept
afloat by a lifevest which was inflated by the surviving flight attendant and passed t o her
and her traveling companion. Her traveling companion helped her don the lifevest. The
survivors were unable t o retrieve other lifevests that were seen floating in the area. They
reported that they experienced extreme difficulty in opening the package which contained
the one lifevest which was retrieved. They stated that the plastic package which
contained the lifevest was finally opened by chewing and tearing at i t with their teeth.
            Between 1622 and 1635, a U.S. Park Police helicopter rescued four passengers
and one crewmember and ferried them t o the shoreline. When the rescue helicopter
arrived, three of the survivors were still able t o function sufficiently t o help get
themselves into the life ring and/or the loop in the rescue rope that was dropped by the
helicopter crew. The other two survivors required hands-on rescue; one was pulled aboard
the helicopter skid by the helicopter crewman, the other was rescued by a civilian
bystander who swam out and pulled her ashore.
           Three passengers from the aircraft, as well as two persons who participated in
the rescue efforts, were placed in an ambulance and treated on scene by paramedical
personnel for hypothermia and shock. Radio communications were established with
National Orthopaedic Hospital and Rehabilitation Center in Arlington, Virginia, about
2 miles from the crash site. After treatment on scene, the survivors were transported t o
National Orthopaedic Hospital by ambulance.
                  The three factors commonly used t o determine survivability of an aircraft
crash are: (1) that the decelerative forces not exceed the known tolerable limits of the
human body, (2) that the restraint system--seatbelts, seat structure, and seat anchorage
p o i n t s ~ r e m a i nintact, and (3) that the occupiable area remain relatively intact t o prevent
ejection and provide living space for the occupants.
            The primary impact forces experienced by the survivors did not exceed the
tolerable limits of the human body. However, the secondary impact forces that most
occupants experienced as a result of restraint system failures and violation of occupiable
area did exceed these limits.
            The recovered wreckage showed that the cabin separated from the cockpit and
broke into three large sections and many smaller pieces. Virtually none of the cabin floor
remained intact. All of the seats, whether empty or occupied, were extensively damaged
and most were separated from t h e floor. The only occupiable space in the aircraft that
remained intact and not violated by the collapsing cabin structure and furnishings was the
area in the rear of the cabin in the vicinity of the a f t flight attendant seat.
1.16        Tests and Research
1.16.1      Test of Flight Instruments
            The captain's and first officer's altimeters and vertical speed indicators were
recovered from the river. Since pitotlstatic system covers had not been used during
deicing operations at the gate, the Safety Board sought t o determine if deicing fluid had
been introduced into the system, and submitted these instruments t o the FBI laboratory
for analysis. Analysis revealed no trace of glycol. However, because of the prolonged
immersion of these instruments in water after the crash, the results of the tests a r e not
t o be considered conclusive evidence that deicing fluid was either introduced or not
introduced into the pitot/static system.
1.16.2     Sound Spectrum Analysis
             Spectrum analyses of sounds recorded on the CVR were performed for the
takeoff roll and the flight. The CVR cockpit area microphone channel picks up and
records sounds which originate or can be heard in the cockpit. In past accident
investigations, particularly those involving aircraft with wing-mounted engines, the
Safety Board has documented the engine sounds recorded on the cockpit area microphone
channel. Experience and tests have shown that the predominant frequencies recorded a r e
associated with the first and second stages of the low pressure compressor fan blades of
turbojet and turbofan engines. These frequencies are related t o the rotational velocity of
the fan by the number of blades in the first and second stages. This frequency in cycle
per second, or tone, is called the blade passing frequency (BPF) and can be determined by
taking the rotor rprn, multiplying it by the number of blades in the compressor stage, and
dividing i t by 60 (BPF = rpm X No. of blades)
                                  60

           The percent of maximum low pressure compressor rpm ( N ) (engine low
pressure compressor speed) is displayed in the cockpit and is an indication of the level of
thrust being produced by an engine. This can be determined by dividing the actual rotor
rpm by the engine's rated value for 100 percent rpm.
           Therefore, percent rotor speed is related t o the blade passing frequency as
follows:
                 Percent rpm      =     BPF X 60 X 100
                                        Maximum rpm x blades

           The validity of this equation was verified by Safety Board investigators during
tests at Boeing Aircraft Company, Seattle, Washington, on January 29, 1982.
            To perform the spectrum analysis, signals from the Flight 90 cockpit area
microphone channel were processed in a spectrum analyzer which displayed the energy
content of the signals as a function of their frequencies. A number of these displays were
printed t o give a time history of the spectral content of the cockpit area microphone
channel.    It was determined from this procedure that the predominant frequency
associated with the engine sound increased a t 1559:48 following the words, "your
throttles." On the takeoff roll, the engines' first stage fan blade passing frequency was
smeared between 3,100 Hz and 3,250 Hz for an average frequency of 3,175 Hz,
corresponding t o an engine first-stage fan speed (Nl) of 80 t o 84 percent.

The following table relates time t o percent N rotor rpm t o blade passing frequency.
                                              1
                      TIME                  BPF               ROTOR RPM
                                            (Hz)             ^percent N l )

                    1559:48             Increasing             Increasing
                    1559:51                 3,100                  80
                    1559:53                 3,400                  88
                    1559:55                 3,175                  82
                    1600:39             Indistinct but             82
                                        probably stable
                    1600:50                 3,250                  84
                    1600:55             Rose and became            90+
                                        indistinct
            The first-stage blade passing frequency was not distinct from 1600:39 t o
1600:50 ; the engine cowl is designed t o reduce noises associated with the fans during the
takeoff regime. There was also some masking because of the sound of the stickshaker and
changes in the CVR tape speed (wow and flutter).
               A frequency which could be correlated t o the second-stage fan, which has
40 blades, was only briefly identified during the initial engine acceleration. Its steady
s t a t e frequency could not be identified because it approached the upper limit of the CVRts
frequency range and was severely attenuated. It was about 1 112 times as high as the
frequency associated with the first-stage fan.
1.16.3     Engine Tests with Blocked Inlet Pressure Probe (Pt2)
           The B-737% primary engine instrumentation consists of: engine pressure ratio
(EPR), a direct indication of the ratio of the pressure measured at the turbine discharge
pressure (Pt ) t o the pressure measured at the compressor inlet (pt2); the first stage fan
or low pressure compressor speed ( N ) ; the high pressure compressor speed (N2); the
exhaust gas temperature (EGT); and t h e fuel flow (FIF). (See figure 5.)
            Tests were conducted at The Boeing Co. using a B-737-200 aircraft with JT8D
engines having the same blade passing frequency for the first stage fan as the engines on
N62AF. During these tests, the Ptn probe on the No. 1 engine was blocked with tape
while the P t probe on the No. 2 engine was left unblocked. The throttles were set t o
achieve an E'%R indicator reading of 2.04 on the engine having the blocked Pi2 probe. The
N , N , EGT and F/F were read and the throttle on the engine with the unblocked P t
probe %as adjusted down t o match these values. The EPR indication on this engine then
read 1.70 with the engine anti-ice switch OFF. The N , N2, EGT, and F/F were also
noted for an unblocked P t probe when the engine throthe was set t o an actual EPR of
2.04. (The comparison of the readings between the engine developing an EPR of 1.70 and
the engine developing an EPR of 2.04 is shown in figure 6.) The approximate angular
differences between the instrument pointers were 30Â for Nl, 20' for EGT, 15' for N2,
and 42' for F/F.
           The engine blade passing frequency produced a t various EPR settings was
recorded. A spectrum analysis of this recording showed the blade passing frequency t o be
between 3,100 Hz and 3,250 Hz with actual EPR settings of 1.70 t o 1.74.
1.16.4      Flight Simulator Tests
            The performance study of Flight 90 included aircraft simulation flights
conducted a t The Boeing Co.'s Flight Simulator Center in Renton, Washington. The visual
environment (what pilots saw from the simulator windshield) was constructed t o represent
the runway at Washington National Airport, the two spans of the 14th Street Bridge, and
the railroad bridge.

           The simulator was programmed t o represent the B-737-200 basic model
aircraft performance in conditions of no ice and ice contamination of varying degrees.
Data for the latter were derived from wind tunnel and flight tests using "corn ice" (30 grit
sandpaper) contamination. The effects of icing were programmed into the simulator in
terms of degraded coefficient of lift and increased coefficient of drag; coefficient of
pitching moment was not varied during these tests.
                COMPARATOR
-
R7
"Â¥




                                                                                             EXHAUST GAS
                                                                                             THERMOCOUPLE
                                                          \
                                                   N2 TACHOMETER


                            ENGINE INDICATING SENSOR LOCATION

                                                                        ENGINE PRESSURE RATIO
                                                                         PR) INDICATOR
                                                                        Indicates ratio of turbine dis-
N, RPM INDICATOR                                                        charge pressure (Pti} to Com-
 Indicates low pressure Corn-                                           pression inlet pressure (Pt21.
 pressor speed in percent of                                            Primary thrust setting instru-
 RPM. Self powered.                                               ,     ment since EPR varies pro-
                                                                                  y to the developed



N2 RPM INDICATOR
Indicates high pressure corn-
pressor speed in pe
Self powered.




 FUEL FLOW INDICATOR
 Indicates fuel consumpti
 rate in pounds per hour                                                 XHAUST GAS TEMPERATURE
 (PPH).                                                                  EGT1 INDICATOR
                                                                        Indicates turbine exhaust gas
                                                                        temperature as sensed by ther-




          F i g u r e 5 . -- C e n t e r i n s t r u m e n t p a n e l f u n c t i o n s .
Engine Instrument Indication:                 Engine Instrument Indication:
1.70 EPR Pt2 probe blocked                    2.04 EPR
Engine anti-ice-Off                           Normal Operation


          Figure 6.-Comparison of Instrument Readings -- 1.70 E P R vs. 2.04 EPR.
            Pilots who participated in the tests first validated normal (no ice) aircraft
performance and simulator response/feel for the configuration and weight of the accident
aircraft. Thrust was set at 2.04 EPR. In their opinion, back yoke pressure was abnormally
high during rotation; one unit of additional noseup trim (6 1/2 units total) was accepted as
producing a normal control feel.
           When the simulator coefficients were changed t o represent the effects of
icing, conditions were sought whereby the time and flightpath of the accident aircraft
were duplicated. In all flights, landing gear was down, flaps were set a t 5, and stabilizer
trim setting was not changed. Because spectrum analysis of the CVR tape and tests at
Boeing showed that the actual thrust being developed by the accident aircraft was about
10,750 pounds net thrust per engine (1.70 EPR) and not the target value of 14,500 pounds
net thrust per engine (2.04 EPR), a thrust level corresponding t o 1.70 EPR was used in the
tests.
            The stall warning (stickshaker) in the accident aircraft activated shortly after
liftoff according t o CVR information. Therefore, a pitch attitude was sought for the
flight simulations which would provide the correct relationship between the time of
rotation and stickshaker activation, liftoff, and distance t o impact. Several test runs
were performed using 1.70 EPR and the lift, drag, and pitching moment coefficients
determined for corn ice. The desired pitch attitude was determined t o be 18'noseup.
            The simulator pilots did not, on any flight, spontaneously activate the
stickshaker with the programmed pitching moment. To activate the stickshaker and keep
i t activated, simulator pilots had t o hold positive back stick force, in some cases,
10 pounds or more. If back stick force was released during the first 10 t o 15 seconds of
flight, the simulator would fly out of the stickshaker regime. Thus, although airplane
behavior in terms of climb and acceleration performance could be simulated and valuable
information derived from these flights, pilot control forces and responses were not
necessarily representative of Flight 90. Variations in aircraft pitching moments may have
produced different control forces and pilot responses. Recovery of the simulator in most
cases could be accomplished simply by adding full power, releasing back stick pressure, or
a combination of both.
             In attempts to duplicate the accident sequence and cause the simulator t o
crash a t or near t h e 14th Street Bridge in the simulator visual environment, the simulator
was flown according t o CVR event timing using lift and drag coefficients believed t o be
representative of different ice contamination. Rotation rates for takeoff were also
varied. Using 1.70 EPR with no in-flight thrust adjustment, a left turn of 5O bank was
initiated 12 seconds a f t e r liftoff while attempting t o maintain a target pitch attitude of
18' with the stickshaker activated until impact.             Five flights were found t o be
representative of the accident flight profile, timing, and position of impact. All of these
flights used degraded lift and drag coefficients representative of wing contamination.

            The next sequence of tests attempted t o define conditions of possible aircraft
recovery using combinations of pitch and added thrust. Using 1.70 EPR and simulated
corn ice contamination, the simulator was flown without crashing with a 14' pitch
attitude. Conversely, using a pitch attitude of 18' and corn ice and an initial thrust
setting of 1.70 EPR, in some cases, increased thrust levels applied a t various times after
liftoff effected recovery. During the run most representative of marginal recovery,
target pitch attitude was held fairly constant at 18' and maximum available thrust
(2.23 EPR) was applied about 15 seconds after liftoff. Vertical velocity and pitch attitude
then oscillated for the next 15 seconds, and about 18 seconds after maximum thrust was
applied, a positive r a t e of climb was established, the stickshaker ceased, and climbout was
continued in stall buffet.
           The effect of retracting the landing gear in the simulator tests was small
compared to the effect of any other action. After sustaining a stalled condition for
15 seconds or more, recovery of the simulator usually was not possible.
1.16.5     Tests on Deicer Fluid Samples
           Union Carbide Aircraft Deicing Fluid I1 PM 5178 deicer is composed of
2 percent wetting agents and corrosion inhibitors, 7 percent water, and 91 percent
ethylene glycols. The 91 percent of glycols is actually 81 t o 83 percent of simple ethylene
glycol and 8 t o 10 percent of another ethylene glycol. Both have essentially the same
deicing properties. Diluted t o a 25 percent deicer175 percent water mixture, the solution
would be expected t o contain about 22 percent ethylene glycols (20 percent simple
ethylene glycol).
            Immediately following the accident, the National Transportation Safety Board
secured samples of deicing fluid similar t o that used t o deicelanti-ice N62AF before i t
left the gate. Samples of the deicing fluid, the deicing fluidlwater mixture, and water
were taken from the American Airlines Trump vehicle No. 5058 and were submitted t o the
FBI laboratory for testing. Two separate samples of the deicing solution mixed a t the
nozzle of Trump vehicle No. 5058 were tested; one sample with 25 percent deicer fluid
and 75 percent water selected, and the other sample with 30 percent deicer fluid and
70 percent water selected. Test results showed that the simple ethylene glycol content of
the samples was 12 percent and 18 percent, respectively. The freezing points of these
solutions are about 22OF and 20Â° respectively. Undiluted samples of deicer fluid were
taken from both the main storage tank on the airport and the tank on Trump vehicle No.
5058; the percent of simple ethylene glycol in these samples was 83 percent and 80
percent, respectively.

1.16.6     Metallurgical Examination of W i Leading Edge Slat Skin
             The B-737 Structural Repair Manual 57-50-3, page 14, dated August 1, 1981,
under the heading of "Wing Leading Edge Slat-Skin Erosion Repair" states in part: "Flight
operation is not allowed if leading edge roughness is equivalent t o or greater than that of
240 grit sandpaper." While this operations limitation is not in the FAA-Approved Flight
Manual, i t is a guide t o inspection and maintenance personnel as t o the conditions under
which an aircraft should or should not be released for flight operations.
            In order t o determine the surface roughness of representative sections of
leading edge slat skin, specimens were taken from each of the slats of N62AF. Samples of
240, 320, 400, and 600 grit sandpaper 151 were compared t o each of the six skin sections.
The comparisons were made by rubbing each of the surfaces with the fingertips applying
the same relative pressure. Numerous laboratory personnel performed the test. In all
cases, the six slat skin specimens were found t o be smoother than 600 grit sandpaper.
           A sample of the slat leading edge skin surface and samples of 240 and 600 grit
sandpaper were examined with the aid of a scanning electron microscope. Results of the
examination also disclosed that the slat skin leading edge outer skin surface was smoother
than 600 grit sandpaper.


-
151 The higher the number of the sandpaper, the finer (smoother) the surface.
1.17       Additional Information
1.17.1     Engine Anti-ice System
           The B-737 FAA-Approved Flight Manual and the Air Florida B-737 Operations
Manual prescribe that the engine inlet anti-ice system shall be on when icing conditions
exist. Additionally, the manuals prescribe that the engine anti-ice system shall be on
when icing conditions are anticipated during takeoff and initial climb. (See appendix H.)
The flight manual defines icing conditions as follows:
           Icing may develop when the followin conditions occur simultaneously:
           The dry-bulb temperature is below 8$C (46.4%)
           The wet-bulb temperature is below 4OC (39.2%)
           Visible moisture, such as fog, rain, or wet snow is present.

           Fog is considered visible moisture when i t limits visibility t o one mile or
           less. Snow is wet snow when the ambient temperature is -lÂ° (30ÂF) or
           above.
            The EPR measurement system in the B-737 aircraft senses an air pressure
measured a t the aircraft inlet engine nose probe, known as P t and sets up a ratio
between inlet air pressure and engine exhaust gas pressure measured at the engine exhaust
nozzle, known as Pt7. The EPR (Pt I P t ) is determined electronically and displayed
continuously in the cockpit. It is the primary instrument used by the crew t o set engine
power for takeoff. The Pt probe is subject t o icing but may be deiced with the engine
anti-icing system. When t%e engine anti-ice system is manually activated by the crew,
engine 8th stage compressor bleed air is supplied t o the engine inlet guide vanes and is
discharged into the engine nose cone and t o the engine inlet upstream of the inlet guide
vanes. This hot air keeps ice from forming or melts ice on the inlet probe by passing
warm air around the probe which is mounted in the nose cone.
            With the engine operating, a false indication of the actual EPR can be
indicated in the cockpit when ice blocks the inlet probe. Under this condition, the Ptn
probe is vented t o the nose cone pressure through a siphon-break hole in the sense line.
The interior of the engine nose cone is vented t o the engine inlet static pressure, which is
lower than the engine inlet total pressure normally sensed by the Ptn system. Under
severe icing conditions, if the engine inlet anti-icing air bleed system is shut off and the
normal P t sensing port is blocked with ice, the Pt, sensor will sense the lower pressure
a t the vent port in the nose cone. The cockpit indication may become slightly erratic as
icing begins t o block the probe and will indicate a significantly higher reading when ice
fully blocks the probe. Tests have demonstrated that with a blocked probe a t takeoff,
engine power can indicate an EPR of about 2.04 with the engine actually operating at an
EPR ratio of 1.70. Under these circumstances, a pilot would unknowingly attempt takeoff
a t a considerably lower thrust than desired. However, the pilot has available other
indications of engine operation displayed in the cockpit, such as a lower Nl, N2, EGT, and
FIF consistent with the reduced engine thrust. (See figure 6.)
            Should the pilot activate the engine inlet anti-icing system with a blocked
probe, he would immediately notice a substantial drop in the indicated EPR, incorrectly
indicating a low engine thrust as long as the normal Pta sensing port remains blocked.
This results from the introduction of engine anti-icing air flow into the nose cone and
resultant increase in the pressure in the interior of the nose cone. This pressure is higher
than that which would be sensed a t the normal P t port. Falsely low indicated EPR's have
been detected by pilots when they found that ?hey were unable t o set takeoff power
without exceeding redline N,, N2, and EGT.
1.17.2     History of the Use of Ethylene Glycol as a Deicinp Agent

            The use of ethylene glycol as a deicing agent was started about 1956. At that
time, i t was used by the United States Air Force (USAF) in its cold weather operations,
and a military specification was developed. After civilian operators started using the
same formula about 1960, they found that the deicing/anti-icing needs for commercial use
were substantially different from those of the USAF, which was using ethylene glycol and
propolene glycol in a 3 t o 1 ratio. Union Carbide's recommendation for commercial use of
its deicer fluid for deicing follows:
                 Use a 50% dilution of UCAR ADF 11 (40% for the milder ice
                 conditions). Apply i t at a temperature between 150 and 180Â°F
                 (66 and 82OC.) for the most effective removal of frost and ice
                 from aircraft surfaces. Remove most of the heavy snow before
                 spraying. A coarse stream of spray loosens and displaces ice from
                 aircraft surfaces.
           For anti-icing Union Carbide recommends the following:

                 UCAR ADF 11 is most efficient in its concentrated form for icing
                 protection of ice-free aircraft. This allows fluid retention on the
                 aircraft surface, prolonging icing protection.
                 Do NOT use diluted deicing fluid for anti-icing treatment of
                 ice-free aircraft.
            Jefferson Chemical Company, a former subsidiary of Texaco, also
manufactures a deicing fluid, "WD-30." Its Technical Service Bulletin No. 3029 describes
its deicing fluid and presents recommended methods for its use. Bulletin 3029 states that
light ice and frost may be removed from aircraft exteriors by application of either a
warm solution of diluted WD-30 or unheated, concentrated WD-30. Either warm diluted
or undiluted WD-30 should be used t o remove heavy ice formations. Temperatures in the
range of 180Â°F are recommended. It further states that WD-30 may be used t o prevent
the formation of ice from freezing rain and frost. The duration of protection and
frequency of application will depend on weather conditions. Wing deicing fluid WD-30 is
not recommended t o protect aircraft from snow deposits. Slush is formed where the
deicing fluid is diluted by melting snow, which freezes and is extremely difficult to
remove. Snow is best removed by mechanically sweeping or brushing i t from the aircraft
surfaces.
1.17.3     The Trump Deicer Vehicle
           Trump vehicle No. 5058 is a Model D40D tank truck unit capable of heating,
premixing, mixing, and delivering deicer fluid/water mixtures t o aircraft surfaces. The
unit used for deicing Flight 90 incorporated a glycol/water proportioning system which
allows the operator t o blend the fluid mixture t o meet the conditions required a t the time
and allow for "a more economical use of glycol." The unit did not incorporate the "mix
monitor" which allows the operator t o ascertain that the desired mixture is indeed being
delivered at the nozzle.
           The following procedures for setting the proportioning valve were set forth in
the February 1979 revision t o t h e Trump Vehicle Operator's Manual:
Ambient Temperture                Glycol                            Condition
       (OF.)                    (Percent)
28 or higher                                            Use with [nozzle set at [ 95 gprn [gallon
                                                        per minute] or 125 gprn t o rapidly remove
                                                        snow or ice with hot water.

                                                        Use with 30 gprn nozzle setting
                                                        t o apply a light coating of glycol
                                                        after hot water deicing. Use
                                                        with 60 gpm [nozzle] setting t o
                                                        remove moderate t o heavy snow or ice.
                                                        For more rapid removal of heavy
                                                        snow, i t may be necessary t o
                                                        increase the flow t o 95 gprn with
                                                        a 22% mixture.
10 t o 20                                               Use 30 gprn [nozzle] setting.

Below 10                                                Use 30 gprn [nozzle] setting.
Anti-icing                                              Use 30 gprn nozzle setting and
                                                        apply only enough fluid t o cover
                                                        aircraft, avoid as much run off
                                                        as possible.

            Although the revised 1979 Trump Vehicle Operator's Manual cited specific
percentages of glycol t o be used a t certain temperatures and conditions, the president of
Trump, Inc., testified a t the Safety Board's public hearing into this accident that he first
learned the exact composition of the UCAR ADF-I1 deicing fluid during the testimony a t
the hearing.
1.17.4       American Airlines Deicing Procedures
           Personnel directly involved in the deicinglanti-icing of Flight 90 were
employees of American Airlines and were primarily using the American Airlines General
Maintenance Manual procedures for performing the required deicing operations. At the
time of the accident, American Airlines did not operate any B-737 aircraft nor had any
American Airlines personnel received specific training on B-737 aircraft. The General
Maintenance Manual cites general precautions related t o snow and ice accumulation on
aircraft and the Federal Aviation Regulations which prohibit takeoff with snow, frost, or
ice adhering t o critical parts of the aircraft.
            While the American Airlines Maintenance Manual contained special
instructions for deicing DC-10 aircraft and precautions regarding snow removal from the
areas of vortex generators on B-707 and B-727 aircraft vertical stabilizers, i t did not
contain any instructions pertaining t o the B-737 aircraft.
           The manual provided the following directions for the use of the Trump D40D
vehicle and Union Carbide ADF 11:
                            For Trump deicers No. 4535 and higher
                         with basket-mounted proportioning valves --

  Outside            1,500-gallon    300-gallon          Set Proportioning Valve for:
Temperature          Water Tank      Glycol Tank     Deicing (Removal) Anti-Icing (Final)

     (O   F)                                                (Percent)            (Percent)
26 & Above           Water only     Concentrated
                                    deicing fluid
25 to 20             Water only     Concentrated
                                    deicing fluid
Below 20             Water only     Concentrated
                                    deicing fluid


1.17.5         Jet Exhaust Data
            Jet exhaust temperatures and velocities at given distances and power setting
behind the exhaust nozzles of JT8D turbofan engines were determined to provide an
indication of their effects on following aircraft. (See figure 7.)
1.17.6         Boeing 737 Maintenance Manual Instructions For Ice and Snow Conditions
           The B-737 Maintenance Manual lists MIL SPEC MIL A-8243 "Anti-icing,
Deicing, and Defrosting Fluid" as an acceptable fluid for deicing Boeing aircraft. This
manual prescribes conditional inspections of the aircraft whenever icing or snow
conditions exist prior to flight as follows:
               Examine for the following:
                    Fuselage, wings, control surfaces, balance panel areas and hinge
                    points for ice and snow. If snow or ice exists, refer to 12-50-0,
                    "Cold Weather Maintenance."
                    Engine inlet cowl for ice and snow, secondary inlet doors for
                    freedom of movement, and the first stage compressor for freedom
                    of rotation.
                    Light coatings of frost up to 118-inch thick on lower wing surfaces
                    only are permissible; however, all control surfaces, tab surfaces
                    and balance panel cavities, wing leading edge slats, and wing upper
                    surface must be completely free of snow or ice before takeoff
                    (Ref. 12-50-0, Cold Weather Operation).
           The B-737 Maintenance Manual also cautions against removal of snow from
any surface of the aircraft by application of deicing solution "since dilution of solution
with melted snow can result in the mixture refreezing and becoming more difficult to
remove." Boeing recommends snow removal from wings and empennage areas with long
handled brooms.
       I          I         I         1         I          I       I
       0          10       20         30       40         50       60   70
                                DISTANCE FROM JET NOZZLE IN FEET

                                          IDLE THRUST


Figure 7.-JT8D turbofan exhaust gas temperatures and velocities.
1.17.7     Air Florida Maintenance Manual Instructions For Winter Operations
           The Air Florida Maintenance Manual, under t h e general heading of "Cold
Weather Procedures," states in part that special dispatching procedures must be used
during cold weather operations and that the following effects of winter weather must be
guarded against and eliminated:
                 Ice, snow and frost accumulation on aircraft, frozen
                 control-surface hinges, snow or ice accumulations in the control
                 surface air seal diaphragms, cold cockpit conditions impairing
                 instrument operation.
            The manual further refers to the "Manufacturer's Maintenance Manual."
Specific instructions a r e set forth in the manual t o plug or cover airframe and powerplant
openings with the appropriate plugs when an airplane is exposed t o "heavy snow or ice for




                 Flights may be dispatched when i t is agreed by the captain and the
                 man responsible for the release of the aircraft that snow on t h e
                 surface of the aircraft is of such consistency that i t will dissipate
                 or blow off during taxi or the start of the take-off run and that no
                 take-off will be made with ice, snow, or frost adhering t o any part
                 of the airplane structure which, in the opinion of the captain,
                 might adversely affect performance.
                 Prior t o application of solution, covers and plugs will be installed.
                 In applying the deicing solution around openings in the airplane
                 care must be taken t o limit the application t o the amount required
                 for anti-icing. Avoid directing the fluid stream into openings or
                 the use of excess solution in dueling or appliances served by the
                 openings.
            Contrary t o these instructions, no openings on the airframe or powerplants
were covered during the exposure of the aircraft t o heavy snow or during the deicing
operations. The Air Florida maintenance representative testified that he had "never seen
airplanes deiced with the covers on them."
1.17.8     Boeing 737 Wing Leading Edge Contamination and Roughness
            Since 1970 there have been a number of reports by operators of B-737 aircraft
who have experienced an aircraft pitchup or rolloff immediately a f t e r takeoff in weather
conditions which were conducive t o the formation of ice or frost on the wing leading
edges. The Safety Board is aware of 22 such reports during the period. In some of these
incidents, the aircraft's stall warning system activated and the pilot used full or nearly
full control column movement t o recover.

             As a result of incidents involving B-737 aircraft which experienced a sudden
roll after takeoff, The Boeing Co. on October 24, 1974, issued Operations Manual Bulletin
No. 74-8. The bulletin advised operators of the incidents in which asymmetrical clear ice
had built up on the leading edge devices during ground operations involving the use of
thrust reversers in light snow conditions with cross winds. It appeared that the snow
melted due t o hot engine gases and refroze on contact with the cold leading edge devices.
The presence of the ice resulted in a tendency t o roll a t higher angles of attack during
ensuing takeoffs. The bulletin cautioned flightcrews t o assure compliance with ail ice and
snow removal procedures prior t o takeoff under suspected icing conditions and t o avoid
maneuvers requiring unnecessary "g" loads immediately following takeoffs in weather
conditions under which icing might be suspected. This bulletin had been incorporated into
Air Florida Flight Manuals.
            The continuation of reports of pitchup/rolloff occurrences prompted The
Boeing Co. t o examine further the B-737 aircraft sensitivity t o leading edge
contamination. In 1977 plans were formulated for wind tunnel and flight tests. Even
before conducting these tests, The Boeing Co. on February 23, 1979, issued Operations
Manual Bulletin 79-2 t o advise flightcrews of a possible inadvertent pitchup/rolloff after
takeoff due t o ice accumulation on leading edge devices. The bulletin stated t h a t several
operators of B-737% had reported pitchup and/or rolloff after takeoff caused by ice
accumulations on leading edge devices and that such incidents had usually occurred
following the application of reverse thrust while taxiing on snow-covered taxiways. In
order t o advise flightcrews of this condition, the following note was incorporated in the
revised portion of the "Adverse Weather" section in the B-737 Operations Manual.

                 A buildup of ice on the leading edge devices may occur during
                 ground operations involving use of reversers in light snow
                 conditions. Snow is melted by the deflected engine gases and may
                 refreeze as clear ice upon contact with cold leading edge devices.
                 This buildup, which is difficult t o see, occurs in temperature
                 conditions at or moderately below freezing. Crosswind conditions
                 can cause the ice buildup t o be asymmetrical, resulting in a
                 tendency t o roll a t higher angles of attack during subsequent
                 takeoffs.
           These bulletins had been incorporated into Air Florida Flight Manuals and had
been disseminated t o all Air Florida B-737 flightcrews.
            As part of its investigation of the reported incidents, The Boeing Co. flight
tested a B-737-200 advanced airplane in the fall of 1980 t o quantify the aerodynamic
effects of contaminated leading edge slats. The leading edge slats were coated with an
epoxy potting compound and the surface was roughened with a paint roller t o simulate a
coating with corn ice. A series of stalls was conducted with flaps up, and a t flap positions
of 1, 15, and 40. The stall characteristics with both symmetric and asymmetric leading
edge contaminations were characterized by a very apparent pitchup, yaw rate, and rolloff.
These characteristics were more pronounced a t flap settings less than 5 when the slats
were sealed, that is, when there was no gap between the leading edge slat and the basic
wing such as that which occurs when the slats are fully extended coincident with flap
settings between 10 and 40. The Boeing Co. concluded that "...when takeoffs a r e
executed during suspected icing conditions or adverse weather conditions, sound
operational techniques must be employed. Wings should be kept clear of ice and other
forms of contamination, and rotation rates should not exceed 3Â°/second.1 It also
concluded that additional speed margins were advisable when operating in adverse
weather such as snow, sleet, or rain a t near freezing temperatures.

            As a result of the flight tests, a third Operations Manual Bulletin, 81-4, was
issued on June 5, 1981. It stated that heavy frost or rime ice on the leading edge would
increase stall speeds by 8 t o 10 kns a t takeoff flap settings. The following operating
procedures were recommended and the B-737 manual was t o be revised accordingly.

           All crews should be reminded that the recommended rotation r a t e for
           the 737 is approximately 3O/sec.       At light gross weights and cold
           temperatures, this rate will result in an initial climb speed above
           V2 + 15. Initial climb speeds up t o V2 + 25 will not significantly affect
           the climb profile.

           If leading edge flap roughness is observed or suspected for any reason,
           care should be exercised t o avoid fast rotation rates (in excess of 3' per
           second) and/or over rotation.
           When operating in adverse weather conditions, improved stall margins
           can be achieved by the following:
           If excess runway is available use Improved Climb procedures for flaps
           1, 2, or 5.

           If runway limited for the planned takeoff flap setting, consideration
           should be given t o using the next greater flap position with Improved
           Climb Performance. This will provide additional stall margins with
           minimum performance penalties.
           If pitch up and/or roll off is encountered after lift off, use aileron,
           rudder and elevators as required t o maintain desired flight path.
           Smooth, continuous flight control inputs should be used t o avoid over
           controlling.
           Currently recommended procedures in t h e Boeing Operations Manual for
           operation in icing conditions are once again emphasized.
            This bulletin had also been incorporated into Air Florida Flight Manuals. In
addition t o Operations Manual Bulletin 81-4, The Boeing Co. printed articles relating t o
the B-737 leading edge contaminations and the flight test program in the
July-September 1981 and the October-December 1981 issues of The Boeing Airliner, a
quarterly publication distributed t o operators through the Boeing Customer Support
Representative.
            Prior t o the issuance of Operations Manual Bulletin 81-4, the United Kingdom
Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) had expressed its concern that flightcrew advisories and
cautions were not sufficiently positive actions t o prevent incidents particularly under
conditions such as darkness when the crew might be unable t o detect small amounts of
contaminant on the leading edge. Consequently, the CAA, in May 1981, proposed a
requirement that carriers ban the use of 1 and 2 flap positions for B-737 takeoff whenever
outside air temperatures were less than 5OC and that improved climb performance
procedures be used t o provide higher stall speed margins. The Boeing Co. reply t o the
CAA proposal objected t o the ban for 1 and 2 flap positions. The CAA subsequently
modified its proposal t o allow the lower flap settings with the additional speed increment.
            The Boeing Co. internal memoranda examined by the Safety Board showed that
i t was considering an engineering change t o the wing thermal anti-ice (TAI) system t o
permit the use of that system on the ground t o assure a clear leading edge. An evaluation
test report dated November 5, 1981, showed that this concept was feasible. Therefore, in
response t o the CAA1s formal release of its intention t o require additional speed margins
on October 28, 1981, a t least one British carrier objected t o the procedures suggesting
instead that the wing TAI system be used on the ground prior t o takeoff. This procedure
would alleviate the weight penalty which would be incurred a t certain airports a s a result
of the modified airspeed schedule defined in the CAA proposal. Another Boeing Co.
internal document dated January 7, 1982, showed that The Boeing Co. agreed with the
carrier that the wing TAI system could be used even without modification by holding a
spring loaded test switch in the test position for 30 seconds before takeoff and that this
procedure should preclude imposition of the overspeed requirement. The same document
proposed a modification t o the wing TAI system t o incorporate a "ground" mode which
would be more compatible with normal operation.
           Two days after the Air Florida Flight 90 accident, the CAA issued
Airworthiness Directive 010-01-82 requiring that, under conditions where visible moisture
existed and the outside air temperature was less than 5OC, 2 kns must be added t o the
airspeed schedule for the B-737 standard aircraft during takeoff with flaps in the 1 and 2
positions and 5 kns must be added t o the B-737-200 advance aircraft under the same
circumstances. There was no mention of exemption for the ground use of the wing TAI
system. The CAA proposed an amendment t o AD 010-01-82 on February 15, 1982, which
would require in addition that 5 kns be added t o the speed schedule when using a takeoff
flap setting of 5 in any B-737 and further that a flap setting greater than 5 would be
required when taking off from a runway contaminated with water, snow, or ice.
           Boeing documents disclosed that following the accident, i t continued t o
evaluate the engineering modifications t o the wing TAI system. On June 2, 1982, Boeing
issued an Engineering Change Order t o incorporate the modification and noted that a
Service Bulletin was planned t o accommodate retrofit on aircraft in service.
1.17.9     Other Boeing-737 Operations Manual Information

          Section 3A-7, page 2, of the August 20, 1973, issue of the B-737 Operations
Manual, Supplementary Procedures, Ice and Rain Protection, "Wing Anti-ice," states:
            There are two methods recommended for operating the anti-icing. The
            primary method is t o use it as a deicer, by allowing the ice t o
            accumulate before turning i t on. This procedure will provide the
            cleanest airfoil surface, the least possible runback ice formation, and the
            least thrust and fuel penalty. Normally, it will not be necessary t o shed
            ice periodically unless extended flight through icing conditions is
            necessary (holding). Ice less than 3 inches thick will have little effect on
            airplane handling, therefore, the ice accumulation may be allowed until
            the icing condition has been passed. The secondary method is t o turn the
            wing anti-ice switch on when wing icing is possible and use the system as
            an anti-icer.
            If the TAT reading is a t or below 10Â° and visible moisture is present,
            the wing anti-icing can be activated t o prevent ice accumulation on the
            wing leading edges. The windshield wiper arms give the first indications
            of ice forming on the airplane.
            Federal Aviation Regulations 14 CFR 121.629(b) prohibit takeoff when
            frost, snow or ice is adhering t o the wings, control surfaces or propellers
            of the aircraft.
1.17.10    Air Florida Flightcrew Training
             Air Florida's B-737 flight training program consists of four phases. Initial
training is required and conducted for crewmembers who have not qualified in the type of
aircraft and served in the same capacity on another aircraft of the same group.
Transition training is required and conducted for crewmembers who have previously
qualified and served in the same capacity on another aircraft of the same group. Upgrade
training is required and conducted for crewmembers who have qualified on a type of
aircraft and served as second-in-command before they are eligible t o serve as
pilot-in-command on that aircraft. Differences training is required and conducted for
qualified flight crewmembers on a new model of the same type of aircraft; for example, a
737-100 qualified crewmember would be required t o take differences training for the
737-200 series.
            Once a flight crewmember is fully qualified and serves as either
second-in-command or pilot-in-command on a specific type of aircraft, recurrent
training is required. Such recurrent training consists of ground school for captains and
first officers once a year. Recurrent training in the flight simulator is required every
6 months for qualified captains and once a year for qualified first officers. All training
consists of a combination of video presentations, films, slides, and lectures. Training
material is derived directly from the Air Florida Flight Operations and Training Manuals.
           Video presentations used during each initial and recurrent B-737 class include
B-737 winter operations, takeoff (rotation effects on initial climb performance) and
landing performance, wet stopping - mark I1 antiskid, windshear, upset, and landing
illusions.
           Programmed hours are also dedicated t o discussions of determination of
maximum allowable takeoff weights with various conditions of temperature, pressure
altitude, wind, and runway contamination through the use of performance charts.
Performance computations a r e also discussed for anti-ice systems "off" and "on" as are
the computations of EPR for both takeoff and go-around. While there is no specific
program for winter operations training, such training is included in the standard training
programs.    Air Florida does not offer any specific command decision, resource
management, or assertiveness training t o its pilots nor is such training required under
existing Federal Aviation Regulations.
           Air Florida's Training and Operations Manuals contain the following normal
takeoff procedures:
                 The airplane is certificated for setting thrust either statically prior
                 t o brake release or while rolling after brake release. Do not waste
                 time and fuel trying t o accurately set thrust or t o check engine
                 performance prior t o brake release. The pilot flying will advance
                 all thrust levers t o the vertical position and allow the engines t o
                 stabilize. This minimizes thrust asymmetry caused by differences
                 in individual engine acceleration, aids in preventing overshooting
                 the desired thrust setting, and eliminates engine surge caused by a
                 crosswind.
                 When all engine instruments have stabilized, the pilot flying will
                 advance the thrust levers t o approximately takeoff EPR and call
                 "SET MAXIMUM THRUST" or "REDUCE THRUST SET" a t which
                 time, the pilot not flying will adjust the thrust levers t o desired
                 EPR. Final takeoff thrust adiustments are t o be made orior t o
                 60K. Pilot not flying will call out "MAXIMUM THRUST SET" or
                 "REDUCE THRUST SET".
                 Rolling takeoffs are performed without stopping a t the end of the
                 runway. As the airplane rolls onto the runway, smoothly advance
                 the thrust levers t o the vertical position and hesitate t o allow the
                 engines t o stabilize and proceed as above. Rolling takeoffs can
                 also be made from the end of the runway by advancing the thrust
                 levers from idle as the brakes are released.
                 The same takeoff EPR setting is good for both static and rolling.
                 There is no appreciable ram effect on EPR up t o 60 knots.
                 If EPR is quickly set, there will be a small overshoot in EPR. A
                 slight EPR adjustment should be made t o correct the overshoot. A
                 max overshoot of . O 1 EPR recommended or covered on P&W [ P r a t t
                 & Whitney] warranty.

                 The takeoff N setting is a preliminary setting and will change
                 with increased 1
                                airspeed. N is t o be used primarily when an EPR
                 gage is inoperative. U ~ F ~ P Ras the "fine" setting and do not
                 retard the thrust levers for Nl variation unless N exceeds the
                 maximum limitation.                                1

           Air Florida flightcrews are taught the following flightcrew duties for takeoff:

                 Prior t o reaching takeoff position, the captain will advise the first
                 officer if he is t o make the takeoff. Takeoff roll will be started
                 either from a static position on the runway or as the airplane rolls
                 onto the runway. Set thrust prior t o 60 knots and rotate a t VR t o
                 approximately 15' nose up.
                 Climb a t V + 15K t o a t least 600 feet above field elevation. Set
                 climb thrust. Continue climb a t V + 15K t o 3,000 above field
                 elevation. Retract flaps on schedule. Normal enroute climb.
                 After gear retraction maximum body angle 20'.
                 When V2 + 15K cannot be maintained with a body angle of 20Â°
                 increase speed as necessary above V2 + 15K. Retract flaps on
                 schedule, if required, by this speed increase.

            Pilots are trained t o reject a takeoff "when engine failure occurs before Vl or
if takeoff warning horn sounds before V1." The training manual states that:

                 On recognition of the engine failure, either pilot will call out the
                 malfunction, e.g. "ENGINE FAILURE", "ENGINE FIRE", and s t a t e
                 engine number (not left or right). The captain makes the decision
                 t o reject.

            The Air Florida Training Manual also sets forth procedures for "engine failure
recognition;" it states:
                 Under adverse conditions on takeoff, recognition of an engine
                 failure may be difficult.        Therefore, close reliable crew
                 coordination is necessary for early recognition.

                 The captain ALONE makes the decision t o "REJECT."

                 On the B-737, the engine instruments must be closely monitored by
                 the pilot not flying. The pilot flying should also monitor the engine
                 instruments within his capabilities. Any crewmember will call out
                 any indication of engine problems affecting flight safety. The
                 callout will be the malfunction, e.g., "ENGINE FAILURE,"
                 "ENGINE FIRE," and appropriate engine number.

                 The decision is still the captain's, but he must rely heavily on the
                 first officer.

                 The initial portion of each takeoff should be performed as if an
                 engine failure were t o occur.

            The Air Florida Flight Operations Manual prescribes procedures and flightcrew
duties for rejecting a takeoff. The manual requires that upon recognition of failure or
warning light, either pilot will call out "engine failure," "engine fire," or "takeoff
warning." There are no written procedures for rejecting takeoff for other engine or
aircraft anomalies. The manual does not recommend rejecting a takeoff solely for the
illumination of the amber "master caution" light once thrust has been set and the takeoff
roll has been established.
           The specific duties for the captain and first officer for normal takeoff and a
rejected takeoff are set forth in the Air Florida Flight Operations Manual. (See figures 8
and 9.) When the first officer is making the takeoff, the duties are simply reversed;
however, no specific manual material is published on this subject. For the purpose of
practical application of the flight crewmembers duties, the column marked captain is
considered the "flying crewmember" and the first officer the "nonflying crewmember."
However, no matter which crewmember is making the takeoff, the captain is solely
responsible for rejecting the takeoff.

1.17.11     Air Traffic Control Handling of Flight 90

1.17.11.1   ATC Information to Pilots
            The FAA's Air Traffic Control Handbook 7110.65B requires that runway visual
range (RVR) or runway visibility value (RVV) be issued for runways in use when the
prevailing visibility is 1 mile or less, regardless of the value indicated, or "When RVR/RVV
indicates a reportable value regardless of the prevailing visibility" and "to issue
mid-rollout RVR when the value of either is less than 2,000 feet and less than the
touchdown va1ue.l'
          Neither RVR nor RVV was issued by air traffic control t o Flight 90. The RVR
was, however, issued t o landing aircraft as they were cleared t o land.
            The Automatic Terminal Information Service (ATIS) is a continuous broadcast
of recorded noncontrol information in selected terminal areas. It is intended t o improve
controller effectiveness and t o relieve frequency congestion by automating the repetitive
transmission of essential, but routine information, such as weather conditions, runway
                                            TAKEOFF PROCEDURE



                           CAPTAIN                                            FIRST OFFICER

Align i i r p l i m on runway.

Advance thrust I w w i to Ã§ppfoxinutal 1.4 EPR (Iwen
in Ãˆl-tiw petition).

                                         dwck angina i n s t r u m nomul.

Advanc* thrust lwma npidly to feoffEPR.                  Follow Uuust \fw Â¥dn mi adjust takeoff EPR
                                                         prior to SO knot* if m u i d .

Hold light forwrd prmure on control column, nuin-        Monitor angina inftrurnits.
tain directional control and monitor thrust lm un-
til V, ipwd.

Verify 80 knots.                                         Call out 80 knots.

Monitor M+,          noting VI, and rotau imoolhly i t   C*)l cort"~~,"and"Rotite" it VR.   Monitor flight instn
VR.                                                      ments.

When positive rat* of dimb,dl      "Gow Up" and -1-      Position landing gur h e r UP.
        ; + 15.
Â¥ff to V

                                 Ooa chick a i m and pitch ittitud* indictions.




                                     Figure 8.--Normal takeoff procedures.
                                    REJECTED TAKEOFF PROCEDURE

Rejected takeoff is required when aiigine failure, fire or takeoff warning is recognized before V l .

Upon recognition of failure or warning either pilot will call out "engine failure," "engine fire"
or "takeoff warning."

Rejecting the takeoff solely for the amber Master Caution light, once thrust has been set and
takeoff roll has been established, is not recommended.




.                         CAPTAIN                                       FIRST OFFICER


                           - -
    Simuitamously: Thrust Liven IDLE
                   Brakes
                   BRAKES
                            APPLY MAXIMUM WHEEL

\



#
    Speed Brake   - FULL UP                          Check Speed Broke FULL UP.

    Apply mine thrust rapidly *Â mid.               Engine Imtrunwnts   - MONITOR
                                                    Advise Captain of m y engine limit or abnormality.
    Stop airplane and evaluate the problem. If
    conditions permit, taxi clef of the runway




                                  Figure 9.--Rejected takeoff procedures.
conditions, temperatures, and altimeter settings. Pilots are expected t o monitor ATIS
preliminary t o departure from or arrival a t an airport and t o advise ATC of the code of
the ATIS message. FAA's Facility Operation and Administration Manual 7110.3F,
Section 3, para. 1230, requires that messages be brief and concise, and not exceed
30 seconds unless required for message content completeness, and that each message be
identified by a phonetic alphabet letter code word a t both the beginning and end of the
message. A new recording is t o be made upon receipt of any new official weather
regardless of whether there is or is not a change of values; a new recording is also t o be
made when there is a change in any other pertinent data, such as runway change,
instrument approach in use, new or canceled NOTAMS/SIGMETS/PIREPS. On the day of
the accident, ATIS information was not updated with changes in braking action.
            ATIS Alpha was broadcast from 1514 t o 1531. Braking action had been
reported as fair by multiengine commuter aircraft. Ground control also received braking
reports a t 1511 as "POOR, ESPECIALLY AT TURNOFF" from a U.S. Air BAC-111 and
"FAIR TO POOR" from an Eastern DC-9 aircraft. ATIS Bravo was broadcast from
1532 t o 1537 and contained no braking report. Subsequent Bravo broadcasts from 1538-
1544 and from 1545-1602 listed braking a s POOR as reported by a B-727 aircraft.
(According t o the requirements of the manual, the second and third Bravo broadcasts
should have been Charlie and Delta, respectively.) Flight 90 did not tell clearance
delivery or ground control that i t was in receipt of ATIS, and clearance delivery or ground
control did not ask the crew of Flight 90 if i t was in receipt of ATIS.
1.17.11.2   Separation Criteria
           Criteria for the separation between departing and arriving aircraft are set
forth in the FAA's Air Traffic Control Handbook 7110.65B Section 6, paragraph 743 a s
follows:
            DEPARTURE AND ARRIVAL
                 (TERMINAL)
                 Except as provided in 744, separate a departing aircraft from an
                 arriving aircraft on final approach by a minimum of 2 miles if
                 separation will increase t o a minimum of 3 miles (5 miles when
                 40 miles or more from the antenna) within 1 minute after takeoff.
            The FAA Air Traffic Control Handbook requires that the controller determine
the position of an aircraft before issuing taxi information or takeoff clearances t o it.
Such position determination may be made visually by the controller, by pilot reports, or by
the use of airport surface detection equipment radar equipment. With regard t o Flight 90,
because of limited visibility, the local controller could not see the B-737 when he cleared
him "into position and hold" and "be ready for an immediate [takeoff]       ". There is no
airport surface detection equipment at the Washington National Control Tower.

           Using the ATC tape, FDR readout from Eastern Flight 1451, radar data from
Eastern 1451, radar performance data for Flight 90, the Safety Board calculated of the
distances between the landing aircraft, Eastern Flight 1451, and Flight 90 and found that
there was between 1,500 feet and 4,000 feet. Discrepancies in the FDR on Flight 1451
precluded more precise calculations.
             The FAA Air Traffic Control Handbook 7110.65B. z =~
                                                   -~   ~-     oaratrraoh 743. Traffic
                                                                         - ~ - ~ r

Training Program Lesson Plan stresses "not TO CLEAR A DEPARTURE FOR TAKEOFF
                                               ~




WHEN THE ARRIVAL IS 2 MILES FROM THE RUNWAY, IT'S TOO LATE THEN.
NORMALLY, DEPARTURE ACTION MUST BE TAKEN AT 3 MILES TO REALIZE 2 MILE
MINIMUM." Additionally, this provision is also contained in the written "Local Control
Test No. 1" which was given t o Washington National Airport controllers as part of their
initial training.
1.17.11.3   Controller Experience
             On January 13, 1982, the local control, ground control, clearance delivery, and
departure control positions were manned. This staffing represents a full complement,
identical t o that of July 1981, before the controllers strike. Ground control, clearance
delivery, and departure control positions were manned by developmental controllers who
had all been checked out in their respective positions.
            The local controller handling Flight 90 a t the time of the accident was a
working controller and was also the team supervisor. He began his career as a military
controller in 1959 and had worked a t Washington National Airport since 1964. His training
records a t the time of the accident indicated that he was checked out on all operating
positions.   His training file indicated that his last "over the shouldern check was
administered and completed satisfactorily on September 9, 1977. The "over the shoulder"
training review is required t o be administered semiannually. Testimony at the Safety
Board's public hearing indicated that he had been given these required checks, but written
documentation could not be provided.
1.17.11.4   Gate-Hold Procedures
           Washington National Tower did not use gate-hold procedures on the day of the
accident. Gate-hold procedures were initially developed as a fuel conservation measure.
FAA Air Traffic Control Handbook 7210.3F, Section 3, paragraph 1232, outlines these
procedures as follows:
            GATE HOLD PROCEDURES
                  a. The objective of gate hold procedures is t o achieve departure delays
            of 5 minutes or less after engine s t a r t and taxi time. Facility chiefs shall
            ensure that gate hold procedures and departure delay information are made
            available t o all pilots prior t o engine start up. Implement gate hold procedures
            whenever departure delays exceed or are expected t o exceed five minutes.

                 b. Facility chiefs shall meet with airport management and users t o
            develop local gate hold procedures within the guidelines of 1230 and in
            accordance with limitations imposed by local conditions. Include the following
            general provisions in the procedures:

                  (1) Pilots shall contact GC [ground control] /CD [clearance delivery]
            prior t o starting engines t o receive start time. The sequence for departure
            shall be maintained in accordance with initial callup unless modified by flow
            control restrictions.

                 (2) Develop notification procedures for aircraft unable t o transmit
            without engine($ running.
                Note.-Inability t o contact GCICD prior t o engine start shall not be
                justification t o alter departure sequence.
                (3) The operator has the final authority t o decide whether t o absorb the
           delay a t the gate, have the aircraft towed t o another area, or taxi t o a delay
           absorbing area.

                (4) GCICD frequency is t o be monitored by the pilot and issued a new
           proposed engine start time if the delay changes.
           The chief of t h e Washington National Tower stated that because of airport
space limitations gate-hold procedures could not be implemented and that Washington
Tower Letter t o Airmen 79-1, subject: Departure Delay Procedures -Fuel Conservation,
was in compliance with subsection b of paragraph 1232. The Washington Tower letter t o
Airmen 79-1, went into effect November 20, 1979, and expired November 20, 1981; i t had
not been renewed.
            Between 1517:13 and 1547:55, there were a total of 22 communications
between ground control and aircraft on the ground at Washington National relative t o
flightcrew's concerns over departure information. The tower was unable t o provide these
departing flightcrews with reasonable estimates of anticipated departure delays.
1.17.12    Ground Proximity Warning System
            A ground proximity warning system (GPWS) was installed on N62AF. Mode 3
of the 5-mode system indicates altitude loss after takeoff or go-around. The system is
armed when the radio altimeter senses 100 feet, and i t will sound an alarm when the
barometric altitude loss is as little as 15 feet. However, if the aircraft never reaches
100 feet or never has a barometric altitude loss of a t least 15 feet, t h e GPWS will not
sense and, therefore, will not give an aural or visual warning. There is no evidence that
the GPWS activated a t any time during the flight of N62AF.
1.17.13    Human Performance Data

             Air Florida pilots stated that their relationship with management is good, and
that there is no pressure from management t o keep t o schedules in disregard of safety or
other considerations. Current company statistics show that the upgrading period from
first officer t o captain averages about 2 years.
            There are three series of B-737 aircraft which a r e flown by Air Florida
pilots-- the -100 basic, the -200 basic, and the -200 advanced. The accident aircraft was
a -200 basic series B-737. There are some differences among these aircraft. In the -200
basic, there is a difference in the placement of engine instruments, the Nl and EPR
gauges are in reversed positions. (See figure 2.) The Nl gauges a r e a t the top of the
engine instrument panel. Pilots indicated that they had not experienced any transition
problems between the different aircraft types.
            B-737 pilots told Safety Board investigators that they had not experienced any
problems reading or interpreting the instrument displays or reaching or manipulating the
controls. The NASA Aviation Safety Reporting System indicated that i t had received no
incident reports regarding crew station design in the B-737 aircraft.

1.18       New Investigative Techniques
           None.
                                      2. ANALYSIS

2.1        Aircraft and Crew

            The aircraft was properly certificated, equipped, and maintained in
accordance with existing regulations and approved procedures. The flightcrew was
properly certificated and qualified in accordance with applicable regulations for the
scheduled domestic passenger flight. The flight attendants were also qualified and
currently trained in B-737 equipment.
           The Accident

             The facts developed during the investigation from witness accounts, surviving
passenger accounts, FDR parameters, and CVR conversation provided indisputable
evidence that the aircraft's performance was significantly below normal from the
beginning of the takeoff roll. The aircraft was observed t o accelerate more slowly and
lift off farther down the runway than normal B-737 departures. Although the FDR
airspeed and altitude parameters showed that the aircraft reached the target liftoff speed
and initially achieved a climb, the stall warning stickshaker activated almost immediately
after liftoff and the airspeed and rate of climb began t o deteriorate.
            That weather conditions which had prevailed for several hours before and were
prevailing at the time of the attempted departure were a significant factor leading t o this
accident is beyond question. The weather was characterized by subfreezing temperatures
and almost steady moderate t o heavy snowfall with obscured visibility. Although the
aircraft had been deiced before its departure from the ramp area, a lengthy
delay -- about 50 minutes-- was encountered before the initiation of takeoff, and the
observations of airport witnesses and surviving passengers as well as the discussion
between the pilots recorded by the CVR confirmed that some snow or ice had
accumulated on the aircraft before the takeoff.
            Therefore, the investigation and analysis of this accident were directed toward
the effects of the weather and other environmental factors on aircraft performance; the
pretakeoff events including deicing of the aircraft and air traffic control delays; the
flightcrew's judgment and performance before and during the flight; and those factors
which may have influenced the flightcrew's performance. In addition, the crash response
and rescue efforts as well as Washington National Airport facilities and their relation t o
the crash of Flight 90 were examined.
           Factors Affecting Aircraft Acceleration and Climb Performance

            The evidence is conclusive that the aircraft's acceleration during the takeoff
roll and its subsequent climb and acceleration were subnormal. A normal B-737 a t the
weight of the accident aircraft and under the existing environmental conditions should
accelerate in about 30 seconds t o a liftoff a t about 145 kns indicated airspeed (KIAS)
using about 3,500 feet of runway.          The aircraft should then climb more than
2,000 feet/minute while transitioning t o the climb configuration. By contrast, t h e CVR
and FDR showed that the accident aircraft took about 45 seconds and used about
5,400 feet of runway before i t lifted off at an airspeed between 140 and 145 kns. The
accuracy of the FDR recorded altitude following liftoff is questionable; however, i t
appears that the aircraft achieved an initial, short-term rate of climb of about
1,200 feet/minute. The stickshaker, indicating an approach t o stall angle of attack,
activated almost immediately after liftoff. Upon reaching an altitude of between 200 and
300 feet, the airspeed began t o decrease and the FDR vertical acceleration parameter and
the descriptions provided by surviving passengers showed that the aircraft encountered
stall buffet before descending t o hit the bridge.

            In determining the causes for the subnormal performance of the accident
aircraft, the Safety Board considered those obvious performance parameters which affect
acceleration and climb -- increased drag, both aerodynamic and rolling, and deficient
thrust. While both increased aerodynamic drag, such as that produced by an accumulation
of airframe ice, and increased rolling drag, such as that produced by an accumulation of
snow or slush on the runway surface, would result in subnormal acceleration, the Safety
Board did not believe that these factors alone would account for the performance
deficiency evident in this accident. Furthermore, the recorded cockpit conversation
between the captain and first officer during takeoff indicated that the first officer was
concerned about the appropriateness of some cockpit instrument readings. This suggested
possible uncertainty about the engine thrust level. Therefore, the CVR tape was analyzed
t o correlate the dominant frequencies of the recorded engine noise with engine rotational
speed and thrust. This sound spectrum analysis disclosed a significant disparity between
the engine (Nil rotational speed developed during and following the takeoff roll and the
rotational speed which would correspond t o the target takeoff power setting.
             Icing of Engine Pt2 (Pressure) Probe.--The primary instrument used by B-737
pilots t o set and monitor thrust on the Pratt & Whitney JT8D engines is EPR, a direct
indication of the ratio of the pressure measured a t the engine discharge i ti) t o the
pressure measured a t the compressor inlet (Pt ). The target value for takeoff is
determined for existing conditions before the ?light.       For the accident flight, the
appropriate takeoff EPR setting was determined t o be 2.04.
            Since the weather conditions at the time of the accident were conducive t o
the formation of ice on the P t pressure probe as well as on other parts of the airframe,
the Safety Board conducted extensive tests and analyses t o determine the effects of an
ice-blocked Pt2 probe on engine EPR indications. The tests confirmed that ice blockage
of the P t probe will affect the EPR reading such that the flightcrew will observe a false
indication of takeoff thrust when the throttles are set for takeoff. The tests further
showed that the direction of the EPR indication error is dependent upon whether the
engine anti-ice system is on or off. With engine anti-ice off, the EPR instrument will
indicate higher thrust level than is actually being developed by the engine. The tests and
analysis showed that had the flightcrew set the throttles t o achieve an EPR indication of
2.04, the actual thrust which would be developed presuming an ice blocked P t 2 probe
would equate t o an (unblocked Pt2 probe) EPR of 1.70. The corresponding engine
rotational speed for this reduced thrust level correlated closely with the engine rotational
speeds actually developed on the accident aircraft during takeoff, as determined from the
CVR sound spectrum analysis.
            One function of the engine anti-ice system is to maintain a flow of heated air
at the P t 2 probe t o prevent ice formation and blockage. Strong evidence from the
accident investigation -- namely the postimpact closed position of the engine anti-ice
valves, valves which are electrically motor driven and thus not susceptible t o position
changes by impact loading -- indicates that the engine anti-ice system was off a t the
time of impact. The CVR recording substantiated that the engine anti-ice system had not
been used during the pretakeoff ground operation.
           Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that the engine anti-ice system was not
used by the crew of Flight 90; that ice accumulation blocked the inlet of the P t probe on
both engines; that the flightcrew set the throttles t o achieve the target EPR indication of
2.04; and that the erroneous EPR indication caused by the blocked P t 2 probe resulted in a
significantly lower thrust level being used than desired.
            Following this accident, several examples of similar occurrences were brought
t o the attention of the Safety Board. In most instances, the flightcrews had rejected the
takeoff because they had observed an EPR reading below their takeoff target value as the
throttles were moved beyond the normal throttle position. In those cases, the flightcrews
had reported that the engine anti-ice systems had been on when setting takeoff thrust. In
a few instances, the circumstances were similar t o those described in the analysis of the
accident. In those, takeoff was rejected because, even though the target EPR was
reached, the flightcrew detected that other engine instruments, such as N Nn, EGT, and
fuel flow, showed corresponding low indications. In at least one case, e akeoff was
continued with a thrust level less than indicated or desired, but sufficient for flight. The
flightcrew detected the problem when normal climb rate was not achieved and turned on
engine anti-ice. The EPR indication subsequently dropped back t o indicate a low thrust
condition.
            Although the ice blockage of a P t probe would similarly affect the operation
of other types of aircraft having the same engines and EPR indicating systems, the Safety
Board notes that nearly all of the reported occurrences have involved B-737 aircraft and
that they have occurred with anti-ice both on and off. The Safety Board, therefore,
believes that the underwing position of the engines with their resultant proximity t o the
ground and t o the exhaust of other aircraft during ground operations may increase the
susceptibility of the B-737 t o engine inlet pressure probe icing. Furthermore, there is no
assurance that the amount of heat provided by the engine anti-ice system during
prolonged ground operation with the engines a t low power will prevent ice from forming
on the probe.
            With the engine anti-ice system off, the circumstances a r e more dangerous
and more insidious when the P t probe is blocked since the erroneous EPR reading can
result in a takeoff or attemptedqakeoff with deficient thrust. The Safety Board strongly
advocates that the proper use of engine anti-ice and that the requirement t o crosscheck
all engine instrument readings be emphasized in operational procedures and flightcrew
training. The Board issued two Safety Recommendations on this subject on January 28,
1982. (Safety Recommendations A-82-6 and 8).
            Airframe Ice.--The theoretical performance of a B-737 at the weight of the
accident aircraft and for the existing environmental conditions was examined both
analytically and in the engineering simulator a t The Boeing Co. for the actual thrust
levels indicated by the CVR sound spectrum analysis (1.70 EPR). The acceleration and
climb performance theoretically achievable by the B-737 were then compared with the
best known takeoff roll and flight trajectory information for the accident aircraft t o
determine whether the subnormal performance could be attributed solely t o the reduced
takeoff thrust.
            The takeoff roll acceleration for the accident aircraft, as indicated by
airspeed, time, and distance, correlated closely with performance expected a t 1.70 EPR,
indicating that increases in aerodynamic drag and rolling drag caused by snow or slush on
the runway had little effect on the takeoff roll. However, once airborne, a B-737 with a
1.70 EPR thrust level should achieve a climb rate of more than 1,000 feetlminute in free
air at a constant indicated airspeed of 145 kns, or conversely i t should be capable of
continued acceleration a t lower climb rates. Since the accident aircraft was not able t o
climb and maintain an airspeed margin above the stall, factors other than reduced thrust
were affecting its performance.
           Ground witnesses and surviving passengers stated that they had observed an
accumulation of snow or ice on the upper fuselage and wings of the aircraft before and
during the takeoff roll. The conversation between pilots as recorded on the CVR also
indicated that they were aware that 114 t o 112 inch of snow was present on the wing
surfaces. Snow or slush adhering t o the surfaces of an aircraft, particularly t o the airfoil
surfaces, will degrade any aircraft's aerodynamic performance.
            The lift which is developed by a wing or any other airfoil depends on the angle
of attack -- that is the relative angle of the impinging air t o the wing chord
line 161 -- and the speed of the air passing over the wing. The higher the angle of attack
and the higher the speed, the greater the amount of lift developed so long as the airflow
over the wing is smooth and adheres t o its contour surface. When the airflow separates
from the surface, the lift produced by the wing diminishes. The airflow starts t o separate
from any wing when its angle of attack reaches a critical value. As the angle of attack is
increased further, i t will reach a value a t which maximum lift is developed, after which
higher angles of attack will produce a rapid decay in lift. The aircraft is stalled when the
maximum lift which can be developed by the wing is not sufficient t o support the weight
of the aircraft. The beginning of t h e airflow separation from the airfoil surface contour
generally causes buffet, such as was described by surviving passengers and evident on the
vertical acceleration parameter recorded on the PDR on the accident aircraft.
             The most significant effect of even a small amount of snow or ice on the wing
surface is the influence on the smooth flow of air over the surface contour. Changes in
the contour shape and roughness of the surface will cause the airflow t o begin t o separate
from the wing a t a lower angle of attack than normal and cause a reduction in the lift
which will normally be developed by a wing at a given angle of attack and a given
airspeed. Both the maximum lift which can be developed and the angle of attack at which
i t will be developed will be reduced significantly. (See figure 10.) Since the total lift
developed depends upon both airspeed and angle of attack, an aircraft having snow or ice
on the wings will be maintaining a higher-than-normal angle of attack a t a given airspeed,
or conversely must maintain a higher airspeed a t a given angle of attack, in order t o
produce the lift required t o support the aircraft's weight. Stall buffet and stall will be
encountered a t a higher-than-normal airspeed.
            Most air carrier aircraft are equipped with a stickshaker or some other type of
alarm t o alert the pilot that his aircraft is approaching the stall angle of attack. In the
B-737, the stickshaker is activated when a fuselage-mounted vane aligns itself with the
airflow and reaches a preset angle of attack which is less than the stall angle of attack.
The normal alarm margin is equivalent t o about 10 percent of the stall airspeed. Since
the stall warning activation is independent of the actual airflow conditions on the wing,
the angle of attack a t which i t will activate is not affected by snow or ice contamination
on the wing. However, if the wing's lift-producing efficiency is reduced by such
contamination, the aircraft will be maintaining a higher than normal airspeed when flown
at the angle of attack a t which the stickshaker will activate in order t o compensate for
the degraded efficiency of the wing.            Thus, the stickshaker will activate a t a
higher-than-normal airspeed. Furthermore, the angle of attack margin, and thus the
airspeed margin, between stall warning, stall buffet, and stall will be reduced significantly
or negated entirely.



-
161 A straight line connecting the leading and trailing edges of the airfoil.
                                                         -50-
                    -LEADING            EDGE ICE FORMATION




                                                                    UPPER SURFACE FROST
                                                                            A




                                                                               BASIC SMOOTH WING




              LIFT
           COEFFICIENT
                  cL




                                                              ANGLE OF ATTACK, a




Where t o t a l l i f t developed by wing equals (L) = CL 4 p V2S

     CL = L i f t c o e f f i c i e n t f o r a i r f o i l s e c t i o n
      p = Density o f a i r

      V = True airspeed

      S = Wing area
                Figure 10.--Effect of Ice and Frost on Aircraft Performance.
               (From Aerodynamics for Naval Aviators (NAVWEPS 00-80T-80).
            At the weight of the accident aircraft, the B-737 stickshaker would
theoretically activate a t an indicated airspeed of about 133 kns. Initial buffet would be
encountered as the airspeed decreases t o about 130 kns and the aircraft would stall about
121 kns.   The CVR disclosed that the stickshaker on Flight 90 activated almost
immediately after liftoff and remained activated until impact. The FDR showed that the
indicated airspeed after liftoff was about 145 kns, about 12 kns above the normal
stickshaker-activation speed. During the approximate 24 seconds of flight, the indicated
airspeed varied between 145 kns and 131 kns. A distance integration showed that t h e
indicated airspeed averaged about 137 kns during the period.           The FDR vertical
acceleration parameter was consistent with the testimony of surviving passengers that the
aircraft was encountering buffet during much of the period.
            Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that the activation of the aircraft's
stickshaker and the onset of stall buffet a t airspeeds significantly higher than the
airspeeds at which those events would theoretically occur are positive evidence that snow
or ice was adhering t o the airplane and degrading its aerodynamic performance.
            Aside from altering the lift-producing properties of the wing surfaces, t h e
most significant detrimental effect of snow or ice contamination on performance is the
increase in the aircraft's total drag, that is, the force which resists the aircraft's forward
motion through the air. The total drag has two components, induced drag and parasite
drags both of which vary with the aircraft's speed. Induced drag is that drag which is
produced by the generation of lift. It is proportional t o lift and the proportion increases
as angle of attack increases. Therefore, since a contaminated wing must fly a t a higher
angle of attack a t a given airspeed t o produce the required lift, the induced drag
generated a t that airspeed will be higher than the induced drag of an uncontaminated
wing. Parasite drag, is t h a t force produced by the frontal area of the aircraft as it pushes
the air aside and the friction created as the air moves over the aircraft surface. Although
the parasite drag component is most significant a t high speed, there can be a considerable
increase in parasite drag at any speed if an aircraft is contaminated with snow. The
aircraft's frontal area is increased by the increased angle of attack required and by the
additional area of the contaminant itself. The friction created will increase because of
the roughness of the contaminated surface. Therefore, the total drag of an aircraft will
be greater a t any given airspeed when snow or ice adheres t o its surface.
             The total effects of snow or ice contamination on lift efficiency and drag
increase a r e further compounded by the added increment of weight of the contaminant.
While the lift-producing capability of the wing is diminished, the lift required is greater
because of the added weight, and since drag is a function of lift, it, too, is increased.
            Aircraft Capability t o Climb or Accelerate After Liftoff.--The increased drag
of the aircraft caused by the snow contamination was a major factor in this accident,
particularly when combined with the lower-than-normal takioff thrust brought about by
the erroneous EPR indication. In order t o maintain stabilized, level and unaccelerated
flight, the aircraft's lift must equal its weight and the thrust produced by the engines
must be equal t o the drag. To climb at a steady airspeed, t o accelerate t o a faster
airspeed in level flight, or t o achieve any combination of climb and acceleration, thrust
must be greater than drag.
            The analysis of the performance aspects of Flight 90 must consider the way in
which the aircraft's drag varies with airspeed. Since induced drag increases with higher
angles of attack, or lower airspeeds, and since parasite drag increases with increasing
airspeed, there is some optimum airspeed at which the total of the two components is a t a
minimum. A t this airspeed, the aircraft will achieve the maximum climb r a t e that can be
achieved for a given thrust level provided that thrust level is greater than the minimum
drag. If the aircraft is a t a faster airspeed, a t the same thrust level, its climb r a t e can be
increased by slowing. However, if the aircraft is at a slower airspeed than that at which
minimum drag is developed, slowing the aircraft will result in reduced climb capability. If
the airspeed is reduced t o a point at which the increased drag equals the thrust being
developed, the aircraft cannot sustain a climb and i t must descend in order t o accelerate
unless more thrust can be and is added. If thrust cannot be added, any attempt by the
pilot t o climb will result in a further increase in drag and any subsequent attempt t o even
maintain level flight would be unsuccessful and would lead t o an aerodynamic stall.
            The analysis of Flight 90 must also consider the effect of flight near the
ground on aerodynamic drag. When an aircraft is flown near the ground, such as during
takeoffs and landings, the lift efficiency of the wing will be increased, with a consequent
reduction in the induced drag component for a given airspeed. A s height above the ground
increases, this effect diminishes rapidly, losing significance when the height above the
ground is equal t o the aircraft's wingspan, about 100 feet for the B-737. This ground
effect explains why an aircraft which has adequate performance at a given thrust t o
become airborne will rapidly lose its performance margin as i t gains altitude.
            Effects of Wing Leading Edge Contamination on Aircraft Longitudinal
Trim.--While snow. slush. or ice contamination on anv oart of the aircraft's wing surface
=be     detrimental t o i t s aerodynamic performance, the extent and way that performance
will be affected depends on the position of the contaminant on the wing as well as the
nature of the contaminant. Generally, contamination of the forward leading edge of the
wing will be the most degrading t o the lift-producing efficiency of the wing.
Furthermore, i t is unlikely that the contaminant will be uniformly distributed or have a
uniform effect along the aircraft's entire wing span so that the lift-producing efficiency
of some spanwise parts of the wing will be more affected than others.
            The B-737, like other modern jet transports, has a swept wing.              The
distribution of lift along the entire wing span of a swept wing is important t o the
longitudinal balance of the aircraft. That is, if all of the lift developed along the entire
wing were t o be represented by a single vertical force, the fore and a f t location of that
force along the aircraft's longitudinal axis (known as the center of lift), when combined
with the location of the aircraft's center of gravity and the aerodynamic force developed
by the aircraft's tail surfaces, determines whether the aircraft is balanced longitudinally
or whether i t will pitch noseup or nosedown. If the outboard portion of the wings of a
swept wing aircraft contains more snow or ice than the inboard sections or if they a r e
more influenced by contamination, the lift distribution along the wing span will change
such that the inboard part of the wings, which are farther forward, will produce a
proportionately greater amount of the total lift. Thus, the center of lift will be farther
forward along the aircraft's longitudinal axis than if there were no wing contamination.
            An aircraft is normally "trimmedu for takeoff by setting tail control surface
trim so that the aerodynamic load on the tail balances the wing lift and the weight acting
at the center of gravity t o minimize the control forces and pitching moments during
liftoff and climb. This preset trim is computed on the basis of the calculated weight and
center of gravity of the aircraft, assuming the theoretical lift distribution of the wing. If
snow or ice are present outboard on the wing, the lift distribution along the wing span will
be changed so that the aircraft will be out of trim during takeoff. As i t approaches
takeoff airspeed and during initial rotation, the forward movement of the center of lift
will cause the aircraft to pitch noseup. If the flightcrew failed to, or was unable to,
counter the pitchup moment of the aircraft with sufficient forward control column force,
the aircraft could become airborne at an excessively high pitch attitude. The aircraft
would not accelerate and i t would retain a high angle of attack and high drag.
            Although any swept wing aircraft is vulnerable t o such flight characteristics if
takeoff is attempted with the outboard portions of the wings contaminated with snow or
ice, the B-737 appears to be particularly susceptible as indicated by several occurrences
reported by operators who have experienced severe pitchup or rolloff just after takeoff.
Abnormal control force and the use of nosedown stabilizer trim were required t o effect
recovery. The majority of these incidents involved takeoff conditions where the air
temperatures were near freezing and snow, sleet, or rain had been falling during the
pretakeoff ground operations.
            Analysis of These Factors As They Affected Flight 90.--The Safety Board
believes that the flightpath of Flight 90 exemplified the combined effects of a thrust
level which was less than intended or normal for takeoff and the presence of snow or ice
on the fuselage and wings of the aircraft. The longer-than-normal takeoff roll was
attributable primarily t o the lower thrust level although increased aerodynamic and
rolling drag may have impeded slightly the aircraft's acceleration.
            The aircraft did reach a normal takeoff airspeed and both theoretical analysis
and engineering simulations showed that i t should have been capable of liftoff, continued
acceleration, and climb, albeit a t a less-than-normal rate, even with the low thrust. The
aircraft failed t o perform as theoretically expected after liftoff because of the reduced
aerodynamic efficiency and the resultant high drag produced by the snow or ice
contamination. The engineering simulation showed that high drag combined with the low
thrust made continued flight marginal. The simulation further verified t h a t the aircraft's
performance after liftoff was highly dependent upon initial rotation and the pitch attitude
at liftoff.
           The Safety Board interprets the captain's comment, "Easy," closely following
the "Vee one1' callout as a typical reaction t o an abnormally abrupt or nose-high rotation.
Based upon the experiences reported by other B-737 operators under similar
environmental conditions, the Safety Board concludes that the airframe snow or ice
contamination produced a noseup pitching moment during rotation and liftoff which was
not or could not be immediately countered by the pilot controlling the aircraft and which
aggravated the subsequent deterioration of the performance of the aircraft.
            The sustained activation of the stall warning stickshaker 3 seconds after
liftoff showed conclusively that the aircraft failed t o accelerate t o the airspeed at which
minimum drag would be produced. A B-737 uncontaminated by snow or ice at the
accident aircraft's weight would have minimum drag, and thus would be capable of
maximum climb a t about 155 KIAS; the minimum drag airspeed for an aircraft with
contaminated wing would likely be significantly higher.
            The r a t e of climb achieved by the accident aircraft immediately after liftoff
can be attributed t o the enhanced aerodynamic efficiency provided in ground effect and
the tradeoff of airspeed for climb rate. The engineering simulation of the flight, which
took into account degraded performance produced by wing contamination, verified that
the initial rate of climb probably exceeded 1,000 f e e t per minute. This rate of climb,
along with the stickshaker warning, most likely prompted the captain's directions,
"Forward, forward,'' "Easy," and "We only want five hundred." The Safety Board believes
that the captain was referring t o a desired rate of climb of 500 feet per minute. As
ground effect diminished, so did the aircraft's performance margin. The peak altitude
reached could not be precisely determined from the FDR altitude data. These data
appeared t o oscillate probably because of the altitude stylus' sensitivity t o vibration as
the aircraft experienced buffet loads and the minuscule total movement of the stylus over
the small range of altitude achieved.
            The aircraft's GPWS should have armed as the aircraft climbed through
100 feet above ground level and should have activated if the aircraft began t o descend
before reaching 700 feet. The GPWS logic altitude signals are provided by the aircraft's
radio altimeter. The absence of the GPWS alarm on Flight 90 prompted the speculation
early in the investigation that the aircraft never reached more than 100 f e e t above the
ground. However, the flights conducted in the engineering simulation indicated that the
aircraft most probably reached a peak altitude between 200 and 300 feet. The Safety
Board believes i t is possible that t h e GPWS takeoff descent mode may have dearmed
prematurely because of the sensitivity of the radio altimeter signal t o excessively high
pitch attitude and attenuated signals reflected from the frozen river surface.
             The aircraft's airspeed began t o decay during the climb and the drag produced
at the increasing angle of attack soon exceeded the thrust being developed by the engines.
A t this point, the aircraft theoretically might have been recoverable with the combined
corrective actions of full thrust and nosedown pitch control. However, the engineering
simulation indicated in actual practice that recovery within the altitude and time
available was not likely. Also, the aircraft's pitch control authority may not have been
sufficient t o counter the noseup pitching moment produced as the contaminated outboard
portions of the wing neared full stall. Upon recognizing that the aircraft was not
recovering, the flightcrew added thrust as they attempted t o counter altitude loss.
However, by that time the aircraft was nearing a full aerodynamic stall. Witnesses
confirmed that the aircraft was a t an extreme noseup pitch attitude as i t descended
steeply t o hit the bridge.
            The Safety Board concludes that neither the low thrust used during the takeoff
nor the presence of snow or ice on the aircraft, alone, would likely have led t o the crash.
In most other reported incidents in which B-737's have pitched up during takeoff, the
flightcrews had sufficient control authority with forward control column force and
stabilizer trim t o overcome the pitching moment, reduce the pitch attitude, accelerate
t o a lower angle of attack, and climb out successfully. The Safety Board believes that if
the proper thrust level (that for 2.04 EPR) had been used for the takeoff this flightcrew
could have recovered from any difficulties caused by the contamination - induced
aerodynamic performance penalties.
            Furthermore, based upon the engineering simulation, the Safety Board
concludes that even with the low thrust during the takeoff roll and the aerodynamic
penalty of the snow or ice contamination, the accident was not inevitable as the aircraft
lifted off. However, both immediate recognition of the situation and positive effective
actions by the flightcrew t o both counter the noseup pitching moment and add thrust were
required. With these actions, the aircraft should have been capable of continued
acceleration and achieved a sufficient performance margin for climbout.
            The Safety Board's belief that the aerodynamic performance penalty imposed
by the snow or ice contamination alone may not have led t o this accident does not, under
any circumstances, imply that the Board condones flight operations with a contaminated
aircraft or that such contamination cannot cause catastrophic accidents. Indeed, the
Board's aircraft accident records clearly illustrate that aircraft have crashed solely as a
result of attempted flight with contaminated wings.
2.4        Analysis of Events Preceding Takeoff
            The operation of aircraft in freezing temperatures and continuing
precipitation poses major problems t o airline maintenance and dispatch personnel, airport
operators, and air traffic controllers, in addition t o the flightcrews themselves. Safety
considerations dictate, and the Federal Aviation Regulations require, that the surface of
the aircraft be free of frost, snow, or ice before takeoff. Obviously, i t is difficult t o
comply with this requirement under some circumstances. Even if all accumulations of
contaminant a r e removed before the aircraft is released for flight, when delays are
encountered before the aircraft can actually takeoff, the risk of additional contamination
exists. Consequently, the final assessment of the aircraft's condition immediately before
takeoff is the sole responsibility of the pilot-in-command, the captain.

            Deicing Operations.--Until the mid-19501s, the common methods used t o clean
the frost, snow, or ice from an aircraft were strictly mechanical; ice was scraped from
the surface and snow was swept from the wings and fuselage much as one might remove
such contamination from an automobile. As aircraft became larger, the smoothness of
their aerodynamic surfaces became more critical and the dependence upon mechanical
techniques of deicing became impractical. Consequently, by the early 1960's commercial
airlines had accepted the use of deicing solutions which could be applied t o the aircraft's
surfaces more easily and quickly t o remove snow or ice contamination. Initially, the
deicing solutions were a composition of ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, and water
(about 10 percent).      The fluids were applied without being heated using an
agricultural-type spray apparatus. While this procedure effectively melted frost or ice,
time was required for the glycol t o react with the frozen contaminant, and some
mechanical effort or pressure application was necessary t o remove the softened snow or
melting ice. Through the years, the application of deicing solutions has been refined and
special equipment has been developed t o deliver large volumes of fluid under sufficient
pressure t o remove the snow or ice. Equipment design refinements have resulted in
deicing equipment which allows the operator to mix water and deicing solutions and thus
control the concentration t o suit the environmental conditions.
             Using this equipment, which delivers t o the aircraft surfaces a high volume of
hot liquid under pressure, heat melts the contaminant and pressure removes it. The liquid
may be water alone or a mixture of water and deicing solution. Generally, if conditions
are conducive to refreezing of any residual moisture which could present control
difficulties, deicing solution manufacturers recommend that aircraft surfaces be sprayed
with a high concentration of deicing solution after the contaminant is removed. Since any
residual high concentrate deicing solution remaining on the surfaces can provide some
protection against refreezing of continuing precipitation, the concept of
deicing/anti-icing has become common.
             The Safety Board has stated its concerns about the effectiveness of deicing
solutions t o provide anti-icing protection. While some protection may be afforded, there
has been little or no research to define the level of protection in terms of the
environmental conditions and the length of exposure t o these conditions. Both the
producers of deicing solutions and the manufacturers of the application equipment
recognize the uncertainties regarding anti-icing protection and do not attempt t o define
or speculate on the level of protection or t o provide guidance t o maintenance personnel
and pilots.

            The Board recognizes the complexity of the variables involved in the
anti-icing concept. The thickness and concentration of the protective film remaining on
the aircraft following the deicing operation depend on the amount of glycol in the
mixture, the amount applied to the aircraft surface, the pressure of the application and
temperature at which i t was applied, the design or runoff properties of the aircraft
surfaces, and the ambient temperature and dewpoint. Even if the thickness and properties
of the film remaining on the aircraft immediately after deicing are predictable or known,
its effectiveness t o prevent ice or snow accretion will depend on the r a t e and type of
precipitation. The water content of the precipitation will further dilute the deicer film,
raising its freezing temperature. If the aircraft is exposed t o precipitation long enough,
the freezing temperature of the diluted surface film will reach the ambient temperature
and the film will freeze either before or after takeoff, degrading aircraft performance. If
exposed t o certain kinds of precipitation for sufficient time, the film remaining on the
aerodynamic surfaces after a heavy overspray of highly concentrated deicer solution
might result in the formation and accumulation of a thicker layer of contamination than
would result if a lesser concentration or no solution had been applied. This is particularly
true if the surface ambient air is subfreezing, not saturated, and the precipitation is
f r o z e n ~ s u c has powdery snow. In fact, under these environmental conditions, a cold, dry
surface t o which frozen precipitation will not stick would be optimum and, though not
practical, removal by sweeping would likely provide the best anti-icing protection.
            In its review of technical literature regarding recommended deicinglanti-icing
practices, the Safety Board found that the practices are not uniform. The anti-icing
recommendations published by Union Carbide s t a t e unequivocally that its deicing fluid is
most efficient in its concentrated form t o protect ice-free aircraft from new icing.
Recommendations for use further emphasize that this allows fluid retention on the
aircraft surface, prolonging icing protection and that diluted deicing fluid is not t o be
used for anti-icing treatment of ice-free aircraft. These recommendations differ from
those contained in the manual prepared by Trump. The Trump manual specifies dilution of
the deicing solution t o 65 percent deicer135 percent water. The American Airlines
Manual specifies an even more diluted solution (25 percent deicer175 percent water) for
ambient temperatures of 20' t o 25'F.         For temperatures below 20Â°F a mixture of
40 percent deicer160 percent water is specified. The Air Florida manual contained no
instructions regarding deicing solutions.
            The Safety Board believes that in view of the differences in data published
within the industry, a comprehensive research program is needed t o establish the optimum
procedures for deicing with ethylene glycol solutions and t o determine the anti-icing
protection, if any, they provide. Once optimum procedures a r e developed, they should be
made standard throughout the industry. As a result of previous accidents, on November
14, 1980, the Safety Board addressed Safety Recommendation A-80-113 t o the FAA. The
Safety Board recommended that "the FAA initiate a study of the effectiveness of
ethylene glycol-based deicing fluid concentrations as an anti-icing agent under differing
icing and snow conditions." The FAA responded that such a study was begun in February
1981 in response t o the Safety Board's recommendation. However, testimony a t the
Safety Board's public hearing following this accident disclosed that the initial effort had
received limited support within the FAA and that resources devoted t o the effort were
inadequate. Since the hearing, the FAA has informed the Safety Board that limited
testing is being planned t o verify analytical and empirical estimates of icelsnow
formations under various atmospheric conditions combined with different deicing
mixtures, and t o verify analytical techniques for estimating fluid film thickness as a
function of selected variables.
            The Safety Board is concerned that pilots may erroneously believe that there
is a positive protection provided for a period following the application of
deicing/anti-icing solution which eliminates the need t o closely monitor the aircraft for
contaminants during ground and takeoff operations. The Safety Board concludes that the
only way t o assure that the deicing process has been effective and that the aircraft is
clean of adhering ice, snow, or frost is by observation by the flightcrew just before the
takeoff roll.
            Deicing of Flight 90.-Flight 90 was deiced by American Airlines maintenance
personnel in accordance with Air Florida's existing service agreement with American
Airlines. The investigation disclosed that there had been little communication between
Air Florida and American Airlines about procedures t o be used t o deice the B-737
aircraft. The Air Florida Maintenance Manual includes little information regarding
deicing, but i t specifically states that covers for pitot/static ports and plugs for engine
inlets must be in place when deicing fluid is applied. American Airlines, however, did not
comply with this requirement nor did the evidence indicate that the personnel actually
involved in the deicing operation were aware of the Air Florida requirement. While the
Safety Board does not believe that the installation of these devices would have affected
subsequent events, the Board concludes that there should have been more complete
discussions between Air Florida and American regarding procedures t o be applied during
B-737 maintenance so that respective responsibilities were fully understood. This is
particularly applicable since American did not operate B-737 aircraft.
           After analyzing the service agreement and interviewing the principals from
both Air Florida and American Airlines, the Safety Board has determined that more
specific responsibilities should have been defined for the the Air Florida Washington
maintenance representative with respect t o deicing Flight 90. Testimony indicated that
his duties were nonspecific and his orientation training upon assignment t o this position
was limited. This situation illustrates a need for more FAA attention t o contract
maintenance operations.
            Notwithstanding the existence of a maintenance agreement and irrespective of
the maintenance representative's role, the Board concludes that the Air Florida dispatch
responsibility a t Washington National Airport is delegated to the captain. Therefore,
although he probably relies on the assigned maintenance representative for ensuring that
necessary maintenance is conducted properly, i t is the captain's responsibility t o ascertain
that the aircraft is properly prepared for dispatch, including assuring that his aircraft is
free of snow, frost, or ice before taxiing for takeoff.
            The deicing operation on Flight 90 was begun about 1420, but was discontinued
after completing only a portion of the left side when the captain determined that the
airport would be closed and there would be a longer gate delay. The aircraft was observed
t o have about 1/2 inch of wet snow adhering t o its surfaces a t that time. Deicing resumed
between 1445 and 1450. Trump Vehicle No. 5058 which was used t o apply the deicing
solution mixes water and deicing solution stored in separate holding tanks, heats the
mixture, and delivers it t o the aircraft under pressure a t an adjustable flow rate. The left
side of the aircraft was deiced first; the operator selected a mixture of 30 t o 40 percent
deicer and 60 t o 70 percent water with a flow rate of 30 gallons per minute. The setting
was used both t o remove the contaminant and t o provide the final overspray in a single
operation. This operator was relieved by another who started and completed the deicing
of the right side of the aircraft. The right side was deiced with 100 percent water and the
final overspray was applied with a 20 t o 30 percent deicer t o water solution selected. The
deicing operation was completed at about 1510.
           Subsequent tests of deicing fluid/water solution taken from the Trump vehicle
showed that the mixture dispensed differed substantially from the mixture selected. The
percent of deicing fluid in solution was about 18 percent rather than 30 percent.
           The Safety Board determined that the inaccurate mixture was attributed t o a
replacement nozzle on the delivery hose. The standard Trump nozzle, which is specially
modified and calibrated, had been replaced with a nonmodified, commercially available
nozzle.   The Safety Board believes that such actions indicate that operators and
maintenance personnel may fail t o appreciate that properly maintained ground support
equipment may be critical t o flight operations, and that insufficient attention is given t o
this aspect of maintenance by both the carrier and FAA surveillance personnel.
            A device called a mix monitor was available as an option from Trump, Inc.,
and is standard equipment on later Trump deicing vehicles. The device monitors the
accuracy of the flow and proportioning valve assemblies and provides the operator with a
visual reading of the actual solution/mixture coming out of the nozzle. Without the mix
monitor, the operator has no means by which t o determine if the flow and proportioning
valves are operating satisfactory. A mix monitor was not installed on Trump Vehicle
No. 5058.
           While the diluted mixture delivered from the Trump vehicle may have affected
the thickness and concentration of the glycol film remaining after the final overspray and
thus the protection afforded against freezing and accumulation of the continuing snowfall,
the Safety Board is not able t o determine that this was a causal factor in the accident.
The complexity of the variables affecting the amount and the water content of subsequent
snow accumulations on the aircraft combined with the absence of research data preclude
meaningful comparison of the effectiveness of the procedures used on Flight 90 with other
procedures. Regardless of whether the deicing operation was causal t o the accident, the
deicing process used was not consistent with recommended practices and is thus
considered deficient. The evidence provided by a photograph taken between 10 t o
15 minutes after the completion of Flight 90's deicing indicated that some new snow had
already accumulated on the top and upper right side of the aircraft's fuselage. The wings
and empennage were not clearly depicted on the photograph. (See figure 3.)
           Ground Operations After Deicing.-Although    the Safety Board could not
determine whether the aircraft was completely free of snow or ice immediately after the
deicing operation was completed, the evidence is conclusive that snow had accumulated
on the surfaces during the nearly 50 minutes of exposure t o moderate t o heavy snowfall
before Flight 90 was cleared for takeoff.
            Since other flights departing Washington National Airport during the snowfall
on January 13 also experienced extensive delays and performed without apparent
difficulty during takeoff, one might conclude that the deicing procedures used on those
aircraft were more effective than those used on Flight 90.            However, the exact
conditions, such as temperature and ground accumulation on ramps and taxiways, the
length of time the aircraft was exposed t o critical wind conditions, and the proximity of
the aircraft t o the exhaust gases of other aircraft after deicing, are all factors which
could have made the difference between a successful takeoff and an unsuccessful one.
While other departing aircraft may also have had some snow on their surfaces, the Safety
Board believes t h a t the manner in which the flightcrew of Flight 90 operated their
aircraft before and during the taxi and ground delay increased the aircraft's susceptibility
t o aerodynamically degrading contamination.
            Fliptitcrew Performance
            The cockpit conversation between the captain and first officer during the
takeoff delay clearly indicated that the crew was aware of and concerned about the
weather and airport conditions. Accordingly, the Board would have expected the crew t o
have exercised all possible precautions t o minimize operational hazards. Such precautions
include (1) close inspection of the aircraft following the deicing operation, (2) adherence
t o flight-manual-recommended procedures regarding the use of thrust reversers and
engine anti-ice, (3) maintaining adequate distance behind taxiing aircraft so as not t o
allow exhaust gases t o turn snow t o slush, (4) assurance that the aircraft's wings were free
of sticking snow or ice before beginning takeoff, (5) early action t o reject a takeoff upon
detection of instrument anomalies, and (6) positive corrective action t o counter a
developing post-takeoff aircraft performance problem. Therefore, the Safety Board
examined the flightcrew's performance in each of these areas as well as those factors
which may have influenced their judgment and actions.

            Inspection of Aircraft Following Deicing.-Although the captain was solely
responsible for assuring that the aircraft was ready for flight when i t left the gate, no
witnesses specifically recalled seeing either the captain or the first officer leave the
cockpit t o inspect the aircraft from outside for remaining snow or ice contamination.
Surviving passengers testified that the crew remained in the cockpit following the deicing
operation. The Safety Board, therefore, concludes that the flightcrew's assessment of the
aircraft's condition was based entirely on their discussions with maintenance personnel
and any observations made from the cockpit. Although the Safety Board places no causal
significance t o the postdeicing inspection because of the subsequent ground operations and
the lengthy exposure of the aircraft t o the continuing snowfall while awaiting takeoff
clearance, i t believes that good practice dictates that one of the flight crewmembers
observe the aircraft from outside. Furthermore, the Safety Board believes that an outside
observation of the conditions may have influenced the crew's assessment of the wet/dry
characteristic of the falling snow, an assessment which may have affected their later
decisions.
             Use of Reverse Thrust During Pushback.-The surface condition in the gate
area was slippery and the tug which was connected t o the aircraft for the pushback after
the aircraft was deiced could not develop the traction needed t o move the aircraft. After
i t was apparent that the aircraft could not be moved with the tug, the flightcrew started
the engines and used reverse thrust t o help pushback, contrary t o advice from the tug
operator that the use of reverse thrust was prohibited by American Airlines' policy.
Witnesses estimated that the engines were operated for 30 t o 90 seconds during which
time snow and slush were blown around the aircraft. The aircraft failed t o move even
with t h e combined effort of reverse thrust and the tug, and the engines were shut down.
            During its investigation, the Safety Board determined that Boeing Operations
Bulletins warning against the use of reverse thrust because of occurrences of takeoff
pitch control anomalies with the B-737 aircraft after ground operation in freezing
conditions, had been incorporated into Air Florida flightcrew's manuals.
            The Safety Board cannot conclusively determine whether the use of reverse
thrust affected the amount or character of the contaminant which subsequently adhered
t o the aircraft. An American Airlines mechanic stated that he did examine the engines
following the use of reverse thrust and other personnel in the area stated that they did not
see any water or slush on the wings. However, heat developed from the engines and
reversers and the blowing snow and slush could have deposited a wet mixture, particularly
on the wing leading edge, which was not significant t o observers, but which subsequently
froze and increased the leading edge area's susceptibility t o further accretions during the
continuing precipitation.
            The Safety Board believes that the flightcrew was influenced by the prolonged
airport closure and by additional delays at pushback, leading them t o use reverse thrust t o
expedite operations. Regardless, the Safety Board concludes that the flightcrew's actions
in using reverse thrust contrary t o advice and guidance provided indicates a lack of
professional judgment consistent with their total performance. Whether the flightcrew
was familiar with the guidance in the Operations Manual and consciously disregarded i t
cannot be determined.
            Use of Engine Anti-ice System.-The Safety Board's investigation established
conclusively that the engine anti-ice system was not used during ground operations of
Flight 90. The crew's response t o anti-ice during the "after-start" checklist was "off."
Additionally, the closed position of four of the six motor-driven thermal anti-ice valves
and the level of engine rotation speed during the takeoff were explainable only if the
engine anti-ice system was "off." The Safety Board discarded the possibility that the
anti-ice switch was placed "onu by the flightcrew but the system failed t o operate. When
the engine anti-ice switches a r e placed on, six individual lights on the forward overhead
panel will illuminate "bright." When the motor-driven valves reach t o the open position,
the lights will "dim." If the valves do not open, these lights will remain "bright." The
Safety Board must accept the premise that the flightcrew would have checked the status
of these lights and then consequently would have noted that the valves failed t o open.
After the checklist response, there was no further mention of engine anti-ice by the
flightcrew. The FAA-Approved B-737 Flight Manual, which is used by t h e Air Florida
crews, prescribes that the engine inlet anti-ice system shall be on when icing conditions
exist or are anticipated during takeoff and initial climb. The manual defines icing
conditions when dry-bulb temperature is below 8' C (46' I?), wet-bulb temperature is below
4' C (39' F), and visible moisture such as fog, rain, or wet snow is present. The manual
provides further guidance that snow should be considered as wet when the outside air
temperature is higher than 30ÂF. Although the outside air temperature was below 30' F
a t the time, the Safety Board believes that the slippery conditions encountered during
pushback, their obvious concern about snow sticking t o the wings, and their later
observations of icicles on other aircraft should have caused the crew t o assess the snow as
"wet."    Since there are no restrictions t o the use of engine anti-ice during ground
operations and no significant performance penalty during takeoff and climb, the Safety
Board would expect the flightcrew t o a c t cautiously in marginal weather and use engine
anti-ice. However the checklist response seemed without hesitation and there was no
discussion regarding the existing weather conditions, and thus no evidence that the
flightcrew even considered the use of engine anti-ice.
            About 1549, while the aircraft was in line for departure, the first officer
commented, "See the difference in that left engine and right one," and 2 minutes later,
"This thing's settled down a little bit, might a been his hot air going over it." The Board
believes that the first officer was referring t o an erratic EPR indication probably as a
result of ice forming on the engine inlet probe. When the probe was solidly blocked, the
indications would settle down as the first officer observed. But, even this indication did
not prompt either of the flight crewmembers t o consider engine inlet icing or t o check or
question the status of the engine anti-ice system. The crew's action may have been due t o
a lack of winter operating experience, a lack of understanding of turbine engine operating
principles, and perhaps, deficiencies in their training regarding winter operations.
           The Safety Board concludes that the flightcrew's failure t o use engine anti-ice
was a direct cause of the accident. Had the engine inlet Pt2 probes not been blocked by
ice, the correct EPR values would have been indicated during t h e takeoff power
adjustments, and the engines would have been set for and developed normal thrust for
takeoff and climb. The engineering simulation showed that even with the airframe
icelsnow contamination, the additional thrust would have provided a positive performance
margin for acceleration and climb following takeoff. Moreover, if the crew had turned on
engine anti-ice before takeoff, but the Pto probes remained blocked, the flightcrew would
have been unable t o set power a t the target EPR. This would undoubtedly have prompted
them t o abort the takeoff attempt until they could evaluate the problem.
             The Safety Board notes that a B-737 flightcrew's attention is directed t o
engine anti-ice on the after-start checklist and that this item does not appear on the taxi
and takeoff checklist. Although it may not be pertinent t o the conditions existing on
January 13, 1982, the Safety Board can conceive of situations involving lengthy ground
delays wherein significant changes in ambient conditions will occur between the conduct
of the after-start checklist and the initiation of takeoff; changes which may require a
reassessment of the use of engine anti-ice. The Safety Board can only speculate whether
a taxi and takeoff checklist entry for engine anti-ice would have prompted the flightcrew
t o turn i t on for takeoff. Had the crew turned it on a t that time, the accident would
probably have been averted. In assessing the significance of the taxi and takeoff checklist
in this accident, the Safety Board considered its expectations regarding an experienced
professional flightcrew. The Board believes that a flightcrew preparing for takeoff in
conditions as they existed on January 13, 1982, would routinely have checked all items
related t o safe operations in subfreezing weather, such as pitot heat and engine anti-ice,
regardless of whether such items appeared on a checklist. While the Board, therefore, did
not include the omission of anti-ice from the taxi and takeoff checklist as a factor in the
cause of this accident, the Board believes that the checklists of all transport category
aircraft could profitably be reviewed t o determine if they include all items pertinent t o
safety.
            Spacing Between Taxiing Aircraft.-The     CVR-recorded conversation between
the captain and first officer as they awaited their sequenced departure indicated that the
captain intentionally positioned his aircraft close behind another aircraft in an attempt t o
use heat and blast from exhaust gases t o remove visible snow or slush from the wings.
Within 3 minutes after the engines were started, the first officer commented, "It's been a
while since we've been deiced." Five minutes later, the captain stated, "Tell you what,
my windshield will be deiced don't know about my wing." The first officer responded,
"Well, all we really need is the inside of the wings anyway, the wingtips a r e gonna speed
up by eighty anyway, they'll shuck all that other stuff." About a minute later the
following exchange took place:
            Captain:             "(Gonna) get your wing now."
           First Officer:        'ID'they get yours? Can you see your wing tip over'er."
            Captain:             "I got a little on mine."
            First Officer:       "A little," "this one's got about a quarter t o half an
                                 inch on it all the way."
            The Safety Board believes that the heat of the exhaust gases may have turned
snow, which otherwise might have blown off during takeoff, into a slushy mixture. The
mixture then froze on the wing leading edges and the engine inlet nose cone. The Safety
Board believes that the captain's actions t o position the aircraft in the area of heated
exhaust gases of preceding aircraft may have contributed t o this accident by increasing
the amount of the frozen contaminant which adhered t o critical parts of the aircraft prior
t o and during the takeoff.

           The Safety Board views the action t o taxi close t o the aircraft ahead as an
example of the captain's lack of awareness of, or disregard for, the contents t o the flight
manual. Operations Manual Bulletin No. 74-8, issued by The Boeing Co. on October 24,
1974, called specific attention t o the cold weather procedures of the FAA-Approved
Flight Manual. The manual states, "Maintain a greater distance than normal between
airplanes when taxiing on ice or snow covered areas. Engine exhaust may form ice on the
ramp and takeoff areas of the runway and blow snow and slush which freezes on surfaces
i t contacts." The Safety Board believes that pilot training programs and materials should
emphasize the hazards of taxiing too close behind another aircraft during icing conditions.
                Initiating Takeoff With Visible Snow Adhering t o Aircraft.--The evidence is
conclusive that the flightcrew was aware that the ton of the wine's were covered with
snow or slush before they attempted to takeoff. ~ h e c a ~ t a iandn first officer continued
t o discuss the weather conditions until they were first in line for takeoff clearance.
There is no evidence that the flightcrew made any last minute visual assessments of the
amount or character of the snow or slush on the wings before taxiing into the takeoff
position. The lack of increased background noises indicating that windows were opened or
pertinent conversation on the CVR are consistent with the conclusion that neither
crewmember left the cockpit to observe the wings from the cabin nor opened the cockpit
windows t o enhance observation from the cockpit. The Safety Board believes that the
flightcrew accepted the fact that snow or ice had accumulated on the aircraft and
believed that while such accumulation may have some deteriorating effect, i t would not
a f f e c t significantly the aircraft's takeoff and climb performance. The flightcrew was
probably influenced by the prolonged departure delay and was thus hesitant t o forego the
takeoff opportunity and return t o the ramp for another cycle of deicing and takeoff delay.
The flightcrew was probably also influenced by their observations of other aircraft
departing ahead of them and successfully completing the takeoff and climb. 171

            Although all of the flight training received regarding winter operations and
advisory materials related t o such operations provided during a pilot's career stress the
importance of "clean" wings for takeoff, the Safety Board is concerned that some pilots
may not fully appreciate the extent t o which even a small amount of contaminant can
degrade an aircraft's performance. Personal encounters with airframe icing during cruise
flight and flight manual statements regarding the ability of the aircraft to cope with icing
during cruise flight might lead a pilot t o believe that some wing contamination can be
tolerated without danger. In fact, the Safety Board believes that this crew's decision t o
takeoff with snow adhering t o the aircraft is not an isolated incident, but rather is a too
frequent occurrence. 181

            Regardless of the many factors which may have influenced the flightcrew, the
Safety Board concludes they should not have initiated a takeoff with snow visible on the
aircraft wings. The Federal Aviation Regulations are very specific, requiring that "no
person may take off an aircraft when frost snow or ice is adhering t o the wings, control
surfaces, or propellers of the aircraft." Since the snow or ice on the wings of Flight 90
degraded the aerodynamic performance significantly, the Safety Board concludes that the
flightcrew's decision t o take off with snow or ice on the wings was a direct cause of the
accident.

-
171 Data has indicated that such factors as crew cognitive patterns, interpersonal
relations and communications patterns can potentially influence pilot performance.
Resource Management on the                      Deck. Proceedings of a NASAIIndustry Workshop
Held a t San Francisco, ~ a l i f o r n i a ,~une26-28, 1979. NASA Conference Publication 2120,
March. 1980.
  ~   ~




-
181 Aircraft Accident Report: Allegheny Airlines, Inc., Nord 262, MohawkIFrakes 298,
N29824, Benedum Airport, Clarksburg, West Virginia, February 12, 1979 (NTSB-AAR-12);
Aircraft Accident Report: Ozark Air Lines, Inc., Douglas DC-9-15, N9742, Sioux City
Airport, Sioux City, Iowa, December 27, 1968, (File No. 1-0039); Aircraft Accident
Report:     Redcoat Air Cargo, Ltd., Bristol Brittania 253, Boston, Massachusetts,
February 18, 1980 (NTSB-AAR-81-3).
            Continuation of Takeoff With Instrument Anomalies.-As the aircraft ahead of
Flight 90 moved onto the runway for departure, the crew of Flight 90 taxied up t o the
taxiway line demarking the safe distance from landing aircraft t o hold and await further
clearance. The crew then began the query-response takeoff checklist. With the existing
weather conditions, the Safety Board would have expected the captain t o respond t o the
"takeoff briefing" with special attention t o procedures t o be followed during the takeoff.
The briefing should have included discussion of the coordination between the captain and
the first officer, which would be required in case of a rejected takeoff on the slippery
runway. Even though the first officer appeared t o be seeking advice when he commented,
"Slushy runway, do you want me t o do anything special for this or just go for it," the
captain's response was noncommital, and no detailed takeoff briefing was given.
             The Air Florida Operations Manual procedures for takeoff recommend a rolling
takeoff. The procedures specify that the captain use nosewheel steering (controlled by
the tiller) until the aircraft is aligned with the runway. After alignment with the runway,
the captain shifts his left hand from the nosewheel tiller t o the control column and sets
takeoff power, keeping his right hand on the engine thrust levers. Directional control of
the aircraft is maintained through rudder pedal steering. The captain's visual attention
would be primarily outside t o monitor directional control with a secondary scan of flight
instruments t o monitor airspeed. The first officer's duties include a check of the engine
instruments after thrust is set. He should then continue t o monitor and crosscheck all of
the instruments and callout 80 knots, V and V p speeds. Testimony a t the public hearing
disclosed that the decision t o reject thetakeoff is the responsibility of the captain.
              Flightcrews routinely reverse duties on alternate legs of flight; however, the
captain remains in the left seat. On the accident flight, the first officer was t o conduct
the takeoff. There are no written procedures in the Air Florida Operations Manual t o
specify the reversal of duties between the captain and first officer; however, such
procedures are standardized during training. The captain must still control the aircraft
until it is aligned with the runway centerline using the nosewheel steering tiller. The first
officer will set the engine thrust levers t o the target EPR value. When the aircraft is
aligned with t h e runway, the first officer will assume directional control of the aircraft
using the rudder pedal steering. He will release his left hand from the throttle levers, and
the captain will make final power adjustments and keep his right hand on the throttle
levers so that he may initiate a rejected takeoff if necessary. During the takeoff
acceleration, the first officer would normally be looking outside t o maintain directional
control with a scan t o the airspeed indicator. The captain's attention would be directed t o
checking engine instruments and monitoring flight instruments. He would make the
required 80-knot, V and V calls. Even with the reversal of takeoff duties, the captain
                            ?
remains responsible Tor the inal decision to reject a takeoff.
             The traffic flow as Flight 90 awaited clearance was being sequenced
alternately t o departing and arriving traffic. Flight 90 was given the clearance t o "taxi
into position and hold" as landing traffic was on the rollout and was told t o "be ready for
an immediate takeoff] .I' The first officer responded t o the "position and hold" clearance
within 4 seconds and the FDR showed that the aircraft began t o taxi about 8 seconds
later.    The crew completed the takeoff checklist and made the public address
announcement for flight attendants to be seated. At 1559:24, 29 seconds after being
cleared into position, Flight 90 was cleared for takeoff; the first officer responded and
the local controller added, "No delay on departure if you will, traffic's two and a half out
for the runway." Flight 90 a t that time was still taxiing onto the runway and just
beginning the 120' turn t o align the aircraft with the runway. The turn took about
18 seconds, and the flightcrew began advancing the throttles before the aircraft was
aligned t o the takeoff heading.
             As the first officer brought the throttles up, the EPR indication probably
overshot the 2.04 target value. Crew comments, "Ho," "Whoo," "Really cold here,"
t'Got'em,'t "Real cold," and "God, look a t that thing," all were indicative of the crew's
observation of the rapid increase and overshoot in EPR as power was added. The CVR
sound spectrogram study confirmed that the engine rotational speed peaked and was
immediately reduced t o a nearly stabilized value which corresponded t o an actual EPR of
1.70-the error resulting from the false reading due t o the ice blocked P t n probe. The
aircraft continued t o accelerate for takeoff. Within 10 seconds of the initial power
adjustment, the first officer commented, "That don't seem right does it?" "Ah, that's not
right." The captain's only response was "yes i t is, there's eighty" (knots). The first officer
again expressed concern, "Naw, I don't think that's right." Again, there was no response
from the captain. This last statement by the first officer was simultaneous with a radio
transmission from the crew of the arriving Eastern aircraft that they were "cleared t o
land, over the lights." With no further comment from the captain, Flight 90 continued the
takeoff. The first officer continued t o show concern as the aircraft accelerated through a
"hundred and twenty" (knots). The aircraft reached V the theoretical engine failure
golno go decision speed, about 41 seconds after the beginning of the takeoff roll.

            The Safety Board considered several factors in analyzing the flightcrew's
performance and judgment during the takeoff. The air traffic situation and the local
controller's instructions t o takeoff with "no delay" may have predisposed the crew t o
hurry. The CVR and FDR data show that the crew probably expedited their actions t o the
extent possible; they taxied t o the runway and began the takeoff from the turn t o runway
heading without stopping. Consequently, they did not take the opportunity t o advance
engine power in a static situation t o verify performance and instrument readings.
Additionally, the slippery surface of the runway probably would have made a static engine
power check before takeoff difficult. Both the captain and the first officer detected the
EPR overshoot when the throttles were advanced. That the target EPR indication was
obtained a t a throttle position other than normal probably prompted the initial awareness
that something was "not right." It is not possible t o determine t o what extent either of
the pilots cross-checked the other engine instruments a t that time. The captain's
comment "real cold" could refer to his observation of the engine exhaust gas temperature
which would have been lower than normal for the intended takeoff thrust though
corresponding to the actual takeoff thrust; however, the Safety Board believes that i t
more probably reflected a belief that a higher-than-normal EPR resulted because of cold
ambient temperatures.
            Since the captain was the nonflying officer during the takeoff, the Safety
Board would have expected that he would have been the most attentive t o the
engine instruments and the most observant of any anomalies. Instead, i t was the first
officer who continually expressed concern that something was not right. The Board finds
no positive evidence that the captain tried t o evaluate the reason for the EPR overshoot
by comparison with other instruments-N       N exhaust gas temperature, and fuel flow.
All of these indications are needle dial an%og?ype and all would have been reading lower
than normal for takeoff power. (See figure 6.) The Board recognizes that there a r e
several factors which could hinder a pilot's properly evaluating the situation confronting
the crew of Flight 90. First, there is no requirement for a pilot t o precompute precise
target values for any of these parameters during takeoff. Second, since both engines are
presenting similar readings with no readily apparent common problem, a pilot might
accept them as valid though confusing. Third, the acceleration of the aircraft a t low
speeds would be less than normal, but t h e reduction probably would not have been
perceived by the crew until higher speeds were attained. Therefore, the Safety Board can
understand the difficulty that a flightcrew would have in analyzing the problem. In fact,
the Safety Board believes that the first officer was astute in his observation that
something was wrong and was highly concerned about that observation.
            Although the first officer advised the captain of his concerns several times,
the captain apparently chose t o ignore his comments and continue the takeoff. It is not
necessary that a crew completely analyze a problem before rejecting a takeoff on the
takeoff roll. An observation that something is not right is sufficient reason t o reject a
takeoff without further analysis. The problem can then be analyzed before a second
takeoff attempt. On a slippery runway, a decision t o reject must be made as early a s
possible.    An engineering analysis based on the FDR-indicated performance and
theoretical performance of the B-737 showed that the accident aircraft had traveled
about 1,250 feet before i t reached 80 kns. Analysis also showed that the aircraft could
have been brought t o a stop from 80 kns in less than 2,000 feet even on an extremely
slippery runwayÃ‘on having a coefficient of braking of 0.1. In fact, the analysis showed
that the flightcrew should have been able t o stop the aircraft safely within the runway
length even if the action t o reject had been delayed until the aircraft reached 120 kns.
While the runway condition may have been an influencing factor at higher speeds, t h e
Safety Board does not consider i t a contributing factor t o the captain's lack of action
when the engine instrument anomaly was first called t o his attention. The Safety Board
also considered the possibility that the captain was aware of and concerned about the
decreasing separation between his aircraft and the aircraft landing behind him. The Board
believes that this would likely have become a factor only after the landing aircraft
reported "over the lights." This was 9 seconds after the first officer first observed, "that
don't seem right," and 1 second after Flight 90 had reached 80 kns. Further, there are no
comments on the CVR t o indicate that the captain ever considered rejecting the takeoff.
Therefore, t h e Safety Board concludes that there was sufficient doubt about instrument
readings early in the takeoff roll t o cause the captain t o reject the takeoff while the
aircraft was still a t relatively low speeds; that the doubt was clearly expressed by the
first officer; and that the failure of the captain t o respond and reject the takeoff was a
direct cause of the accident.

             Reaction t o Stall Warning After Takeoff.-If the extent t o which the aircraft's
performance was degraded was not recognized by the flightcrew during the takeoff
acceleration, i t should have been immediately apparent that a serious condition existed
after the takeoff rotation. The Safety Board believes that the first officer was probably
surprised as the aircraft nose pitched up abruptly during rotation because of the trim
change caused by the wing contamination. The forward control column force required t o
lower the nose attitude may have been much higher than anticipated. In fact, some
stabilizer trim change may have been needed t o augment elevator control; however,
stabilizer trim actuation was not evident on the CVR or on the stabilizer trim jackscrew.
The flightcrew would also have been surprised and probably confused when the stickshaker
stall warning activated a t a normally acceptable indicated airspeed. However, the
flightcrew's reaction t o this warning should have naturally been t o bring thrust t o the
takeoff level and reduce the noseup attitude of the aircraft.              In the accident
circumstances, the crew, believing that thrust was already a t the the takeoff limit, would
likely have limited their initial actions t o correcting pitch attitude. The captain's
comments, "Forward, forward," "Easy," "We only want five hundred," "Come on forward,"
and "just barely climb," all were evidence that the captain was directing his concern to
pitch attitude.

            The Safety Board believes that the crew probably reduced nose attitude a t
first, but later increased i t t o prevent descent into the ground. It should have been
apparent from the continuation of the stickshaker and the continuing decrease in airspeed
that the aircraft was not recovering from a serious situation. The Safety Board believes
that, with the aircraft near t o stall and close t o the ground, the crew should have
responded immediately with a thrust increase regardless of their belief that EPR limits
would be exceeded. Furthermore, in this case the crew should have known that all other
engine parameters - N N,,, and exhaust gas temperature-were well below limit values.
                        1'
            The frequency recorded on the CVR which corresponded t o engine rotational
speed was not distinct on the sound spectrogram after the aircraft's stickshaker activated.
Although a transient frequency which may have been associated with an increase in engine
rotational speed was discernible about 16 seconds after stickshaker activation, the Safety
Board does not believe this t o be sufficient evidence on which t o base a positive
conclusion that the crew waited 16 seconds before pushing the throttles forward. The
Board does believe t h a t power was added before impact. However, since the engineering
simulation showed that had full thrust (equivalent t o 2.23 EPR) been added immediately
following the activation of the stickshaker, the aircraft could probably have accelerated
t o a safe stall margin and continued flying, the Board believes that the flightcrew
hesitated in adding thrust because of the concern about exceeding normal engine
limitations which is ingrained through flightcrew training programs.
             The Safety Board is concerned that pilots are so indoctrinated not t o exceed
engine parameter limitations that they will withhold the use of available thrust until i t is
too late t o correct a developing loss of control. Pilot training programs should be
reviewed t o ensure that they place proper emphasis on adherence t o engine limitations,
but that they also stress the use of available thrust beyond those limits if loss of an
aircraft is the other alternative.
           Flightcrew Experience and Training
            Both the industry and the traveling public have come t o expect the highest
degree of performance and professionalism from flightcrews of scheduled air carrier
operations and particularly from airline captains. It would further be expected that the
basics of turbo jet operations would be clearly ingrained in the mind of an experienced,
well trained airline captain, and that under the weather conditions existing a t Washington
National Airport on January 13, 1982, these basics would have dictated checking the wings
for snow or ice, using engine anti-ice, and rejecting of the takeoff when the engine
instruments appeared anomalous. An airline captain should have assimulated or gained
thorough knowledge of these procedures and of the conditions which warrant their use.
He should have done so both through actual experience and through formal training as he
progressed through the various stages of his career. By the time a pilot qualifies as an
airline captain, he should be capable of detecting and coping with not only the situations
demonstrated in this accident, but with every phase of reasonably anticipated transport
aircraft operations.
             The captain and first officer of Flight 90 were certificated and qualified in
accordance with applicable regulations. However, the Safety Board believes that the
flightcrew's performance on January 13 reflected an insufficient concern for the hazards
of cold weather operations which was not consistent with t h e intent of the regulations.
The Safety Board could not determine the level of training in cold weather operations or
the amount of exposure t o actual cold weather conditions that either crewmember had
before his employment with Air Florida. Certainly, however, any such experience would
have been gained in other types of aircraft and probably would have involved
considerations other than those involved during the operation of jet transport aircraft.
Although cold weather considerations generally apply t o all types of aircraft, specific
procedures and requirements related t o such aircraft systems as engine and airframe anti-
ice, considerations for congested airport operations, and even t h e sensitivity of the
aircraft t o wing contamination may differ significantly.
            The captain's flying experience before his employment with Air Florida, Inc.,
included flying light aircraft, twin reciprocating aircraft and turboprop-powered aircraft.
Much of his flying is known t o have been in t h e southern United States. All of his jet
transport training and experience were obtained with Air Florida. Before his checkout as
a B-737 captain, his jet flight experience consisted of about 1,200 hours as a first officer
on DC-9 and B-737 aircraft. Since upgrading t o captain, he had accumulated about
1,100 hours. The Safety Board's review of his operating experience as a captain disclosed
only eight previous occasions where arrivals or departures were conducted during weather
conditions conducive t o icing. In contrast t o this captain's prior experience, testimony a t
the hearing disclosed that the average pilot currently hired by Air Florida for first officer
duties has more than 2,000 hours flying time in turbojet transport aircraft and 85 percent
possess Air Transport Pilot certificates.
            The first officer's experience before his employment with Air Florida, Inc.,
was gained as a military jet fighter pilot. His direct experience in jet transport-type
aircraft consisted of about 1,000 hours as a first officer in B-737 aircraft. The Safety
Board's investigation disclosed only two occasions during that period where he had
conducted ground operations in conditions conducive t o icing. Thus, neither of the
flightcrew had much experience in operating jet transport aircraft in weather conditions
like those at Washington National Airport on January 13, 1982.

            The training that the flightcrew received did cover cold weather operating
procedures in classroom presentations during initial and recurrent training and discussions
during flightchecks. All of the various aspects of cold weather operations would have
been covered in one form or another during the Air Florida Training Program. Such
training usually does not include detailed discussions or specific problems, such as engine
probe icing and related instrument indications with and without the engine anti-ice
system. It would be unusual t o encounter conditions during training flights or checkflights
which would allow an instructor t o demonstrate actual cold weather operating procedures
or t o observe a trainee's ability t o deal with cold weather operations. Air Florida did
circulate a periodic newsletter which contained general discussions of cold weather
procedures and hazards. While the Safety Board encourages periodic dissemination of
such material, i t is not a substitute for more formal training t o emphasize the
significance of winter operational hazards. The Safety Board is concerned that existing
training programs, particularly those conducted during warmer seasons or in Southern
climates may not provide for an objective measurement of a flightcrew's appreciation for
the hazards of winter operations.
             The Safety Board concludes that the flightcrew's limited training and low
experience in jet transport winter operations in snow and ice conditions were contributing
factors in this accident. The Board believes that the captain of Flight 90 missed the
seasoning experience normally gained as a first officer as a result of the rapid expansion
of Air Florida, Inc., from 1977 through 1981, wherein pilots were upgrading faster than
t h e industry norm t o meet t h e increasing demands of growing schedules. The Safety
Board's informal survey of major trunk carriers showed that pilots upgrading t o captain
had served an average of 14 years as a first or second officer with the carrier.
            The Safety Board also reviewed the evidence in this accident as i t related t o
the relative roles of the captain and first officer and their interaction. The captain of the
aircraft is responsible for the safety of the aircraft a t all times and is expected t o exert
leadership and authority. The captain of Flight 90 did not give a detailed takeoff briefing
nor did he respond directly t o specific questions from the first officer regarding
operational procedures before the beginning of the takeoff. Most significantly, the
captain did not react t o the first officer's repeated comments that something was not
right during the takeoff roll; in fact, there is no evidence that he took decisive action
even when the stickshaker activated after takeoff.
           With regard to the first officer, while he clearly expressed his view that
something was not right during the takeoff roll, his comments were not assertive. Had he
been more assertive in stating his opinion that the takeoff should be rejected, the captain
might have been prompted t o take positive action.
              The Safety Board strongly believes that pilot training programs as well as
initial selection and upgrading criteria should include considerations for command
decision, resource management, role performance, and assertiveness. As a result of
previous accidents in which circumstances included shortcomings in crew communication
and coordination, in June 1979 the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A-79-47
recommending that the FAA urge operators t o indoctrinate flightcrews in the principles
of flightdeck resource management with emphasis on the merits of participative
management for captains and assertiveness training for other cockpit crewmembers. As a
result, t h e FAA issued an Air Carrier Operations Bulletin instructing Principal Operations
Inspectors t o urge carriers t o include such training. Several air carrier operators have
recognized a need for enhanced flightcrew management and have developed command
training programs, including principles of leadership, management skills, human relations,
and problem solving in the operational environment. However, there are no specific
requirements or syllabus guidelines for resource management training or criteria, and
many carriers, including Air Florida, place little or no emphasis on these aspects of
training.
           Other Factors Relevant to the Accident
          B-737 Known Inherent Pitchup Characteristics With Wing Leading Edge
Contamination and Related Boeing Actions.-The engineering simulation of Flight 90's
  - .orofile disclosed that the aircraft's rate of acceleration after liftoff, below normal
mzht
because of the reduced thrust, was further impaired by a high noseup 'pitch attitude
attained during the takeoff rotation. Consequently, the aircraft did not reach an airspeed
safely above the stall speed. The high pitch attitude occurred because the flightcrew
failed to, or was unable to, react quickly enough to counter the aircraft's longitudinal trim
change produced by the wing leading edge contamination. The reports since 1970 by other
operators who have experienced abrupt pitchup or rolloff immediately after liftoff of
B-737 aircraft indicate that the B-737 may have a greater known inherent pitchup
characteristic than other aircraft in this regard a result of small amounts of frost, snow,
or ice on the wing leading edge. The Safety Board could not determine whether the
aerodynamic design makes the B-737 more sensitive t o pitching or rolling moments when
the wing is contaminated, or whether more frequent operation of these aircraft in
environmental conditions conducive to snow or ice accretion during ground operations,
coupled with the near t o the ground wing placement, accounts for the higher number of
reported B-737 pitchup/rolloff incidents. Regardless, the Safety Board concludes that the
pitchup tendency of the aircraft because of leading edge contamination contributed t o the
accident. However, to place this contributing factor in perspective, the Board notes that
no aircraft design requirements include the ability t o perform with snow or ice
contamination and that any known contamination, regardless of the amount or depth, must
be viewed as potentially critical t o a successful takeoff. For this reason, flightcrews are
not only dissuaded, but are prohibited, from attempting a takeoff with such
contamination.
           The Safety Board, however, agrees with the United Kingdom Civil Aviation
Authority that there are times, such as night time operations, when a small amount of
contaminant may not be detectable by the flightcrew and that precautionary procedures
should be developed and implemented t o reduce the potential of control problems if a
takeoff is conducted under those circumstances. The occurrences of pitchup or rolloff
were first reported over 10 years ago and although they prompted The Boeing Co. t o
examine the B-737's flight characteristics during flight tests, preventive actions taken by
both the manufacturer and the Federal Aviation Administration have been limited solely
t o the dissemination of advisory information. Even this information is couched in a
manner which may fail t o impart the hazard potential t o the reader. For example,
Operations Manual Bulletin No. 81-4 advises pilots, "If leading edge roughness is observed
or suspected for any reason, care should be exercised t o avoid fast rotation rates (in
excess of 3' per second) and/or over rotation." Such a statement could imply that i t is
safe t o operate the aircraft provided the pilot exercises care. The Safety Board concludes
that Boeing should have placed greater emphasis on the prohibition of takeoff if leading
edge contamination is observed or even suspected. To accommodate those situations in
which the flightcrew may be unable t o detect small amounts of contamination, the Board
concludes that more positive measures should have been taken by Boeing, such as those
imposed by the CAA in its Airworthiness Directive 010-01-82.

            Moreover, the Safety Board is aware that The Boeing Co. has been considering
and evaluating modifications t o the B-737 wing thermal anti-ice system which would
permit that system t o be used during ground operations t o prevent the formation of ice on
the wing leading edge devices. In view of the span of time over which the pitchup/rolloff
incidents were reported, the Board believes that The Boeing Co. should have developed
this modification and promulgated corresponding operational procedures more
expeditiously. The Board believes that both the manufacturer and the FAA should move
rapidly and before the next winter season t o assure that wing thermal anti-ice system
modifications and related operational procedures are implemented or takeoff speed
margins are added t o prevent further pitchup or rolloff occurrences of B-737 aircraft
during cold weather conditions.
            Washington National Airport.--The        ideal situation during periods of
precipitation conducive t o ice accretion or snow accumulation is t o deice the aircraft
immediately before taxi and t o receive takeoff clearance without delav. Unfortunately.
this same type of weather is most apt t o produce significant air traffic delays. In this
context, the Safety Board examined the conditions a t Washington National Airport.
Although there was no attempt during this investigation t o evaluate the airport's ability t o
cope with normal daily operations, i t was evident that the airport's capacity affected the
ground delays experienced on January 13. First, the airport operates with a single
acceptable instrument runway. While most other major airports have multiple runways
and snow can be removed from one runway while operations are conducted from another,
at Washington National i t is necessary t o close the airport for snow removal. This
necessarily produces a backlog of both arriving and departing traffic. Second, a t many
airports it is possible to implement a gate-hold procedure, permitting aircraft t o remain
a t the gate where deicing equipment is accessible until takeoff can be made with
minimum delay. At Washington National, however, both gate and ramp space are limited.
On January 13, the imbalance between arriving and departing traffic resulted in more
aircraft on the ground than the airport normally handles, making i t necessary t o clear
aircraft for taxi in order t o provide gate space and relieve the congestion of arriving
traffic. Consequently, aircraft were lined up awaiting air traffic control's ability t o fit
them into the traffic flow. Third, the constrained taxi areas, particularly in periods of
snowfall, provide for only limited movement and maneuvering of delayed aircraft. There
is not sufficient room under most circumstances t o get out of line and taxi t o a designated
area for deicing and then fall back in line for takeoff. The flightcrew's options are
limited t o continued waiting until they are able t o takeoff, or returning t o their deicing
areas where they will probably be exposed t o more waiting for space a t the ramp. Thus,
while the Safety Board believes that professional flightcrews must give paramount
consideration t o the hazards of takeoff with a contaminated aircraft, the practicality of
returning t o a deicing area only t o encounter repeated delays awaiting takeoff might
influence a flightcrew's decision t o take off with an accumulation of ice or snow on the
aircraft which a flightcrew might view as nonthreatening.
            The Safety Board also analyzed the conditions of the runway and taxiways as
they might have influenced the performance of Flight 90. Pilots who had landed following
the airport's snow removal operation and others who landed about the time of the accident
stated that the runway was snow covered at the approach and departure ends and that i t
was patchy with areas of asphalt visible through the snow in the center. None of the
pilots reported problems in stopping their aircraft within the runway length. Indeed, most
arriving aircraft turned off before the intersection with runway 33-15. The Safety
Board's analysis of the takeoff performance of Flight 90 indicated that the actual
acceleration of the aircraft during the takeoff roll correlated closely with the
acceleration that a B-737 at the accident aircraft's weight would attain a t an EPR setting
of 1.70. Therefore, t h e Board concludes that the runway contaminant did not significantly
affect the aircraft's takeoff performance. Undoubtedly, the braking coefficient which
could have been achieved on the runway was less than that for a dry runway. However,
the actual braking coefficient was not measured. Therefore, the Board cannot precisely
assess the extent t o which the runway condition might have become a factor if the
takeoff had been rejected a t high speed.        However, assuming braking coefficients
generally associated with icy runways, the aircraft should have stopped without difficulty
if the takeoff had been rejected below 120 kns. Therefore, the Safety Board believes that
the runway condition should not have been a factor in any decision t o reject the takeoff
when the instrument anomaly was noted.
            Pilots using the airport a t the time of the accident stated that the taxiways
were covered with about 3 inches of snow and slippery conditions were encountered during
taxi. While there is no evidence that Flight 90 encountered problems taxiing, the snow on
the taxiway might have contributed t o the accumulation of contaminant on the aircraft,
particularly because of its proximity t o the preceding aircraft. However, the Board
believes i t is likely that the continuing precipitation was the major source of wing
contamination and that the snow on the taxiway contributed little t o the contamination.
            Although the Safety Board believes that the airport snow condition was a
factor only insofar as i t contributed t o the flight's ground delay as i t awaited takeoff
clearance, the Board has been concerned about the problems of runway surface conditions
as they affect aircraft, particularly air carrier operations. As a result of this accident
and others, including a fatal accident which occurred only 10 days afterward, the Safety
Board convened a 3-day public hearing on May 3, 1982, t o receive evidence on the subject.
Witnesses from Government and various segments of the aviation industry appeared t o
address five related issues:       airport management requirements and maintenance
procedures during inclement weather, the role of the airline, air traffic control, and the
pilot in determining the operational adequacy of a runway, the effect of slippery runways
on aircraft certification and operational regulations, the adequacy of present techniques
for measuring runway friction and their value t o a pilot, and the development of
equipment or techniques t o monitor aircraft acceleration. The findings of that hearing
will be published by the Safety Board in a Special Investigation Report.

            Runway 36 a t Washington National Airport does not comply with current FAA
design criteria for newly constructed airports for extended runway safety areas. While
the Safety Board acknowledges that a longer safety area would have provided a greater
margin of safety if Flight 90 had rejected its takeoff, i t notes that the length of the hard
surface of runway 36 exceeded the runway length required by regulations for Flight 90's
takeoff. Furthermore, the total length afforded by runway 36 and its extended surface
area exceeded the total length which would have been provided if Flight 90 had been
operating from a minimum length runway having a currently prescribed extended safety
area. Consequently, the Safety Board does not consider the fact that the runway does not
meet the current FAA design criteria for new airports t o be a factor in this accident.

            Regardless of the relevance t o this accident, the Safety Board has had a
long-standing concern with the adequacy of runway safety areas. On April 20, 1977, the
Safety Board recommended that the FAA amend 14 CFR 139.45 t o require that extended
runway safety area criteria be applied retroactively to all certified airports. At those
airports which cannot meet the full criteria, the extended runway safety area should be as
close t o the full 1,000-foot length as possible. The FAA responded that the requirement
for an extended runway safety area a t all certificated airports would "be unacceptable
due to the unreasonable burden placed on airport operators." However, the FAA is
considering an amendment to 14 CFR 139 t o require extended runway safety areas at new
airports, or when new runways or major runway extentions a r e constructed at existing
airports. The FAA has, however, rewritten Advisory Circular 15015335-4 t o place more
emphasis on the design criteria for extended runway safety areas.

           In view of the FAA's decision not t o emphasize the construction of extended
runway safety areas a t certificated airports, the Safety Board urges voluntary action by
airport owners and managers t o upgrade those runways which fall short of the current
design standards for extended runway safety areas.
            Flow of Traffic Into Airport (Air Traffic Control).-The congestion of aircraft
operations a t Washington National Airport on January 13, 1982, as the cause of takeoff
delays after aircraft had been deiced has been discussed. Certainly, the ability t o handle
large numbers of aircraft without difficulty even in good conditions is a recognized
limitation of the airport. Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should have
used all available means t o prevent saturation of the airport and the air traffic control
system during the weather conditions which existed. The FAA could have provided
stricter control of the number of aircraft inbound t o Washington National Airport through
their Central Flow Control Facility (CFCF).

            It is an accepted procedure that airport management notify the Air Route
Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and the CFCF when i t anticipates closure of an airport.
Such notification should be given a t least 30 minutes before the airport is closed so that
the affected ARTCC's and CFCF can take appropriate action t o deal with aircraft
destined for the airport. They must plan for holding or rerouting those aircraft which are
airborne and scheduled t o arrive during the period of closure. Action should also be taken
t o prevent an arrival backlog by notifying ARTCCrs to hold those aircraft which are
planning flights t o the airport, but which have not yet taken off from their departure
airports.

            At 1300 on January 13, 1982, Washington National Airport personnel advised
the Washington ARTCC and CFCF that the airport would be closed for snow removal
operations between 1330 and 1430. The Washington ARTCC thus began t o hold en route
traffic inbound t o the airport a t 1320. Concurrent action was not taken by CFCF t o hold
aircraft at departure airports. Thus, the backlog of arrival traffic being placed into
holding increased. The situation was compounded further when Washington National
Airport personnel notified the ARTCC a t 1425 that the airport would reopen a t 1437, but
then a t 1437 revised the expected time for reopening t o 1500. At that time, the
Washington ARTCC was becoming saturated with holding inbound traffic and holding was
extended t o the adjacent ARTCC's. It was not until 1455 that the adjacent ARTCC's
began t o delay departures of aircraft destined for Washington from airports within their
respective areas.
            The Safety Board believes that the CFCF should be capable of adjusting
rapidly t o changing weather conditions t o enable the system t o hold traffic a t the
departure airports. The failure or inability t o do so resulted in a flow of arrival traffic
immediately after the airport reopened which saturated the airport. The Safety Board
concludes that the FAA's CFCF did not anticipate the developing situation and take
action t o prevent it. The Safety Board believes that its failure t o a c t may have been the
result of inadequate communications between facilities-either the lack of timeliness of
essential information or inaccurate information, such as the closing of the airport for
30 minutes longer than anticipated. The Safety Board thus believes that the FAA should
review ATC coordination practices and modify them as necessary t o require that facilities
provide CFCF with current and accurate information and that CFCF acts on that
information in a positive manner t o minimize airport saturation and extensive traffic
delays.
           Traffic Separation.-A witness observation suggested and the Safety Board's
evaluation of the ATC communications and radar data confirmed that Eastern Flight
1451, a B-727, touched down on the runway before Flight 90 became airborne from the
same runway. The correlation of data showed that the minimum separation was no
greater than 4,000 f e e t and might have been much less. The Safety Board concludes that
the separation between Flight 1451 and Flight 90 was an unsafe condition which violated
acceptable ATC procedures and established separation criteria.
            As a result of the traffic backlog on the day of the accident, arrivals were
being fed by approach control t o the local controller in a continuous sequence and
departures were being delayed. The local controller was placed under considerable
pressure t o expedite the traffic flow in order t o reduce departure delays, and he was
interspersing departure traffic between successive arrivals.
            In this type of operation, the separation between departing and arriving
aircraft depends upon the interval between successive arriving aircraft established by
approach control. The local controller is responsible, however, for monitoring that
interval so that he can provide the prescribed separation or departing traffic. H e must
decide whether the interval is sufficient t o allow the departure. The controller's actions
are guided by the limiting criteria set forth in FAA's Air Traffic Control Handbook
7110.65B~that is, under IFR conditions, a departing aircraft may be separated from an
arriving aircraft on final approach by a minimum of 2 miles if separation will increase t o
a minimum of 3 miles within 1 minute after takeoff. The criteria are intended t o assure
that safe separation is maintained between departing and arriving aircraft in the event
that an arriving aircraft executes a missed approach. However, both the local controller
on duty a t the time of the accident and the Washington National Airport Tower Chief
stated a t the Board's public hearing that the FAA's ATC Handbook criteria are widely
interpreted t o allow for the "accordion effect" of landing deceleration and takeoff
acceleration. To the contrary, the ATC training manuals and controller tests clearly
indicate that no such allowance is intended.
            In making his operational decisions regarding the insertion of departure
traffic, the controller must consider factors, such as the time required for a landing
aircraft t o clear the runway, the time required for a departing aircraft t o taxi t o the
takeoff position and initiate takeoff and the acceleration of the departing traffic and its
relationship with the closure rate (ground speed) of the landing traffic. Other factors,
such as taxiway and runway conditions, must be considered as they affect the movement
of aircraft. The assessment of these factors undoubtedly is more difficult on a day when
aircraft holding for takeoff or those rolling out after landing cannot be seen from the
tower. The controller must then base his judgment on radar displays, experience, and
verbal communications with the aircraft. For example, based on all of the factors, the
local controller might determine that he needs a minimum spacing of 6 miles between
arriving aircraft. If he notes a separation of less than 6 miles, he must realize that he
cannot insert a departure. His logical action would then be t o notify the approach
controller t o provide more spacing between arrivals in order t o accommodate departures.
Based on the evidence, the Safety Board concludes that the local controller handling the
departure of Flight 90 used poor judgment of these factors, compromising the required
separation criteria. That he realized that the spacing interval was tight is evident by the
ATC communications. Eastern 1451 reported ''by the marker" 30 seconds before Flight 90
was told t o taxi into "position and hold." The earlier landing traffic was asked t o expedite
its turnoff from the runway, Eastern 1451 was asked t o maintain reduced speed, and
Flight 90 was told t o takeoff without delay. The last two transmissions were particularly
poor practices. Restricting speed on short final is a dangerous practice and is specifically
prohibited by the Air Traffic Control Handbook when inside the final approach fix.
Expecting Flight 90 t o takeoff without delay was improper since the controller did not
verbally and could not visually verify that Flight 90 had reached the takeoff position at
 the time. Until Flight 90 was cleared for takeoff, the controller had the option of holding
Flight 90 and issuing a missed approach t o Eastern 1451. However, after Flight 90 was
 cleared, the situation became critical. The controller should have requested a rolling
 report from Flight 90 and continued t o monitor the progress of Eastern 1451. Failing t o
 receive a rolling report from Flight 90 as Eastern 1451 closed t o within 3 miles, the
 controller could have issued a missed approach and vectors.             Instead, the 2-mile
 separation criterion was probably compromised when Flight 90 started rolling, and the
 abnormally slow acceleration of Flight 90 further reduced the expected separation.
            Since the controller could not see the aircraft because of poor visibility, he
could not monitor Flight 90's takeoff progress visually and was completely dependent upon
radar information and verbal communications in order t o determine whether he should
permit Eastern 1451 t o continue its approach. Consequently, he may not have known if
Flight 90 had rejected a takeoff in time t o issue a missed approach clearance t o
Eastern 1451 which could be executed safely. Furthermore, action t o issue a missed
approach clearance t o Eastern 1451 or even voluntary execution of a missed approach by
Eastern 1451 after Flight 90 had commenced takeoff would have been equally hazardous
since the two aircraft could have collided during departure.
             The Safety Board has concluded that the proximity of Eastern 1451 should not
have been a factor in the takeoff decision of the captain of Flight 90, and there is no
evidence that i t did influence his decision. Although the Safety Board does not believe
that there is sufficient evidence t o determine that the ATC's handling of Flight 1451 was
a causal factor in the crash of Flight 90, the Board concludes that the local controller's
overeagerness t o expedite the traffic flow torelieve the departure backlog was contrary
t o established procedures and jeopardized safety. The Safety Board is concerned that no
operational error was recorded although the local controller's handling of traffic in this
case was clearly contrary to FAA procedure.
            Takeoff Acceleration Monitor.-The Safety Board believes that this accident
clearly illustrates fallacies in the takeoff field length criteria and decision speed concept
employed by air carrier operators t o assure an acceptable level of safety during takeoff.
The minimum field length from which air carrier aircraft can takeoff is established so
that an aircraft experiencing an engine failure during the takeoff roll can either stop
safely within the runway length or continue t o accelerate with power from the remaining
engines and take off safely. In preparation for the takeoff, the flightcrew computes the
decision speed (Vl), the speed above which the aircraft can continue the takeoff safely if
an engine fails.
            There are two significant fallacies in the takeoff criteria. One, the aircraft
accelerate-stop-performance upon which the decision speed and runway length
computations are based is determined during the aircraft type certification tests on a
clean dry runway. The stopping performance is determined without the use of reverse
thrust and is thus considered by the FAA and the airframe manufacturers t o be
conservative on a clean dry runway. However, this conservative margin is obviously
degraded on runways having a braking coefficient reduced by snow, ice, or even liquid
contamination. Thus, on a snow-covered runway, there a r e no assurances that the
aircraft can be stopped from the V speed within the limits of a minimum length runway.
In fact, since stopping data on slippery runways are not provided in objective terms, the
pilot is not able t o determine the existing margin of safety for takeoff under conditions
such as existed at Washington National Airport on January 13. However, data provided by
the aircraft manufacturer during the investigation showed t h a t runway 36 was longer than
required for Flight 90 using the minimum field length criteria for a clean dry runway and
that a B-737 aircraft a t the accident aircraft weight performing normally should have
been capable of accelerating t o V and stopping on runway 36 using reverse thrust even if
the braking coefficient was reduced t o 0.1--equivalent t o that expected on clear ice.

            The second fallacy in the takeoff criteria is, however, more significant t o the
circumstances of this accident. The accelerate-stop performance and thus the field
length and decision speed computations are based upon the demonstrated and theoretical
acceleration of the aircraft using normal takeoff power. If, for any reason, the aircraft
aceleration is less than that used for the computation, the runway distance used t o
achieve V will be increased and the length of runway available for stopping will be
decreased? Thus, with subnormal acceleration, such as occurred during the takeoff of
Flight 90, there is no assurance that the aircraft can stop from V on the remaining
runway even if the runway surface is clean and dry. Since a t a k e o h may have t o be
rejected a t an airspeed much lower than V when aircraft acceleration is subnormal t o
assure adequate stopping distance, the pilot must be able t o recognize the subnormal
acceleration rate early during the takeoff roll.
            The Safety Board has investigated other accidents which have occurred after
an aircraft failed t o accelerate a t a normal r a t e during takeoff. In its report of one such
accident in November 1970, 191 the Safety Board noted that a timely rejection of t h e
takeoff might have been initiated effectively if the flightcrew had been able t o assess the
aircraft's acceleration r a t e more accurately under t h e given operating conditions.
Consequently, the Safety Board recommended implementing takeoff procedures that will
provide the flightcrew with time or distance references to enable the pilot-in-command
t o make a go-no-go judgment with regard t o the aircraft acceleration r a t e t o the V
speed, particularly for critical length runways and for runway surface conditions that may
impede acceleration.
            As a result of this recommendation, in early 1971, FAA asked the Air
Transport Association of America (ATA) Flight Operations Committee t o update its
position on the use of distance-to-go runway markers as a means of supplying acceleration
rate information t o Vl speed t o flightcrews on takeoff. In addition, the airlines were also
asked t o explore the feasibility of developing an acceptable acceleration time check on
aircraft having inertial navigation systems (INS) t o determine if procedures could be
developed that would enable flightcrews t o make a go-no-go decision with regard t o the
airplane's acceleration t o V speed. The Flight Operations Committee reviewed this
subject in detail and concluded that any attempt t o use distance-to-go runway markers or

-
191 Aircraft Accident Report: Capitol International Airways Inc., DC-8-63F, N4909C,
Anchorage, Alaska, November 27, 1970 (NTSB-AAR-72-12).
t o use the INS system for acceleration rate information t o V speed was not feasible for
airline operations. Of more serious concern in using such techniques was the fear of
increasing exposure t o unnecessary high-speed aborts and subsequent overruns. The Flight
Operations Committee believed, based on individual investigations and experience, that
acceleration checks during takeoff roll could cause more accidents than they might
prevent.
            As a result of its investigation of another accident 20/ in May 1972, the Safety
Board reiterated its recommendation that FAA "require the installation of runway
distance markers a t all civil airports where air carrier aircraft are authorized t o operate."
It also again urged the FAA t o "require the use of takeoff procedures which will provide
the flightcrew with time and distance reference t o associate with acceleration t o Vl
speed."
            Nothwithstanding the views expressed by ATA's Flight Operations Committee
in 1971, the Air Line Pilots Association (ALPA) appears t o have recognized some merit in
using time-to-distance checks.        In late 1973, ALPA petitioned FAA t o require
distance-to-go markers a t 1,000-foot intervals on runways used by turbine-powered
aircraft. The petition did not, however, include a proposal t o require the use of an
operational procedure in connection with the proposed markers. In response t o ALPA's
proposal and the Safety Board's recommendations, FAA issued an Advance Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) on this subject in May 1973. But, as a result of
industry-wide opposition t o the proposal, FAA withdrew the ANPRM in May 1977.
            The Safety Board acknowledges that the many variables affecting the
acceleration r a t e of an aircraft present a difficult problem. First, the target acceleration
rate for any set of conditions must be determined; second, a method of measuring and
comparing the actual acceleration in terms of speed versus distance traveled with the
target value must be established; and third, acceptable tolerances must be applied t o
prevent unnecessary takeoff rejections particularly a t higher speeds where the hazard of
overrun is greatest. Nonetheless, the Safety Board believes that some means of assessing
takeoff progress could have alerted the flightcrew of Flight 90 t o the f a c t that their
aircraft was accelerating a t a lower-than-normal rate and may have prompted a safe
rejection of the takeoff. The monitoring of takeoff acceleration was also explored a t the
Safety Board's May 1982 public hearing.
            At the hearing, the Safety Board queried representatives of a number of
aviation organizations regarding the extent t o which speed and distance checks a r e
currently used in turbo jet operations to assess takeoff performance. Without exception,
spokesmen from ALPA, ATA, Allied Pilots Association (APA), and several air carriers
indicated they knew of no carrier which regularly used such checks. Similarly, General
Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA) and Aerospace Industries of America (AIA)
representatives indicated that t o their knowledge none of their member companies use or
advocate such techniques. Although some military operations still use runway markers t o
provide specific information on distance, time-to-speed and time-to-distance checks are
used infrequently elsewhere in aviation operations. Furthermore, most of the hearing
participants agreed that technology has surpassed the manual methods of using
stop-watches or runway distance markers t o monitor takeoff progress.         Automatic
systems t o monitor distance which can then be compared with a computed theoretical
distance for a given speed are receiving more industry attention. While those directly
involved in the design of such equipment appear optimistic, much of industry, including

-
201 Aircraft Accident Report: Pan American World Airways, Inc., B-747, July 30, 1971,
San Francisco, California (NTSB- AAR-72-17).
FAA, is skeptical that the necessary s t a t e of development of such equipment --
particularly in definition of tolerances and in accurate and reliable measurements -- has
been reached.
            The Board believes that a concerted effort and support by various elements of
the aviation community could overcome the technical hurdles involved and would lead t o
the implementation of a takeoff performance monitoring system that could contribute
significantly t o flight safety. The Board believes that such a concerted effort should be
initiated by a joint government-industry task force a t the earliest possible date. In, the
interim, the Safety Board reiterates its Safety Recommendation A-72-3, issued January 3,
1972, that the FAA:
                 Require the installation of runway distance markers a t all airports
                 where air carrier aircraft are authorized t o operate.
            Crash Dynamics and Injury Analyses.-The           witness observations, the
examination of damage to the vehicles struck by the aircraft, and the examination of the
recovered aircraft wreckage were used t o reconstruct the aircraft's impact sequence and
t o analyze the nature of the loads experienced by the aircraft structure and passengers.
The reconstruction showed that the aircraft was descending along a flightpath of about 9'
with a nose-high attitude of about 15O when the tail structure first contacted vehicles on
the bridge. An analysis based on the estimated velocity change and the distance in which
the structure decelerated showed that the initial impact vertical load experienced by the
tail section averaged about 4s. The impact of the tail structure with the vehicles and
bridge caused a downward acceleration of the aircraft's nose as i t plunged toward the
ice-covered river. The deformation of the nose structure of the aircraft showed that i t
hit first. The downward acceleration of the nose was abruptly reversed a t impact and an
analysis based on the crushing deformation showed that an average deceleration of 12g
was experienced. However, the dynamic characteristics of impact as various structural
elements collided during the progressive crushing of structure probably resulted in peak
loads several times greater than the calculated average. The extensive breakup and
numerous undefinable variables made a meaningful load analysis impossible.
Nevertheless, the Safety Board believes that the average loads experienced in the cabin
were within human tolerance for survivability, but that the extensive breakup of the
fuselage, the impingement upon occupiable space, and the failure of the cabin floor with
the consequent loss of occupant restraint resulted in secondary impact loads on the
passengers which exceeded survivable tolerances.
             All but 1 of t h e 74 occupants who were fatally injured suffered severe impact
injuries which directly related t o their deaths. The injuries t o 54 of these occupants were
of a nature t o cause immediate death. The injuries to the other 19 were incapacitating t o
the extent that they could not have escaped from the aircraft without assistance. The
injuries t o some of these persons may have been survivable, but only under conditions
where rescue personnel could have reached them t o render immediate assistance and
medical attention.
            Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that the magnitude of peak impact
loads exceeded rational limits for aircraft structure. The accident was classified as
nonsurvivable for the cabin occupants because of the violation of occupiable space when
the cabin collapsed and broke up and because of the high secondary impact forces
following the loss of passenger restraint. The Board further concludes that the rescue
effort following the crash was not a factor in the deaths of 73 of the aircraft's occupants.
             The only occupiable area which remained relatively intact was that section of
the a f t cabin near the separation forward of the empennage. The one passenger who
survived the crash but who drowned and the four passengers and one flight attendant who
were rescued all were seated in this a f t cabin area and managed t o escape through the
separation.
            Rescue Efforts.--The obscured visibility as Flight 90 was taking off prevented
the local controller from observing the aircraft as i t proceeded toward the departure end
of the runway. The local controller was depending upon his radar monitor and airlground
communications t o track the aircraft's takeoff progress. The controller observed the
aircraft t o be airborne on his radar display, and a t 1600:33 he advised Flight 90 t o
"contact departure control." He received no response from t h e flight, and a t 1601:22,
within about 20 seconds of the aircraft's contact with the bridge, he noted that the radar
return from Flight 90 had disappeared. After an unsuccessful attempt t o reestablish
communications with the flight, the local controller, who was also the tower team
supervisor, was relieved immediately by another controller so he could assume supervisory
duties. He stated that he then notified Operations and Safety and called the Washington
National Airport fire department t o report a possible accident. The relieving controller
continued the attempts t o establish communications or determine the whereabouts of
Flight 90 until the tower received a telephone call that an aircraft had crashed north of
the 14th Street Bridge.

            The evidence showed that the airport fire department became aware of the
accident at 1603, about 2 112 minutes after the accident but was not officially notified
until 1604. Although the notification of the fire department might have been expedited
had the controller taken action t o call them first immediately upon loss of the radar
target, the Safety Board believes that, under the circumstances, the controller acted
properly and promptly in attempting t o ascertain the status of the aircraft and in
notifying the fire department.

            At 1606, 5 minutes after the crash, the Washington Metropolitan Area
Communication Circuit of the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency was notified and it in
turn alerted all circuits t o an aircraft emergency. The notification included Arlington
fire and police departments, U.S. Park Police, the District of Columbia fire and police
departments, and the Fairfax and the Alexandria fire departments. All departments
responded; however, none were properly equipped t o perform a rescue operation in the
ice-covered river. The Washington National Airport airboat was available for rescue
efforts, but i t had never been tested for performance on ice. It was launched from near
the end of runway 36 at 1622, but experienced directional control difficulties and did not
reach the rescue scene in time t o be used t o rescue the survivors. The distance traveled
by the airboat was about three-quarters of a mile. The District of Columbia fire boat and
harbor police boats were unable t o break ice in order t o reach the scene in time to be
effective.

            The U.S. Park Police was notified of the accident at 1606. The U.S. Park
Police helicopter did reach the scene promptly and although not equipped nor required t o
be equipped for water rescue operations, i t predominated in the rescue effort. Eagle 1, a
jet-powered Bell Jet Ranger helicopter arrived on the scene a t 1622. The pilot hovered
the craft near the survivors while his crewman dropped make-shift rescue aids, ropes with
loops and life rings t o survivors in the water. The survivors were dragged t o the shore in
this manner. To accomplish one rescue, the crewman stood on the helicopter's skid and
pulled one of the survivors from the water. The Safety Board commends the heroic
actions of the helicopter pilot and crewman who participated in the rescue effort. The
Board also commends the prompt and heroic actions of bystanders, one of whom
disregarded personal safety and jumped into the frigid water t o swim to the aid of a
survivor. His action is deserving of and has met with, the highest praise and recognition.
In addition, the Safety Board recognizes the unselfish act of the flight attendant who
inflated the only available lifevest and gave it t o one of the more severely injured
passengers.

            The lifevest was packaged in plastic and was difficult t o open. The survivors
had to chew on the package and tear i t open with their teeth. The Safety Board had noted
similar difficulties of opening lifevests were experienced by survivors of the National
Airlines, Inc. B-727 aircraft accident near Pensacola, Florida, May 8, 1978. As a result,
the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation No. A 79-39. This recommendation
specifically addressed standards for packaging along with other needed changes and asked
that these changes be made in a revision of Technical Standard Order (TS0)-C-13d.
However, a draft TSO on life preservers published by the FAA on November 16, 1981, had
no provisions regarding packaging. The Safety Board on February 19, 1982, in responding
to the draft, urged the FAA t o include in the new TSO packaging standards that would
assure that survivors of aircraft accidents could, under adverse conditions, easily unpack
the life preserver.

            FAA has not issued final TSO-C-13d, but expects t o do so by the end of 1982.
The Safety Board a t this time does not know if the final TSO will contain standards for
the proper packaging of the lifevest. The Safety Board is continuing t o monitor the FAA's
actions in this regard. The Safety Board again urges that the FAA include packaging
standards in the TSO.
             While recognizing the contribution of these individuals in rescuing the
survivors of this accident, the Safety Board does not believe that the various emergency
response organizations were adequately equipped for this emergency. Undoubtedly, had
there been a large number of persons surviving the impact forces, many would have
drowned in the icy water before they could have been rescued. The Safety Board has
continually supported and advocated disaster planning and reciprocal agreements between
airports and their surrounding communities. As recently as July 1981, the Washington
National Airport plan was tested during a simulated ditching exercise in which the
surrounding communities participated. The exercise effectively pointed out problems
with equipment Also, apparently, little thought had been given t o a situation involving
conditions as they existed on January 13, 1982. The accident demonstrated the need for
special equipment capable of being launched rapidly and of performing on ice. The Board
further notes that there are no specific FAA requirements regarding the type of
equipment t o be maintained t o accomplish rescue from waters surrounding any air carrier
airports.    In fact, Washington National had more equipment than was required by
applicable regulations. The guidance provided in FAA Advisory Circular 15015210-13,
however, goes beyond regulatory requirements and suggests that the emergency plans,
facilities, and equipment a t airports include capability for water rescue for all conditions
which might be encountered.

            The Safety Board believes that the response capability at the Washington
National Airport was not totally consistent with the guidance provided in the Advisory
Circular. In that respect, there was a lack of adequate equipment and the apparent lack
of planning t o meet a situation of this magnitude, especially at an airport with the traffic
density of Washington National.
            The Board is aware of the extensive improvements which have been made a t
Washington National Airport since the accident. In addition t o another airboat, the FAA
has acquired a 22-ft Boston Wehaler boat equipped with firefighting equipment and a 40-ft
steel-hull utility boat which has a limited ice breaking capability. Police and firemen
have been trained in ice operations in the airboats, and have received formal CFR training
in the Boston Whaler. The FAA has also purchased new rescue nets for use by helicopter
crews in water operations. One net was provided t o the U.S. Park Police for use in its
helicopters. Finally, a diving team is being trained at Washington National Airport for use
in underwater rescue and operations. The Board believes these measures are necessary at
an airport with extensive water boundaries. We urge the FAA t o use the same rationale
for the bolstering of water rescue capability a t Washington National t o require additional
equipment at certificated airports located next t o large bodies of water.
            Some of the rescue units from the District of Columbia and the surrounding
communities were still en route t o the Air Florida crash site when they were notified of
an accident involving the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority train a t the
Smithsonian Metro station which occurred about 1630 January 13. Several of these units
were redirected t o the scene of that accident. This action did not affect the rescue
efforts at the aircraft accident site. However, the occurrence of two major accidents
within a 30-minute period in the Washington Metropolitan area during weather conditions
as they existed on January 13, 1982, placed a severe burden on the emergency response
capability of those jurisdictions required t o respond t o both accidents. The concurrent
emergencies, while unique, emphasized the need for the District of Columbia fire
department t o review its emergency response plans t o assure that a residual rescue
response capability is available a t all times.
                                    3. CONCLUSIONS

3.1        Findings
            1.   The aircraft was properly certificated, equipped, and maintained in
                 accordance with existing regulations and approved procedures.
            2.   The flightcrew was certificated and qualified for the scheduled domestic
                 passenger flight in accordance with existing regulations.
            3.   The weather before and a t the time of the accident was characterized by
                 subfreezing temperature and almost steady moderate-to-heavy snowfall
                 with obscured visibility.
            4.   The aircraft was deiced by American Airlines personnel. The procedure
                 used on the left side consisted of a single application of a heated
                 ethylene glycol and water solution. No separate anti-icing overspray was
                 applied. The right side was deiced using hot water and an anti-icing
                 overspray of a heated ethylene glycol and water was applied. The
                 procedures were not consistent with American Airlines own procedures
                 for the existing ambient temperature and were thus deficient.
            5.    The replacement of the nozzle on the Trump deicing vehicle with a
                  nonstandard part resulted in the application of a less concentrated
                  ethylene glycol solution than intended.
There is no information available in regard t o the effectiveness of
anti-icing procedures in protecting aircraft from icing which relates t o
time and environmental conditions.
Contrary t o Air Florida procedures, neither engine inlet plugs nor
pitotlstatic covers were installed during deicing of Flight 90.
Neither the Air Florida maintenance representative who should have
been responsible for proper accomplishment of the deicinglanti-icing
operation, nor the captain of Flight 90, who was responsible for assuring
that the aircraft was free from snow or ice at dispatch, verified that the
aircraft was free of snow or ice contamination before pushback and taxi.
Contrary t o flight manual guidance, the flightcrew used reverse thrust in
an attempt t o move the aircraft from the ramp. This resulted in blowing
snow which might have adhered t o the aircraft.
The flight was delayed awaiting clearance about 49 minutes between
completion of the deicinglanti-icing operation and initiation of takeoff.
The flightcrew did not use engine anti-ice during ground operation or
takeoff.
The engine inlet pressure probe (Pt2) on both engines became blocked
with ice before initiation of takeoff.
The flightcrew was aware of the adherence of snow or ice t o the wings
while on the ground awaiting takeoff clearance.
The crew attempted t o deice the aircraft by intentionally positioning the
aircraft near the exhaust of the aircraft ahead in line. This was contrary
t o flight manual guidance and may have contributed t o the adherence of
ice on the wing leading edges and t o the blocking of the engine's Pt2
probes.
Flight 90 was cleared t o taxi into position and hold and then cleared t o
take off without delay 29 seconds later.
The flightcrew set takeoff thrust by reference t o the EPR gauges t o a
target indicator of 2.04 EPR, but the EPR gauges were erroneous
because of the ice-blocked PtÃ probes.
Engine thrust actually produced by each engine during takeoff was
equivalent t o an EPR of 1.70 - about 3,750 pounds net thrust per engine
less than that which would be produced a t the actual takeoff EPR of
2.04.
The first officer was aware of an anomaly in engine instrument readings
or throttle position after thrust was set and during the takeoff roll.
Although the first officer expressed concern that something was "not
rightn t o the captain four times during the takeoff, the captain took no
action t o reject the takeoff.
The aircraft accelerated at a lower-than-normal rate during takeoff,
requiring 45 seconds and nearly 5,400 f e e t of runway, 15 seconds and
nearly 2,000 f e e t more than normal, t o reach liftoff speed.
The aircraft's lower-than-normal acceleration r a t e during takeoff was
caused by the lower-than-normal engine thrust settings.
Snow and/or ice contamination on the wing leading edges produced a
noseup pitching moment as the aircraft was rotated for liftoff.
To counter the noseup pitching moment and prevent immediate loss of
control, an abnormal forward force on the control column was required.
The aircraft initially achieved a climb, but failed t o accelerate after
liftoff.
The aircraft's stall warning stickshaker activated almost immediately
after liftoff and continued until impact.
The aircraft encountered stall buffet and descended t o impact a t a high
angle of attack.
The aircraft could not sustain flight because of the combined effects of
airframe snow or ice contamination which degraded lift and increased
drag and the lower than normal thrust set by reference t o the erroneous
EPR indications. Either condition alone should not have prevented
continued flight.
Continuation of flight should have been possible immediately after
stickshaker activation if appropriate pitch control had been used and
maximum available thrust had been added. While the flightcrew did add
appropriate pitch control, they did not add thrust in time t o prevent
impact.
The local controller erred in judgment and violated ATC procedures
when he cleared Flight 90 t o take off ahead of arriving Eastern Flight
1451 with less than the required separation and jeopardizing.
Eastern 1451 touched down on runway 36 before Flight 90 lifted off; the
separation closed t o less than 4,000 feet, in violation of the 2-mile
preparation requirement in the Air Traffic Control Handbook.
Runway distance reference markers would have provided the flightcrew
invaluable assistance in evaluating the aircraft's acceleration rate and in
making a go-no-go decision.
The Federal Aviation Administration's failure t o implement adequate
flow control and the inability t o use gate-hold procedures at Washington
National Airport resulted in extensive delays between completion of
aircraft deicing operations and issuance of takeoff clearances.
                 The average impact loads on the passengers were within human
                 tolerance.    However, the accident was not survivable because the
                 complex dynamics of impact caused the destruction of the fuselage and
                 cabin floor which in turn caused loss of occupant restraint. The survival
                 of four passengers and one flight attendant was attributed t o the relative
                 integrity of the seating area where the tail section separated.
                 The crash/fire/ rescue capability of Washington National Airport meets
                 the applicable regulations, which do not require water rescue equipment.
                 Washington National Airport had water rescue equipment available;
                 however, it had not been tested for use in ice-covered waters and i t
                 proved ineffective.
                 The Washington National Airport crash/fire/rescue personnel were
                 notified 3 minutes after the crash as tower personnel attempted t o
                 determine the aircraft's whereabouts.
                 Rescue of the survivors was due solely t o the expeditious response of a
                 U.S. Park Police helicopter, and the heroic actions of the helicopter
                 crew and of one bystander.
3.2        Probable Cause
            The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause
of this accident was the flightcrew's failure t o use engine anti-ice during ground operation
and takeoff, their decision t o take off with snow/ice on the airfoil surfaces of the
aircraft, and the captain's failure t o reject the takeoff during the early stage when his
attention was called t o anomalous engine instrument readings. Contributing t o the
accident were the prolonged ground delay between deicing and the receipt of ATC takeoff
clearance during which the airplane was exposed t o continual precipitation, the known
inherent pitchup characteristics of the B-737 aircraft when the leading edge is
contaminated with even small amounts of snow or ice, and the limited experience of the
flightcrew in jet transport winter operations.
                                 4. RECOMMENDATIONS

          As a result of this accident and several others involving operations in snow and
icing conditions the National Transportation Safety Board issued the following
recommendation t o the F A A on January 28, 1982.
           Immediately notify all air carrier operators of the potential hazard
           associated with engine inlet pressure probe icing, and require that they
           provide flightcrews with information on how t o recognize this hazard and
           requiring that flightcrews cross-check all engine instruments during the
           application of takeoff power. (Class I, Urgent Action) (A-82-6)
           Immediately review the predeparture deicing procedures used by all air
           carrier operators engaged in cold weather operations and the information
           provided t o flightcrews t o emphasize the inability of deicing fluid t o
           protect against reicing resulting from precipitation following deicing.
           (Class I, Urgent Action) (A-82-7)
               Immediately review the information provided by air carrier
               operators t o flightcrews engaged in cold weather operations t o
               ensure comprehensive coverage of all aspects of such operations,
               including the effects of a runway contaminated by snow or slush on
               takeoff, and methods t o be used t o obtain maximum effectiveness
               of engine anti-ice during ground operations and takeoffs. (Class I,
               Urgent Action) (A-82-8)
               Immediately require flightcrews t o visually inspect wing surfaces
               before takeoff if snow or freezing precipitation is in progress and
               the time elapsed since either deicing or the last confirmation that
               surfaces were clear exceeds 20 minutes t o ensure compliance with
               14 CFR 121.629(b) which prohibits takeoff if frost, snow or ice is
               adhering t o the wings or control surfaces. (Class I, Urgent Action)
               (A-82-9)

               Immediately issue a General Notice (GENOT) t o all FAA tower and
               air carrier ground control personnel alerting them t o the increased
               potential for aircraft icing during long delays before takeoff and
               when aircraft operate in proximity t o each other during ground
               operations in inclement weather, and encouraging procedural
               changes where possible so that the controllers implement the gate-
               hold provisions of the Facilities Operations and Administration
               Manual 7210.3F, paragraph 1232.           (Class I, Urgent Action)
               (A-82-10]
                Document the effect of engine inlet pressure probe blockage on
                engine instrument readings and require that such information be
                added t o approved aircraft flight manuals. (Class 11, Priority
                Action) (A-82-11)
                Amend Advisory Circulars 91-13c, "Cold Weather Operation of
                Aircraft," and 91-51, "Airplane Deice and Anti-Ice Systems," t o
                discuss in detail the effects and hazards associated with engine
                inlet pressure probe icing. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-12)
                Revise the air traffic control procedures with respect t o aircraft
                taxiing for takeoff, holding in line for takeoff, and taking off t o
                provide for increased ground separation between aircraft whenever
                freezing weather conditions and attendant aircraft icing problems
                exist. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-13)
                Expand the training curricula for air traffic controllers and
                trainees t o assure that instruction includes the hazards associated
                with structural and engine icing of aircraft. (Class I1 Priority
                Action) (A-82-14)
                Immediately disseminate the contents of               this safety
                recommendation letter t o foreign operators involved in cold
                weather operations. (Class I, Urgent Action) (A-82-15)

           The Safety Board has received the following response from the FAA regarding
these safety recommendations:
            A-82-6.--On March 11, 1982, the FAA issued Air Carrier Operations Bulletin
(ACOB) No. 7-82-2, Cold Weather Procedures, emphasizing the problems associated with
engine inlet icing and suggested operational procedures.

            A-82-7 and 8.--These safety recommendations were provided t o all air
carriers via a telegraphic message on January 28, 1982. A telephone conference between
FAA's Office of Flight Operations personnel and all regional Flight Standards Division
Chiefs on January 29, 1982, tasked the regions t o conduct a review of their operators.
The request was for each principal operations inspector or appropriate aviation safety
inspector to actively review the manuals and guidance on cold weather operations. The
benchmarks for this review were pertinent Federal Aviation Regulations, advisory
circulars, air carrier operation and maintenance bulletins, plus guidance in the January 29,
1982, telephone conference.
            A-82-9.--Reference   t o a time such as 20 minutes since deicing or the last
confirmation that the aircraft surfaces were clear is not considered in the best interest of
flight safety. Under some atmospheric conditions ice may form in a much shorter period
whether ground deicing has been performed or not. Flightcrews must use the "clear
aircraft" concept specified by current rules without regard to specific time intervals.
(The FAA response presented an extensive rationale for its position.)

            As a result of the Air Florida, Flight 90, B-737 accident and the subject
recommendation, the R&D effort has been accelerated. We do not anticipate that
changes will be made t o the existing clean aircraft concept. However, information
resulting from R&D efforts is expected t o emphasize improved procedures t o assure that
hazardous ice formation does not exist prior to takeoff.
            A-82-10.--A copy of NTSB Recommendations A-82-6 through -15 was sent in
its entirety t o all air traffic facilities in GENOT form on January 28, 1982. The
provisions of FAA Facilities Operations and Administration Manual 7210.3F, paragraph
1232, gate-hold procedures, adequately cover the handling of departure procedure delays.
The GENOT of January 28 acts t o remind facilities t o review their application of these
procedures.

            A-82-11 and 12.--A new advisory circular (AC) is being developed which will
include a complete discussion of the hazards of engine inlet icing; pressure probe icing and
blockage, and methods a flightcrew can use t o recognize these conditions and properly use
the engine anti-ice system. In addition, a detailed technical analysis is being undertaken
in order t o include specific engine instrument reading impacts, cross-check procedures,
and performance degradation parameters in this AC. Initial information from this study is
being immediately disseminated to the field in the ACOB described in FAA's response t o
NTSB Safety Recommendation A-82-6. When completed, this AC will be forwarded t o the
Safety Board. Flight Manuals will be revised after the AC is completed, if such changes
are deemed essential for flight safety.
           In addition, the FAA will perform a detailed review of AC 91-13c and AC
91-51 in order t o update them as required in areas other than that covered by the new AC
on engine inlet icing.

            A-82-13.--The   following note was added t o Handbook 7110.65C, paragraph
972b:
                 Aircraft taxiing behind jet aircraft in freezing conditions may
                 experience aggravated engine and airframe icing. For planning
                 purposes, be alert to pilot advisories that increased taxi intervals
                 may be used.
            A-82-14.--In the meteorological portion of Phase I1 in the basic air traffic
training program, indepth training is conducted t o identify the forms of icing and its
effects on aircraft performance.
            Additionally, the FAA will advise the present work force via the Air Traffic
Service Bulletin on the hazard associated with structure and engine icing of aircraft. The
Bulletin will be published in September or October 1982.

            A-82-15.--A telegraphic message was transmitted on January 28 t o all FAA
facilities; U.S. air carriers; U.S. owners, operators, aircraft and engine manufacturers;
foreign authorities of known airplane registration; and other interested groups. This
notice contained the verbatim contents of the Board's safety recommendation letter
issued and transmitted t o the FAA on January 28. The purpose of the transmittal t o all
air carrier operators and manufacturers was t o ensure their awareness of the preliminary
findings and recommendations as requested by the Board.
             A telephone conference (telecon) was conducted on January 29 involving FAA
headquarters and all FAA regional flight standards division personnel. The telecon was
initiated t o advise regional flight standards personnel t o contact all air carriers, with the
emphasis on operators of turbine-powered aircraft, t o review the Board's safety
recommendations and each operators' respective cold weather operational procedures,
training programs, and contents of their operational manuals, as requested by the Board.
             A survey report has been provided by each FAA region. This report indicates
that all air carriers have been contacted and made aware of the safety recommendations
and hazards associated with icing. The results of this survey indicate that there is a
positive attitude on the part of industry concerning these safety recommendations.
            As a part of its investigation, on May 10, 1982, the Safety Board requested the
following information from the FAA:
                  Data pertaining to, contemplated, or actual changes to the Boeing
                  737 (standard or advanced) FAA Approved Flight Manual.

                  Data pertaining t o the issuance or contemplated issuance of any
                  Service Bulletins applicable t o the Boeing 737 (standard or
                  advanced) aircraft.
                  Data pertaining t o the issuance or contemplated issuance of any
                  Operations Manual Bulletins applicable t o the Boeing 737 (standard
                  or advanced) aircraft.
                  Data pertaining t o the issuance or contemplated issuance of any
                  revisions t o the Boeing 737 Operations Manual.
                  Data pertaining t o the issuance or contemplated issuance of any
                  revision t o the Boeing 737 Maintenance or Structural Repair
                  Manuals.
            On July 27, 1982, the FAA replied that its Seattle, Washington, Area Aircraft
Certification Office has requested that Boeing change appropriate Airplane Flight
Manuals t o more adequately cover the questions raised concerning B-737 and B-727
airplane icing of the engine inlet total pressure probe (Pt2) and the use of engine anti-ice
while on the ground. The Seattle Aircraft Certification Office has not as yet received
any operational manual changes or bulletins from Boeing, and Boeing has not yet issued
any B-737 service bulletins related t o adverse weather operations since January 13, but
that Boeing is developing a Service Bulletin which would permit the use of the wing
anti-ice system on the ground.

           Boeing has issued a "Telex" t o all operators of B-737's and 727's on the subject
of engine Pt icing.      Boeing is reviewing both the B-737 Operations Manual and
Maintenance Manual. The review is not complete. Service letters have been sent t o all
B-737 and 727 airline representatives on the Pt2 vent.

           As a result of its analysis of the investigation of this accident, on August 11,
1982, the Safety Board issued the following additional recommendations t o the Federal
Aviation Administration:

                 Issue a Maintenance Alert Bulletin t o require Principal
                 Maintenance Inspectors t o emphasize t o air carrier maintenance
                 departments that proper maintenance of ground support equipment
                 may be critical t o flight operations and the importance of adhering
                 t o maintenance practices recommended by the manufacturers of
                 such equipment. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-79)

                 Issue a Maintenance Alert Bulletin t o require Principal
                 Maintenance Inspectors t o review contract agreements between an
                 air carrier operating into a facility a t which another air carrier or
                 maintenance contractor is providing maintenance services t o
                 assure that the responsibilities of both parties and key personnel
                 are clearly defined and that the contractor providing the
                 maintenance is thoroughly familiar with the maintenance of the
                 type of aircraft involved. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-80)

                 Issue an Operations Alert Bulletin t o require Principal Operations
                 Inspectors t o require that air carrier training programs adequately
                 cover the effects of aircraft leading edge contamination on
                 aerodynamic performance, particularly as i t affects the
                 relationship between airspeed and angle of attack and those
                 functions whose activation is dependent on the angle of attack,
                 such as stall warning systems and autothrottle speed command
                 systems. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-80
                 Require revision of the B-737 Approved Flight Manual t o add
                 "anti-ice" t o the normal taxi and takeoff checklist. Review the
                 checklists for all air carrier aircraft t o ensure that all action items
                 required for a successful takeoff are included on the appropriate
                 checklist. Special consideration should be given t o items whose
                 functions may be affected by environmental conditions subject t o
                 change during ground delay periods. (Class 11, Priority Action)
                 (A-82-82)
Issue an Airworthiness Directive t o implement the necessary
airplane modifications and/or changes in operational procedures for
B-737 aircraft takeoff operations during weather or runway
conditions conducive t o the formation of leading edge frost, snow,
or ice contamination to require either: (1)that the leading edge is
free of frozen contaminant through the pretakeoff use of a ground-
operable wing thermal anti-ice system, or (2) an increased stall
airspeed margin a t liftoff which will provide adequate pitch and
roll control to counter the effects of undetected leading edge
contaminants by modification of takeoff flaps configuration and/or
increased takeoff airspeed schedules. (Class 11, Priority Action)
(A-82-83)

Amend Air Traffic Control coordination procedures and practices
to require that terminal and en route facilities provide the Central
Flow Control Facility (CFCF) with current and accurate
information regarding congestion and that CFCF act on that
information in a positive manner to minimize airport saturation
and extensive traffic delavs. Review imolementation of orescribed
gate-hold procedures and require their use wherever possible.
(Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-84)

Issue a General Notice t o terminal area Air Traffic Control
facilities t o emphasize t o controllers that the separation criteria
set forth in FAA Air Traffic Control Handbook 7110.65C which
require a minimum of 2 miles separation do not permit deviation
based upon the anticipated acceleration differences between
landing and departing traffic. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-85)

Evaluate the criteria and current practices of Air Traffic Control
facilities regarding the declaration and reporting of operational
errors to ensure that all such errors are reported and are
investigated. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-86)

Provide for essential equipment and increased personnel training t o
improve the water rescue capabilities a t the Washington National
Airport in all anticipated weather conditions, and provide
necessary funding for surrounding communities and jurisdictions
which will be called on t o s u p ~ o r tthe airport's rescue response.
(Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-87)

Survey all certificated airports having approach and departure
flightpaths over water and evaluate the adequacy of their water
rescue plans, facilities, and equipment according t o the guidance
contained in Advisory Circular 150/5210-13                 and make
recommendations for improvement as necessary to appropriate
airport authorities. (Class 11, Priority Action) (A-82-88)

Amend 14 CFR 139.55 t o require adequate water rescue
capabilities a t airports having approach and departure flightpaths
over water which are compatible with the range of weather
conditions which can be expected. (Class 11, Priority Action)
(A-82-89)
                               -88-


BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

                                      JIM BURNETT
                                      Chairman

                                      PATRICIA A. GOLDMAN
                                      Vice Chairman

                                      FRANCIS H. McADAMS
                                      Member

                                      G.H. PATRICK BURSLEY
                                      Member

                                      DONALD D. ENGEN
                                      Member

August 10, 1982
                                      APPENDIXES

                                      APPENDIX A

                             INVESTIGATION AND HEARING

Investigation

      The Safety Board was notified of this accident about 1603 on January 13, 1982. An
investigative team was dispatched immediately but full team activity was delayed for
several hours because of severe weather conditions and local transportation emergencies.
Working groups were established for operations, air traffic control, witnesses, aircraft
records, human factors, weather, powerplants, systems, structures, flight data and cockpit
voice recorders, aircraft performance and human performance.

      Participants in the on-scene investigation included Air Florida Inc., Federal
Aviation Administration, Air Florida Pilots Association, Airline Pilots Association, Allied
Pilots Association, the Boeing Company, Pratt & Whitney Division of United Technologies,
and the International Association of Machinists.

Public Hearings

     A public hearing was convened on March 1, 1982, and completed on March 9, 1982.

      Parties to the hearing included the Federal Aviation Administration, Air Florida
Inc., Air Florida Pilots Association, Airline Pilots Association, Allied Pilots Association,
the Boeing Company, and the Pratt & Whitney Division of United Technologies.
                                        APPENDIX B

                              PERSONNEL INFORMATION

Mr. Larry Michael Wheaton - Captain

            Captain Wheaton, age 34, was employed by Air Florida, Inc. in October, 1978.
He qualified as a first officer in the DC-9 in October 1978 and qualified as a first officer
in the B-737 in June of 1979. He was upgraded t o captain in the B-737 on August 27,
1980. Captain Wheaton held airline transport pilot certificate No. 1669130, dated April 2,
1980, for airplane multiengine land with ratings in the DC-3 and B-737 aircraft and
commercial privileges airplane single engine land. His Flight Instruction certificate,
No. 16669130 CFI, dated June 29, 1974, for airplanes single and multiengine- instrument,
had expired.

            His current first class medical certificate, dated October 1 2 , 1981, contained
no limitations.

            Captain Wheaton had approximately 8,300 flight hours, about 2,322 of which
were accumulated with Air Florida, Inc. His commercial jet operating experience, all
with Air Florida, Inc. consisted of the following: (times are approximate) DC-9 first
officer 471, B-737 first officer 752, B-737 captain 1,100.

              In the past 90 days, 30 days, and 24-hours, Captain Wheaton flew about
2 2 1 hours, 64 hours, and 2 hours 14 minutes respectively.

             His duty time (flight and standby) the previous 24-hours was approximately
5 hours and 46 minutes. His rest time during the 24-hours prior was about 18 hours
1.4 minutes.    Total duty time the previous 30, 60, and 90 days was approximately
177 hours, 372 hours and 642 hours respectively.

Mr. Roger Alan Pettit - First Officer

            First Officer Pettit, age 31, was employed by Air Florida, Inc. on October 3,
1980. He became qualified as a first officer in the B-737 on November 23, 1980. First
Officer Pettit held airline transport pilot certificate No. 1795470, dated June 14, 1979,
for airplane multiengine land with a rating in the CE-500 and commerical privileges
airplane single engine land.

           His current first class medical certificate, dated September 15, 1981,
contained no limitations.

            First Officer Pettit had approximately 3,353 flight hours, about 992 of which
were accumulated with Air Florida, Inc. - all in the B-737. Prior t o being hired by Air
Florida, Inc. First Officer Pettit was a fiffhter pilot in the United States Air Force. From
October 1977 t o October 1980 First Officer Pettit accumulated 669 flight hours as a
flight examiner, instructor pilot, and ground instructor in an operational F-15 unit.

            In the past 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours, First Officer Pettit flew about
180 hours, 66 hours, and 2 hours 14 minutes respectively.

           His duty time (flight and standby) the previous 24 hours was approximately 5
hours and 46 minutes. His rest time during the 24 hours prior was about 18 hours 14
minutes. Total duty time the previous 30, 60, and 90 days was approximately 179 hours,
390 hours and 505 hours respectively.
           Cabin Crew

           Ms. Kelly Duncan, a g e 22, had previously flown f o r Air Sunshine, a n airline
acquired by Air Florida. She completed initial training f o r Air Florida on September 15,
1979, and since then had completed recurrent training in February 1980 and in February
1981. Her January 1982 schedule was in B-737's. She had flown 26 hours and 25 minutes
during January 1982.

              Ms. Donna Adams, age 23, completed initial training f o r Air Florida on
J u n e 30, 1978, and had completed recurrent training in October 1978, October 1979,
October 1980, and in October 1981. Her January 1982 schedule was in 3737's. She had
flown 26 hours and 25 minutes during January 1982.

           Ms. Marilyn Nichols, a g e 25, completed initial training f o r Air Florida on
November 16, 1979, and had completed recurrent training in July 1980 and in July 1981.
Her January 1982 schedule was in 5-737's. She had flown 26 hours and 25 minutes during
January 1982.
                                      APPENDIX C

                                AIRCRAFT INFORMATION

            The aircraft was a Boeing 737-222. The aircraft, United States registry
N62AF, serial No. 19556 was obtained by Air Florida from United Airlines on July 28,
1980, and had been operated continuously by Air Florida since that date. The aircraft
total time as of January 1, 1982, was 23,608.44 a t departure from Miami.

           Statistical Data

                                           Aircraft

              Date of Certification               February 25, 1969
              Fuselage Number                     P2600
              Serial Number                       19556
              Registration Number                 N62AF
              Airframe Hours                      23610:40 at departure DCA
              Airframe Cycles                     29549    at departure DCA
           An original standard Airworthiness Certificate, Transport Category was issued
February 20, 1969.

            The aircraft was issued a valid Certificate of Registration dated October 2,
1980, in the name of Weiler, Alan G., Trustee, 1114 Avenue of the Americas, New York
10036.
                                           Engines


         Number 1 Engine                                Number 2 Engine
         Type Pratt & Whitney         JT8D-9A           Type Pratt & Whitney         JT8D-9A
         Date of Manufacture          4-14-68           Date of Manufacturer         7-2-71
         Serial Number                P655929B          Serial Number                P674546B
         Total Time                   20,762:20         Total Time                   17,091.32
         Time Since Overhaul          20,762:20         Time Since Overhaul          9,171:15
         Total Cycles                 26,955            Total Cycles                 16,661
         Date of Installation         7-29-81           Date of Installation         8-5-81

            Under Letter of Agreement with American Airlines, signed by American
Airlines, Inc., Director of Interline Service Agreements and Air Florida, Inc., Senior Vice
President, American Airlines, Inc., provided the following services t o Air Florida, Inc., at
Washington National Airport:

                       Aircraft Loading and Unloading
                       Transportation of Passengers, Baggage, Mail & Cargo
                       Aircraft Cabin Cleaning
                       Weight and Balance Computation
                       Aircraft Marshall and Push Out
                       On Call Minor Emergency Aircraft Maintenance as defined by
                         American Airlines (Air Florida's Technical Representative
                         t o provice guidance and sign aircraft log).
                                           -93-
                                      APPENDIX D




AIRPORT BULLETIN
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
FEDERAL AVIATION
              -  ADMINISTRATION
                 .-    - . ..-..
METROPOLITAN WASHINGTON AIRPORTS                             Date:   October 9, 1981
                                                     Cancellation
                                                            Date: April 1, 1982


suu:               OOMROLOFSNOH,SLOSHMOICEBBtSBCIES

     1. PURPOSE. This Airport B u l l e t i n is issued to assign
    responsibilities and establish procedures to be followea in removing
    and controlling snow, slush, iae, sand or mter at Washington National
    Airport-


              a.    HA Advisory Circular 150/5200.23 dated Novoiter 1, 1976.
              b.    FAA advisory Circular 150/5380-4,   dated SeptBiter 11, 1968.
     3. GEKERAL CONSmBtMTOB. STOW fall or icing conditions of
    sufficient proportions to create hazardous situations on the operating
    surfaces of the airport nay be expected at Washington National Airport
    aeveral W during ea& w i n e seasm and will wire rmuval or
    control measures to be placed in effect. Ihe primary objective is to
    preserve or restore the operational capability of the airport and to
    maintain sidewalks, streets and approach loads in a safe usable
    condition so that essential services will not be inter--.              In
    achieving t h i s cbjective, pxvcdures nust be initiated p r a p t l y md
    conducted in a manner to cause the least interference possible w i t h
    aircraft movements and other vital a c t i v i t i e s of the airport.
     4. RESPONSIBILITIES. Effective and rapid prosecution of the snow
    clearance program will be -Usher3                   only w i t h close and continued
    coordination amrq all a c t i v i t i e s concerned, particularly the
    Cpezations ~ i v i s i i n ,R q i n e e ~ i qand blain&          ~ i v i s h ,airlhe
    oonnittees, and Airport control Tower. Specific responsibilities axe
    assigned & follows:
              a.    the Chief, Operations Division is responsible for:

                 (1) Contacting the Snow R e n w a l Activitlea D i r e c t o r ,
    Engineering and Maintenance Division, when information reveals the
    G s i b i l i G of smm or icing W t i a n s in the M e t r c p l i b n m.
             (2) Deciding uhen mow renewal and ice control operations
    shall begin based on h i s evaluation of the existing conditions, after
    a study of present and forecast weather, and normally after discussion
    with t k Airp* mnqer, chief, Air Traffic ~ ~ L                     l snow
                                                                           a ,
    Activities Director, and the Airline Snow Wnntittee.
Oi*ibution:        CCA-3, All Tenants, Concessionaires          1nit"t.d ~ y : MA-120
                   and Air Carriers
APPENDIX D




      Page 2


                (3) Determining after full evaluation which removal plan
    w i l l be effected (Ref: Par. 6.a.(2)). This decision must be based on
    the character of precipitation, predicted winds, anticipated traffic,
    and an evaluation of the overall situation.
             (4) MaintainingliaisonwiththeAirportManagerandthe
    Chief Air Traffic Controller on anticipated or planned snow clearance operation
    on the aircraft operating areas.
               (5)   rssuing ~DTICE10 AIRMEN to report changing field conditions.
             (6) Determining the condition of runways and taxiways
    whenever there is any question concerning the surfaces. Ihis is
    normally to be done in coordination with, and using designatd
    representatives of the Airlines Snow C d t t e e and the others
    uentioned above, as appropriate.
               (7) Requesting braking action measurement be Bade when
    conditions warrant such action.
          b. Ite Chief, Bagineering and Maintenance Division is
          responsible for:
             (1) Providing and naintaining, in an cperable condition, all
    heavy equipmmt ami related servicing facilities expected to be
    required during the snow removal season.

             (2) Training aid qualifying snow controllers and equiprat
    operators who will be oonpletely familiar with radio control
    prm+ures, the layout of runways ami taxiways, and the location of
    lighting fixtures, and other airport features subject to damage in the
    course of snow removal.
             (3) Establishing procedures for a s s d l i n g crews when
    existing or forecast mnditions indicate a need for snow removal or
    Banding operations outside of regular working hours.
        (4) M i n g action to place sidewalks, streets acA roadways in useable
    dith.

              (5) Measuring the braking action of the runways when
     conditions indicate such measurenenfc is needed.
      5. GENERAL PROCEDURES. Tte following general procedures shall be
     followed unless circumstances clearly j u s t i f y a deviation therefran:
         a. Actual plowing or sweeping shall be started a t the discretion
    of the Chief, Operations Division, or following coordination specified
    la Paragraph 4.


      Par 4
                                                                            APPENDIX D




October 9, 1981                                                    DCA 7/63


     b. Normally, Ruway 18-36 will be cleared f i r s t to put the airport
in the position to accept loner n i n M instrument approaches.
     c. Sanding cwerations shall be conducted on zunways d taxiways   -
at any tiue iciiq -or slippeq d i t i o m mke &Mitiormi t r a c t h i
                                                       -            -
desirable. Sand of needed snecification - as to oracle or tmuerature.
         -
or both w i l l be used.
     d. Runway deicer will be used on the runways Mtenever there is a
d i t h of pa&d snw or ice a t annot be remved nechanically.
The material w i l l be distributed on the runways a miniurn of 150 f e e t
wide and full length if necessary. the use of the runway deicer must
have the prior approval of the Airport Manager.
     e. The use of shotted urea as a melting agent is authorized on
sidewalks, passenger talkways, gate positions* ranps~~P-,
taxiways, runic blocks, and runways.
     f. Picnpt attention will be given to 03rrecting dangerous slush
conditions.

     g. When slippery conditions exist on any a i r c r a f t operating
area, to the extent possible, operational tests shall be used to
measure the degree of braking actions      -
                                          talcing p i l o t reports into
primary account a t a l l tines. The results will be translated into
appropriate terminology f o r use in the issuance of NOTAtB.
          h. Control over a l l -/sand     equipment while it is on the
a i r f i e l d zests with the Snow Renoval Activities D i r e c t o r in
coordination with the "tower by means of a radio-eguipped vehicle.
     1. (ten a prolonged &lay is encountered in crossing an active
intersection, the Operations Officer will be notified of the
condition. H e w i l l then request the Control 'tower to suspend
operations u n t i l equipment can cross.

     j. The operators of snow equipment naneuvering on the a i r f i e l d -
shall exercise extra-re caution to avoid conflict with ground t r a f f i c
or to otherwise create a hazard.
 6. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES. The following procedures for enow removal
operations a t Washington National Airport w i l l be s t r i c t l y adhered
to:
     a. Pre-snav rewval &cisions w i l l be l i m i t e d to:




    Par 5
APPENDIX D




       Page 4                                                          DCA 714.7


                    (1) Tine airport dll be closed.

                     (2) Effect either Plan A, B, C, or alternate Plan A, (with
       e r o p r i a t e attmdant procdures q e e i f i e d mder Parqraph 7. and
       8.), in its entirety without deviation. Alternate Plan A w i l l be
       effected only under an extremely heavy a m l a t i o n or continuing
       precipitation.
               b. the announced tine of airport closing w i l l be firm and
       unchangeable, weather conditions permitting. All a i r c r a f t novenents
       on the airport w i l l cease a t t h a t tune, and no takeoffs or landings
       w i l l be permitted u n t i l the removal plan in effect is ccrpleted.
            c. A MOTAM w i l l be issued tÃˆ (2) tours in advance of closing,
       when possible.

            d. When the f i r s t designated removal operations Plan (A, B, or
       C) is conpleted, the airport will be opened thereby cancelling the
       NOTAM.  The next designated removal plan will then be executed i f the
       Snow Removal Activities Director in charge determines it feasible,
       depending on the wnditions of equiptent and employees.


               a. Plan A (Runway 18-36).
                 (1) All a i r f i e l d snow removal equipment w i l l be ready a t the
       west end of Taxiway Alpha, north side of the A i r Cargo Building, a t
       the designated closing tine of the a i r f i e l d (Acplicable to Plans A, B,
       aid C ) .
                (2) the equipment w i l l proceed up vehicle t r a f f i c lane to
       Taxiway Bravo, plow*   as they go. A t this point, some equipnent w i l l
       continue cleaning vehicular lane, ramp (east of vehicular lane), and
       laxiway Linn to Hangar 12 (Applicable to Plan A, B, and C ) .

                (3) All other equipment w i l l clean Taxiway Bravo to Taxiway
       Alpha, Taxiway Alpha east to Taxiway Charlie, and Taxiway Charlie Â£ru
       Runway 3/21 to Runway 18/36, Runway 18/36 to Taxiways Echo, Foxtrot,
       Hotel west 18/36, India between Runway 18/36 aid K i l o , J u l i e t between
       Runway 15/33 and Runway 18/36; and 100 f e e t of Taxiways Hotel and Mike
       east of 18/36, then Runway 15/33 fron 40 f e e t fron intersection of
       18/36 to 100 f e e t northwest of Taxiway J u l i e t , Taxiways J u l i e t from
       Runway 15/33 to ranp.
               b.   Alternate Plan A   - Runway 18/36.
                    (1) See Paragraph (1)aid (2) of Plan A.



       Par 6
                                                                             APPENDIX D




October 9, 1981                                             DCA 7 / b J


                (2) All other equipment w i l l clean Taxiway Bravo to Taxluay
 Alplm, Taxiway Alpha east to Taxi-         Charlie, and Taxiway Charlie from
 Runway 3/21 to Runway 18/36. Runway 18/36 (150 f e e t wide only),
 Runway 3/21 between Taxiway Delta and Runway 18/36, Taxiway Delta,
 Rinway 15/33 between Runway 18/36-and Taxiway Juliet, and Taxiway
 J u l i e t from Runway 18/36 to ranp.
       c. Plan B (Runway 15/33).
            (1) See Paragraph (1)of Plan A.
           (2) the equipment w i l l proceed ID vehicular t r a f f i c lane
  from Hangar 7 to the run* block of 15/33 plowing as they 9. Ranp
  snow zenoval d e t a i l w i l l continue cleaning Taxiway Lima and ranp from
  runw blodc c& 15 to H a n g a r 7. A l l otkm w i p r e n t w i l l clean Rummy
  15/33, Taxiway Kiln, Hotel and Poxtrot.
       d.   Plan C (Runway 3/21).
            (1)    See Paragraphs (1)and (2) of Plan A.
          (21 Clean Taxiway Bravo, Runway 3/21, Taxiways Hotel, west
 of 3/21, Mike and Foxtrot, west of 18/36.


              (1) Snow franHangar 6 R q . Hie Hangar 6 tenant is
 w i b l e for clearing mow Â£ra h i s rap. S m shall be p i l e 3 on
 each side of the rant) adiaoent to the ranos of Hanaars 5 and 7. Snow
 w i l l be removed f r G the& areas by the   iZngin&ring and
 Maintenance Division as soon as practical.
          (2) Snow from Gate Position. Onoe the plows- have started
 pIoxing the vehicular lane and ramp, snow s h a l l not be pushed from
 gate positions or from in front of Hangars on or across the vehicular
 lane. Any snow, west of the vehicular lane, s h a l l be piled in
 designated areas by the tenants.

           (3) Aircraft Parking on South Hangar Line, Southeast of
 Vehicular Lam. AircraÂ£ s h a l l ke mve3 prior to the tine aiqmrt is
 closed. This most be s t r i c t l y adhered to because the plows and -
 blowers w i l l start at Hangar 7 in the vehicular lane and plow north.
 S n m from the blowers could cause heavy damage to any a i r c r a f t parked
 in this area.
            ( 4)   Cargo Building.




  Par 7                                                                   Page 5
APPENDIX D




        page 6                                                   DCA 7/4J



                    (a) A h p r t p ~ w i l l c l m n t h e ~ m ~ l a r ~ t n t h e
      Post Office on the field side, and remove snow within 20 feet of the
      loading dock en the south side of the Cargo Building if area is dear
      of tenant equiptent.
                    (b) All vehicles and cargo equirnent under the
      jurisdiction of the tenant group, and a l l delivery vehicles shall be
      kept clear of these areas m that the plows can operate efficiently.
      The tenants shall be responsible for cleaning a l l other areas.

                    (c) Snow shall not be pushed from ramp side into
      vehicular traffic lane once the pious have started plowing vehicular
      lane.




      conjunction with runway cleaning. However, the runway cleaning w i l l
      have priority over a l l other operations.

                (6) Closed Areas. A l l taxiways not mentioned in Plans A, B,
      o r C shall be closed until the equipment is checked and repaired.
                  ( 7 ) Snow Duming Areas. All tenants shall use designated
      snow dunping area a t the north end of the field. the use of the north
      end w i l l be restricted as follows: N o m r e than two vehicles will be
      allowed i n the area a t any cne tine and no snow pile will exceed five
      ( 5 ) feet in height fron the ground surface.

               ( 8 ) Small Plane Parking (Taxiway Lima).     Snow removal
      operations en                                         a w i d r o w bebeen
      Taxiway Lima and the snail aircraft parking area. This -1 be
      reamed when the required runway plan(s) are completed, except for
      entrance e x i t a t north and south end, which will be cleaned in
      connection with Taxiway Line.

     -NOTE: Past experience has Indicated that the Dost effective, economical and
     overall tine saving procedure in renoving snow and providing maxiirum aircraft
      operational capability is to execute Plan A, B, and C in that Older when
      permissible. However, Plan C will not be initiated without the express
      permission of the A i r p o r t Manager.



     ~ i r p o r tManager, &     .
        ELAPSEDTIME MINUTES



Flight D a t a Recorder Graph
                                      -100-

                                  APPENDIX F


      TRANSCRIPT OF A SUNDSTRAND V-577 COCKPIT VOICE RECORDER S/N 2282
     REMOVED FROM AN A I R FLORIDA B737 WHICH WAS INVOLVED I N AN ACCIDENT
                  AT WASHINGTON, D. C., ON JANUARY 13, 1982


                                      LEGEND


CAM          Cockpit area microphone voice o r sound source
RDO          Radio transmission from accident a i r c r a f t
-1           Voice i d e n t i f i e d as Captain
--2
  3
             Voice i d e n t i f i e d as F i r s t O f f i c e r
             Voice i d e n t i f i e d as Head Stewardess
-4           Voice i d e n t i f i e d as Stewardess
-7           Voice u n i d e n t i f i e d
TUG          Tractor
INC          Intercom
AOPS         American Operations
LC           Tower (Local Control )
PA           Pub1i c address System
GND          Ground Control
E l 33       Eastern one three three
625          One s i x two f i v e
NYA 58       New York A i r f i f t y - e i g h t
 556         TWA f i v e f i f t y - s i x
OOJ          E i g h t thousand j u l i e t
451          Eastern fourteen f i f t y - o n e
 41M         Four one mike
68G          Six eight gulf
*            U n i n t e l l i g i b l e word
#            Nonperti nent word
%            Break i n c o n t i n u i t y
 ( 1         Questionable t e x t
( ( 1)        Editorial insertion
---           Pause

-
Note:         A l l times are expressed i n l o c a l time based on the 24-hour
              clock.
           1m-COCKPIT                                                  AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TIME 6                                                               TIME 6
  SOURCE                   CONTENT                                     SOURCE              CONTENT
                                                                1530:48
CW-2         figure i t out                                     TUG         You have your brakes on r i g h t ?
CAM-2      We're t o o heavy f o r the I c e                    INC-1       Yeah, brakes are on
CAM-2      They g e t a t r a c t o r w i t h chains on i t ?
           They g o t one r i g h t over here
           ((PA announcement r e l a t i v e t o pushback))
                                                                1531:33
                                                                AOPS        Palm n i n e t y from American Operations
                                                                1531:36
                                                                RDO-2       Palm ninety, go ahead
                                                                1531:38
                                                                AOPS        Okay, your agent Just c a l l e d t o t e l l
                                                                            me t o t e l l you t o amend your release
                                                                            showing nineteen twenty-five z u l u
                                                                            per i n i t i a l RH
                                                                1531:51,
                                                                RDO-2       Okay, nineteen twenty-five romeo
                                                                            hotel, thanks
CAM-1      That's n o t so f great                              AOPS        Roger, how's i t look f o r you, you gonna
                                                                            be departing soon, I hope
                                                                1532:03
                                                                RDO-2       Well, we're working on It, what time
                                                                            does he say t o do it, I t ' s twenty
                                                                            t h i r t y - f i v e r i g h t now
                                                         AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                  TIME 6
  SOURCE                 CONTENT                         SOURCE                CONTENT

                                                      1532:07
                                                      AOPS         That's the interesting thing, he said
                                                                   nineteen twenty-five, l e t me give him
                                                                   a buzz back cause we think that maybe
                                                                   he meant twenty twenty-five, hang on
CAM-1      Ah w e ' l l take that
                                                      1532:18
                                                      RDO-2        Okay
1532: 22
CAM-2      I hadn't called ground to t e l l 'em we
           d i d n ' t make it. do you want me t o

CAM-?          c a l l 'em and t e l l 'em
CAM-2      I'm surprised we couldn't power
           i t out o f here
CAM- 1     Well we could o f i f he wanted me t o
           p u l l some reverse
CAM-?
1532: 59
CAM- 1     I ' v e done i t i n Minneapoli's and I
           had t o come up to one point four,
           one point f i v e
1533:05
CAM- 1     I t had chains on i t

           ((Chuckle)) d i d you hear that guy,
           think h e ' l l get a gate i n a second,
           1 don't see anybody pushing
            IHTRA-COCKPIT                              AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
   TIME t                                              TIME 6
   SOURCE                   CONTENT                    SOURCE           CONTENT
CAH-2       Want me t o t e l l Ground t h a t we're
            temporarily indisposed?
1533: 25
CAM-2       H e ' l l c a l l us surely
CAM-2       Where are you guys?
CAM-?       4 4


CAM-2       Huh
CAM-?       4 4


1533: 40
CAM-2       I t ' s twenty-five.    i t ' s not too
            cold r e a l l y

CAM- 1      I t ' s not r e a l l y that cold
CAM- 2      I t ' s not that cold, cold, l i k e ten
            with the wind blowing, you know
1534:09
cw-2        People's going t o deplane i n the snow
            here
CAM- 2      Piedmont's going t o park I t on the
            ramp
1534: 24
CAM-1       Here comes the chain t r a c t o r
           INDIA-COCKPIT                                           AIR-GROUND CONUHICATIONS

  TIME 1                                                           TIME 1
                         CONTENT                                   SOURCE                  CONTENT

                                                             1535:06
                                                             TUG            Ready to r o l l
                                                             INC-1          Ready t o r o l l
                                                             TUG            Brakes o f f
                                                             1NC-1          Brakes are o f f , "A" pumps are off,
                                                                            interconnects closed
1535:14
CM-2       Me11 that's a difference, do ou
           want twenty-five (or s t a r t up f               TUG            Bet those vacuum cleaners would do
                                                                            wonders as a snow me1t e r
CAM-2      Yeah
                                                             INC-1          Sure do
1535: 40
W-2        I guess (1) never even thought about I t
           being a l i t t l e plane l i k e this, figured
           they'ed push I t out o f there, you know
           but we're p r e t t y heavy, we're a hundred
           and two thousand s i t t i n ' there
1536: 13
CAM-2      Maybe we can t a x i up side'a some seven
           two s i t t i n ' there runnin', blow o f f
           whatever (accumulated on the wings)
                                                             1536: 19
                                                             TUG            You can s t a r t engines I f you want, I
                                                                            don't know whether you got 'en running
                                                                            or not
           m-COCKPIT                                      AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TIME 6                                                  TIME 1
                             CONTENT                      SOURCE               CONTENT

                                                    1536:23
                                                    INC-1       I'll t e l l you what. I ' m gonna w a i t
                                                                t i l l you disconnect before I s t a r t
                                                                them up so 1 can g e t the buckets closed
                                                    1536:31
                                                    GNO         Okay, parking brakes

                                                    1536: 34
                                                    INC-1       Okay, brakes a r e s e t

                                                    TUG         Stand by f o r s a l u t e and w e ' l l see ya
                                                                later
                                                    1536:43
                                                    INC-1       Right'o,   thanks a l o t
           C h e c k l i s t again, r i g h t
           Me d i d I t and we're down t o before
           start, that's a l l
CAM-2      Shoulder harness
cm-1
CAH-2      A i r conditioning pack
CAM- 1     Off
CAM-2      S t a r t pressure
CAM- 1
           Irn-COCKPIT                                        AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                      TIME 6
  SOURCE                   CONTENT                            SOURCE           CONTENT




CAM-2      S t a r t s complete
                                                        GND            I
1537: 01
CAM-2      LaGuardia's n o t accepting anybody
           r i g h t now
CAM-3/4    I s i t r a i n i n g i n Tampa?
                                                                                          I-'
CAM-2      Rainy and foggy                                                                0
                                                                                          01
                                                                                          I
CAM-3/4    How I s the temperature?
CAM-?      Fifty
CAM-2      Sixty
CAM-1      ((Sound o f laughter)) can they land here?

1537:31
CAM-2      Drop

CAM-2      O i l pressure
1537:41
CAM        ((Strange sound apparently associated
           w i t h engine s t a r t ) )
1537:46
CAM-2      (Eighty-seven) (bet I t f e e l s l i k e
           a gas stove)

CAM-1      Temperature
           Irn-COCKPIT                               AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TIME 6                                             TIME 6
  SOURCE                    CONTENT                  SOURCE           CONTENT

1537: 49
CAM-2      ( I s n ' t that an a r t i s t though)
CAM-1      Huh   - o i l pressure
1538:M
CAM        ((Second strange sound apparently
           associated w i t h engine s t a r t )
CM         ((Sound o f i g n i t e r s ) )
CAM-1      Stowed
CAM-2      Cut out
1538:16
CAH-1      Afterstart
CAM-2      Electrical
CAM- 1     Generators
CAM-2      P i t o t heat




CAM-1      (Off)
CAM-2      A i r conditioning pressurization
                                                         AIR-GROUND COWUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                 TIME 6
  -
  SOURCE                  CONTENT                       SOURCE                     CONTENT

CW-1       Packs on f l i g h t
CAM-2      APU
CAM-1      Running

CAM-2      S t a r t levers
CAM- 1     Idle
CAM-?      Door warning l i g h t s
CAM- 1     Out
CAM-2      You want roe t o hold the flaps t i l l
           we get up closer?
                                                     1538:22
                                                     GHD          Can vou act around that Palm on the
CAM- 1     He said something about Palm
CAH- 2     Yeah
CAM-2      ((Chuckle))
                                                     1538:34
                                                     RDO-2        Ground Palm ninety, we're ready to
                                                                  taxi out o f h i s way
                                                     1538: 38
                                                     GND          Okay Palm ninety, roger. j u s t p u l l up
                                                                  over, behind that, ah, THA and hold
                                                                  r i g h t there, y o u ' l l be f a l l i n g i n l i n e
                                                                  behind a, oh, Apple DC nine
                                                                     AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                             TIME &
  -
  SOURCE                   CONTENT                                   SOURCE            CONTENT

                                                                 1538:47
                                                                 RDO-2     Palm one ninety
CAM        ((Sound o f takeoff warning))
1538: 58
CAM-2      Behind that Apple, I guess
CAM-1      Behind what TMA?
1539: 04
CAM-2      Over by the TWft t o follow that Apple,
           apparently
CAM-2      ((Whistling))
1539: 29
CAM-2      Boy, t h i s i s s h i t t y . i t ' s probably the
           s h i f t i e s t snow I ' v e seen

CAM        ((Sound o f takeoff warning horn))
CAM        ((Be inning o f f l i g h t attendant
           PIN?
1540: 15
CAM-1          go over t o the hangar and get
           deiced
CAM-2      Yeah
CAM-2      Definitely
                                                            - 10 -
                                                                     AIR-GROUND COWUNICATIOHS

  TIME 6
 SOURCE                   CONTENT                                                     CONTENT

CAM-1            deiced       ((laughter))
CAM-2      Yeah. that's about I t
1540: 42
CAM-2      I t ' s been a while since we've
           been deiced
CAM-1      Thank I'llgo home and (play) * *

1541:24
CAM-2      That C l t a t l o n over there, t h a t guy's
           about ankle deep i n I t
CAM        ((Sound o f laughter))
1541:47
CAM-2      He1l o Donna
CAM-3      I love i t out here

CAM-2      I t fun
CAM-3      I love i t

CAM-3      The neat way the t l r e tracks

1541:52
CAM-2      See that C i t a t i o n over there.
           looks l i k e he's up t o h i s knees
CAM-4      Look a t a11 the t l r e tracks i n the
           snow
CAM-3      Huh
           INTRA-COCKPIT                                 AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                 TIME 6
                         CONTENT                         SOURCE           CONTENT

CAM-4      The t i r e tracks i n the snow


1542:13
CAM-2      No that's a DC nine Apple New York
           At r
CAM-4      I s that the way ours are, t h a t low
           t o the ground, too
1542: 21
CAM-2      I don't know, those are dash tens there,
           aren't thev. DC nine dash tens. don't
           know what we had, t h i r t i e s ? 1s that
           a thirty?


1542:29
CAM-1      Doesn't look l i k e it. I can't see, I
           can't t e l l
CAM-1      I need to see something other than what
           we're looking a t
1542: 59
CAM-2      ((Sound o f whistling))
CAM-1        * snow        snow
1543: 22
CAM-2      Pretty poky
CAM-4      What does the "N" stand f o r on a11
           the a i r c r a f t , before the number?
                                                                   AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

    TIME &                                                         TIME &
    -
    SOURCE                CONTENT                                  SOURCE                CONTENT

w    2       U.S. United States see everyone o f
             o f than have an "N" on i t see, then
             you see somebody else l i k e . ah
CAM-4        (Like Bahamas)
1543: 37
CAM- 1       C " i s Canada, yeah I think, o r i s
             i t "Y"?

CAM-2        1 think, I think i t I s "C"
CAM-2        There's, ah, you know, Venezuela
CAM-2        Next t i n e you have a weird one, you
             can look up
                                                             RDO            ((Radio c a l l pertaining t o Palm))
CAM-3/4
CAM-2        Stand by a second
1544: 59
CAM-2        I never got back t o Operations on the
             twenty twenty-five, we cap put twenty-
             five, romeo hotel, just, j u s t go f o r i t
CAM- 2       That's what time i t is, awhile ago
             instead o f nineteen twenty-five, I
             think the guy j u s t * he added four
             instead o f f i v e
CW- 1        That's why I said, that's why I gave
             the agent twenty-five so I wouldn't
             have t o be concerned with that I
                                                                   AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                           TIME 6
  -
  SOURCE                  CONTENT                                  SOURCE           CONTENT

CAN-2      What's our release good for, one
           hour? one hour release
CAM-2      Ha. ha, god he s a i d LaGuardia I s not
           t a k i n g anybody, f i t ' s e a r l y y e t
           ((sound o f laughter)) we may end up
           i n Kennedy o r somewhere, ou never
           know ((sound o f laughter))
1545: 43
CAM-1      Bradley, A1bany
CAN-2      Yeah
1545:51
CAM-2      There's PSA's Eastern j e t coming i n
           ((sound o f laughter))
CAM-2      Andtheyusedtolaughatusforflying
           those green t a i l s , you know
CAM-2      Whatever I t was
1546: 21
CAM-1      T e l l you what, my windshield w i l l be
           deiced, don't know about my wing
1546: 27
CAM-2      Well a l l we r e a l l y need i s the i n s i d e
           o f the wings anyway, the wing t i p s are
           gonna speed up by e i g h t y anyway, t h e y ' l l ,
           t h e y ' l l shuck a l l t h a t other s t u f f
           ((sound o f l a u g h t e r ) )
                                                          AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                  TIME 6
                                                          SOURCE

1546: 51
CM         ((Sound o f takeoff warning))
1547:Ol
CAM-2      Yeah, Palm t h i r t y - f i v e ' s i n the
           holding pattern r i g h t now
1547: 32
CAM- 1     (Gonna) get your wing now
1547: 37
CAM-2      D'they get yours? can you see your
           wing t i p over 'er?
CAM-1      1 got a l i t t l e on mine
CAM-2      A little
1547:46
CAM-2      This one's got about a quarter t o
           h a l f an Inch on i t a l l the way

1547: 53
CAM-2      Look how the i c e i s Just hanging on
           his, ah, back, back there, see that?
CAM-2      Side there
1548: 06
CAM- 2     W i t s impressive that these b i g o l d
           planes get I n here with the weather
           t h i s bad you know, i t ' s impressive
                                                                       AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                               TIME 6
  SOURCE                  CONTENT                                      SOURCE                CONTENT
1548:13
CAM- 2     I t never ceases t o amaze me when we
           break out o f the clouds, there's the
           runway anyway, d'care how many times
           we do It. God, we d i d good! ((sound
           o f laughter))
1548: 24
CAM-2      See a l l those i c i c l e s on the back
           there and everything
CAM- 1     Yeah
1548: 31
CAM-2      He's getting excited there, he got h i s
           flaps down, he thinks he's getting close
           ( (sound o f laughter))
1548: 59
CAM-2      See t h i s difference i n that l e f t engine
           and r i g h t one
CAM- 1     Yeah
CAM-2      Don't know why that's d i f f e r e n t
1549: 05
CAM- 2     Less i t ' s h i s hot a i r going i n t o that
           r i g h t one. that must be i t
CAM-2      From h i s exhaust
CAM-2      I t was doing that i n the chocks
           awhile ago but, ah
                                                             1549:42
                                                             GND        Okay, Palm ninety, cross runway three and
                                                                        i f there's space and then monitor the tower
                                                                        on nineteen one. don't c a l l him, h e ' l l c a l l
                                                                       YOU
                                                                       AIR-GROUND COMWHICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                               TIME 6
  SOURCE                 CONTENT                                       SOURCE           CONTENT

                                                             1549:49
                                                             RDO-2      Palm ninety

CAM-?      ((Sound o f whistling))

1550:08
CAM-2      I'm c e r t a i n l y glad there's people
           taxiing on the same place 1 want
           t o go cause I can't see the runway.
           taxiway without these flags ((sound
           o f takeoff warning))

1550: 29
CAM-?      ((Sound o f whistling))
1550: 38
CAM- 1     Where would 1 be I f I were a holding
           1 ine?

CAM- 2     I would think that would be about r i g h t
           here, agreed?
1550:45
CAM-2      May be a l i t t l e further u p there, I
           don' t know

CAM-1      Ah,   + he's barely o f f o f I t
CAM-2      I know i t
1551:05
CAM-2      This thing's settled down a l i t t l e b i t ,
           might'a been h i s hot a i r going over i t
1551:13
CAM        ((Sound o f takeoff warning))
           IHTIIA-COCKPIT

  TIME 1                                                        TIME &
                            CONTENT                             SOURCE

1551:23
CAM-4      We s t i l l fourth
CAM-2      Yeah
CAM-4      Fourth now
1551:38
CAM-2      We're getting there, we used to be
           seventh
1551:49
CAM-?      ((Sound o f whf s t l f ng))

1551:54
CAM-1      Don't do that Apple. I need t o get the
           other wing done ((sound o f laughter))
                                                     1552:04
                                                     LC          How f o r Palm ninety, f f you're with me
                                                                 y o u ' l l be gof ng out after, ah, the red
                                                                 DC nine Apple type

                                                     1552:09
                                                     RDO-2       Palm ninety
CAM        ((Sound o f laughter))
                                                     1552: 30
CAH-2      That guy shooting CAT two ILS's           ROO         ((Tower gives direction to Eastern con-
           there says how come there was a                       cernfng CAT faro l i n e ) )
           snail Lear on the runway when we
           ((sound o f laughter))
CAM-1      When we landed on the taxiway
            INTRA-COCKPIT                                          AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
   TIME 6                                                          TINE 6
   SOURCE                   COWTEHT                                SOURCE
1552:42
CAM- 1      You ought t o t a l k t o Rich Lussow,
            he landed on a      --- landed on a
            closed runway in, ah, Chicago
1552:49
CAM-2       Accidently
155253
CM-1        I n about sixteen inches, a seven two
            seven, that I stopped j u s t l i k e that
CAH-2       ' 1 1 bet i t d i d smooth deceleration, eh,
            ((sound o f laughter)) maugh                                                        I
                                                                                               I-'
1553:21                                                                                        I-'
CAM- 2      Boy, t h i s I s a, t h i s i s a losing b a t t l e                               00
                                                                                                I
            here on trying t o deice those things,
            i t (gives) you a f a l s e feeling o f
            security that's a11 that does
CAM-1       That. ah. s a t i s f i e s the Feds
CAM-2       Yeah
CAM-2       As good and c r i s p as the a i r i s and
            no heavier than we are I ' d

CAM- 1      Right there i s where the i c i n g truck,
            they oughta have two of them, you p u l l
            right
CAM-2       Right out
1553: 42
CAM- 1      Like cattle, l i k e cows r i g h t
CAM- 1      Right i n between these things and then
            INTRA-COCKPIT                                    AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME fr                                                    TIME 6
  -
  SOURCE                  CONTENT                            SOURCE           CONTENT

CAM-2       Get your position back
CAM-1       (ton you're   cleared f o r takeoff
CAM-2       Yeah and you t a x i through kin& l i k e
            a car wash o r something
CAM- 1      Yeah
1553: 51
CAM-1       H i t that thing with about eight
            b i l l i o n gallons o f glycol
1554: 04
CAM-1       I n Minneapolis, the truck they were
            deicing us with the heater d i d n ' t
            work on it, the Iglycol was freezing
            the moment i t h i t
CAM-2       Especially that cold metal l i k e that
CAM-1       Yeah
CAM- 2      Well I haven't seen anybody go around
            yet, they' r e doing good
CAM-2       Boy I'llbet a l l the school kids are
            j u s t Ii n t h e i r pants here. I t ' s fun
            f o r them, no school tomorrow, ya h w
            ((sound o f laughter))
1555:W
CAM-1       What do think we should use f o r a
            takeoff a1ternate
           INTRA-COCKPIT                                    AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                    TIME 6
  -
  SOURCE                    CONTENT                         SOURCE           CONTENT

CAM-2       Well. i t must be w i t h i n an hour. I s
            t h a t Stewart UP there w i t h i n an hour?
1555: 09
CAM- 2      About t h i r t y - f i v e minutes up there
            I s n ' t it, on one
CAM- 2      Dullas g o t a b i g o l d runway over there,
            probably about the same, probably about
            the same s t u f f as here, you know
1555: 36
CAM- 1      Been i n t o Stewart?
CAM-2      No, I ' v e overflown i t several times,
           over by the water over there, ktnda
           long, i t looks l i k e an A i r Force base,
           use'ta be something
CAM- 1     Yeah
CAM-2      Looks p r e t t y good
1555: 44
CAM- 1     Yeah, i t ' s a n i c e a i r p o r t
CAM-2       Is I t ?
CAM- 2     You been there, haven't you
CAM-2      D i d you have t o from Uhi t e Plains
1555:49
CAM-2      Yeah
CAM-2       I heard, ah
           IMTRA-COCKPIT                                                    AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                                                    TIME 6
  SOURCE                     CONTENT                                        SOURCE                   CONTENT

CAM-1      I n the service too
CAM-2      Yeah. we were in. we were I n t o White
           Plains one time, we were i n e a r l i e r i n
           t h e day and then saw some guys a t the
           bar l a t e t h a t n i g h t come s t r a g g l i n g i n
           there r e a l l y b i t c h i n g , where i n the I
           you a11 been, we been t o Stewart man,
           we drove a van over here

CAM-2      Nice touchdown
                                                                        1556:ll
CAM-1      Right on I t                                                 LC           Eastern one three three t a x i i n t o
                                                                                     p o s i t i o n and h o l d
CAM-2      Uhuh
                                                                        1556:15
                                                                        El33         Eastern's one three three, p o s i t i o n
                                                                                     and hold
1556:19
CAM        ((Sound o f l a u g h t e r ) )
1556: 20
CAM-2      Got h i s wing t i p
                                                                        1556: 24
                                                                        LC           G r u m n one s i x two f i v e , t u r n l e f t
                                                                                     t a x i c l e a r and hold. ground
                                                                                                                 -         point
                                                                                     seven as you c l e a r

                                                                        1556:28
                                                                        625          One s i x two f i v e
  TIME
  SOURCE
           *                 CONTENT
                                                                     TIME 6
                                                                     SOURCE                 CONTENT

1556: 39                                                         1556:39
CAM-1          Sure glad I ' m not taking o f f i n              LC           Eastern one t h i r t y three cleared f o r
               that piece o f I                                               takeoff
                                                                 1556:42
                                                                 1133         Cleared t o go. Eastern's one t h l r t y -
1556:43                                                                       three on the r o l l
CAM-2          Yeah that thing r i g h t there, that
               gets your attention


1556: 47                                                         1556:47
CAM-2          Hopefully, thats. ah. i s that turbo              LC           Apple f i f t y - e i g h t taxi i n t o position
               charged o r fuel injected?                                          and hold, be ready f o r an i d l a t e
                                                                 1556:50
                                                                 NYA 58    Position and hold, Apple f i f t y eight
1556: 51
CAM-2          Hate to b l a s t outta here w i t h carburetor
               i c e a11 over me
                                                                 1556:53
                                                                 556       THA f i v e f i f t y - s i x i s inside Oxonn
1556: 54
CAM-2          Specially w i t h the monument staring
               you i n the face
1556:56                                                          1556:56
CAM-1          They c a l l I t the, ah, four twenty-            LC        Trans World f i v e f i f t y - s i x roger,
               one. Golden Eagle                                           runway three s i x
1556: 59
CAM-2          Yeah
1557:02
CAM-1          I t ' s , ah, pretty fancy
                                                        AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
   TIME 6                                               TIME 6
  SOURCE                    CONTENT                     SOURCE                  CONTENT

1557:05
CAM         ((Sound similar t o parking brake
            release))
CAM         ((Sound o f takeoff warning horn
            simultaneous w i t h above))
                                                    1557:06
                                                    LC        Trans World f i v e f i f t y - s i x , the wind
                                                              i s zero one zero a t one zero, you're
                                                              cleared t o land runway three s i x
                                                              visual range i s t h r e e thousand touch-
                                                              down i s at, ah, r o l l o u t i s one thousand
                                                              eight hundred
1557: 30
CAM-2       Where do you want t o go?
                                                    1557:31
                                                    LC        Apple f i f t y - e i g h t cleared f o r takeoff
                                                              t r a f f i c ' s three south f o r the runway
1557:32
CAM-1       Ij u s t don't want t o b l a s t him
1557: 34                                            1557:34
CAM-1       CAT two l i n e ' s r i g h t here      NVA 58    Apple f i f t y - e i g h t take o f f



1557: 38
CAM-2       Yeah
1557: 42
CAM-2       Do you want t o run everything but
            the flaps?

                                                                                                                  'If
            lrn-COCKPIT                                          AIR-GROUND COHMUHICATIONS
   TIME 1                                                        TIME 1
  SOURCE                    CONTENT                              SOURCE                CONTENT

1557: 44                                                    1557:44
CAM-1       Yeah                                            LC         Eastern one t h i r t y - t h r e e contact
                                                                       departure c o n t r o l
1557:45
CAM-2       S t a r t switches
1557:46
CW-1        They ' r e on
1557: 46
CAM-1       Recall
1557: 47                                                    1557:47
CAM-1       Checked                                         El33      Okay s i r , good day
1557:47
CAM-1       Checked
1557: 48                                                    1557:48
CAM-2       F l i g h t controls                            LC        Good day
CAM-1       Bottoms
1557:49
CAM-2       TOPS good
1557:50
CAM-2       Let's check these tops again
            since we been s e t t i n g here awhile
1557: 55
CAM-2       1 t h i n k we g e t t o go here i n a minute

                                                            1557:56
                                                            WJ        National tower e i g h t thousand J u l i e t
                                                                      approaching pisca
            INTRA-COCKPIT                                    AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

   TIME 6                                                    TIME 6
   SOURCE                 CONTENT                            SOURCE              CONTENT

1557: 58
CAM-2       Ought t o work
1558:OO
CAM-2       Flaps we don't have y e t
1558:Ol
CAM-2       Stab t r i m set a t f i v e point three
1558:02
CAM-1       Set
1558: 03
CAM-2       Zero fuel weight, we corrected that
            UP

                                                       1558:04
                                                       LC         Eight thousand J u l i e t Washington tower
                                                                  report Oxonn
1558: 05
CAM-2       Ought t o be, ah, seventy-nine one now
                                                       1558:07
                                                       OOJ        Eight thousand J u l i e t
1558:08
CAM-2       Seventy-seven one
1558: 09
CAM- 1      Set
CAM-2       Okay
1558: 10
CAM-2       EPR a l l the way two oh four
           Irn-COCKPIT                                       AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TIME &                                                     TIME 6
                            CONTENT                          SOURCE                 CONTENT

1558: 12
CAM-2      Indicated airspeed bugs are a t h i r t y -
           eight, forty, f o r t y four
                                                         1558:16
                                                         556        TNA f i v e f i f t y - s i x cleared to land?


                                                         1558:18
                                                         LC           Five f i f t y - s i x 1s cleared to land
                                                                      the wind i s zero one zero a t one zero
1558: 20
CAM-1      Set                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                     I-'
                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                                     01
1558:21                                                                                                              I
CAM-2      Cockpit door
1558:22                                                  1558: 22
CAM-1      Locked                                        556        Cleared t o land TWA f i v e f i f t y - s i x

1558:23
CAM-2      Takeoff b r i e f i n g
                                                         1558: 24
                                                         451        Eastern fourteen fifty-one by the
                                                                    marker
1558: 25
CAM-2      A i r Florida standard
1558: 26                                                 1558: 26
CAM-2      Slushy runway, do you want me t o             LC           Eastern fourteen fifty-one runway
           do anything special f o r t h i s o r                      three s i x
           j u s t go f o r I t
                                                         1558:29
                                                         451          Fourteen f ifty-one
           INTRA-COCKPIT                                       AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TINE 1                                                       TIME 1
  SOURCE                   CONTENT                             SOURCE                CONTENT
1558: 31                                                   1558: 31
CAM- 1     Unless you got anything special                 LC         Apple f i f t y - e i g h t contact departure
           you'd l i k e t o do                                       control
1558: 33                                                   1558: 33
CAM-2      Unless Just takeoff the nose wheel              NYA 58       Fifty-eight so long
           early l i k e a s o f t f i e l d takeoff o r
           something
1558: 37
CAM- 2     I'11 take the nose wheel o f f and then
           we'll l e t I t f l y o f f
1558: 39
CAM-2      Be out the three two six, climbing t o
           five, 1'11 p u l l i t back to about one
           point f i v e f i v e supposed t o be about
           one s i x depending on how scared we are
1558: 45
CAM        ((Sound o f laughter))
1558: 47
CAM- 2     Up to five, squawk set, departure i s
           eighteen one, down t o flaps ((sound
           o f laughter))
                                                           1558:55
                                                           LC         Palm ninety t a x i into positon and
                                                                      hold, be ready f o r an imnediate
1558: 56
CAM-2      Oh, he pranged i t on there
              INTRA-COCKPIT                                        AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
     TIME 6                                                        TIME 6
     -
     SOURCE                    CONTENT                             SOURCE                CONTENT
                                                               1558: 58
                                                               ROO-2      Palm ninety positon and hold
.-- - .- -
CAM           ((Sound similar t o parking brake
              being l e t o f f ) )
1559: 00
CAM           ((Sound o f takeoff warning))
                                                                                                                            I
CAM           ((Sound similar t o f l a p lever activation))                                                               I-'
                                                                                                                           (0
1559:03                                                        1559: 03                                                    00
                                                                                                                           I
CAM           ((Sound o f takeoff warning ceases))             451        Eastern fourteen fifty-one, keep i t
                                                                          a t reduced s~eed. t r a f f i c ' s ooina t o
                                                                          depart, ~ r a &Uorld f i v e f i f t y - s i x
                                                                          l e f t turn o f f i f you can turn a t the
1559: 06                                                                  next taxiway, i t would be appreciated
PA            Ladies and gentlemen, we have j u s t                       nothing's been plowed
              been cleared on the runway f o r takeoff,
              f l i g h t attendents please be seated
1559:lS
CAM-2         F l i g h t attendant a l e r t
1559: 16
CAM-1         Given
1559: 16
CAM-2         Bleeds
           Irn-COCKPIT                          AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS

  TIME 6                                        TIME 6
                             CONTENT            SOURCE                   CONTENT

1559:17
CAM-1      They'reoff

1559:18                                    1559:18
CAM-2      Strobes, external l i g h t s   LC            Okay contact ground p o i n t seven r i g h t
                                                         there, thank you f o r your cooperation


1559:19
CAM-2      Anti skid



1559:21
CAM-2      Transponder


1559: 22
CAM-2      Takeoffs complete
                                           1559:24
                                           LC            Palm n i n e t y cleared f o r takeoff
                                           1559:26
                                           RDO-2         Palm n i n e t y cleared f o r takeoff
                                           1559:28
                                           LC            No delay on departure i f you w i l l ,
                                                         t r a f f i c ' s two and a h a l f o u t f o r
                                                         the runway

1559: 32                                   1559:32
CAM-1      Okay                            RDO-2         Okay

1559:45
CAM-1      Your t h r o t t l e s
                                                 AIR-GROUND COWUNICATIOHS

  TINE 6                                         TIME 6
  SOURCE                 CONTENT                 SOURCE            CONTENT

1559: 46
CAM-2      Okay
1559: 48
CM         ((Sound o f engine spoolup))


           Hollar I f you need the wipers

           I t ' s spooled

           Ho
CAM-?      who0
1559: 54
CAM-?      Really cold here

           Got 'an?
1559: 56                                    1559:s
CAM- 1     Real cold                        41M        Ground four one mike, we behind the
                                                       Piedmont?
           Real cold

           God. look a t that thing
                                            1559: 59
                                            LC         Four one mike, you're behind the
                                                       Piehnt
           1NTM-COCKPIT                                 AIR-GROUND CUMMICATIOHS
  TIME I                                                TIME 1
                          CONTENT                      SOURCE                COHTENT

1600:02
CAM-2      That & n e t seer r i g h t does i t ?
                                                    1600:03
                                                    LC          Eastern fourteen fifty-one, the wind
                                                                I s zero one zero a t one one you're
                                                                cleared t o land runway three six, the
                                                                visual range touchdown two thousand
                                                                eight hundred r o l l o u t one thousand six
                                                                hundred
1600: 05
CAM-2      Ah. that's not r i g h t
1600:07
CAM-2      (Hell)   ---

1600: 10
CAM-2      HIM. I don't think that's r i g h t
                                                    1600:ll
                                                    E451        Fourteen fifty-one cleared to land
                                                                over the 1lghts
1600: 19
CAM-2      Ah, maybe It i s
1600: 21
CAM-1      Hundred and twenty
1600:23
CAM-2      Idon't know
                                                    1600:24
                                                    OOJ       Oxonn f o r eight thousand J u l i e t
           INTRA-COCKPIT                               AIR-GROUND COWUNICATIOHS
  TIME 1                                               TIME 1
  -
  SOURCE                 CONTENT                       SOURCE             CONTENT

                                                 1600: 26
                                                 LC         Eight thousand J u l i e t runway three
                                                            six, you're cleared to land the
                                                            wind i s zero one zero a t one two
                                                 1600:28
                                                 OOJ         Eight thousand J u l i e t cleared t o
                                                             land
1600:31
CAM-1      Vee one
1600:33
CAM-1      Easy
                                                 1600: 36
                                                 LC         Six eight g u l f t a x i i n t o position
                                                            and hold be ready
1600: 37
CAM-1      Vee two
                                                 1600:38
                                                 68G        Position and hold s i x eight g u l f
1600:39
CAM        ((Sound o f stickshaker s t a r t s
           and continues t o impact))
                                                 1600:41
                                                 LC         Palm ninety, contact departure control
1600: 45
CAM-1      Forward, forward
1600:47
CAM-?      Easy
1600:48
CAM-1      We only want f i v e hundred
                                                             AIR-GROUND COMMUNICATIONS
  TIME 1                                                     TIME 6
  SOURCE                       CONTENT                       SOURCE

1600: 50
CAM-1      Cone on. forward
                                                         1600:52
                                                         172          Tower US A f r one seven two w i t h you
                                                                      ten o u t
1600:53
CAM-1      Forward
                                                         1600: 54
                                                         LC         US A i r one seven two, roger
1600:55
CAM-1      J u s t barely climb

                                                         1600: 56
                                                         LC         Eastern fourteen f i f t y - o n e , t u r n l e f t
                                                                    a t the next taxiway, advise when you
                                                                    c l e a r the runway, no delay c l e a r i n g
1600: 59
CAN        ( S t a l l i n g ) we're ( f a l l i n g )
1601:OO
CAM-2      Larry. we're going down, Larry
1601:Ol
CAM-1      I know i t

1601:Ol    ((Sound o f impact))
                                             APPENDIX G


                                                  REPORT
                                                   fÃ‡
                                                       Fat
                                     T I O H K I O A L SERVIOES OIVIMOK
                                  FNDERAL ~ U R E A U    OF i n v c m n o i i
                                         WASHIISTOM, 0.0. 1-


          Mr. Rudolf Kapuatin                  A p r i l 7, 1982
            Invtiqator-in-Charge
            National Tranaportation Safety Board
            800 Independence Avenue, S.W.      ro pum. 95-247269
            Washington, D. C.  20594
                                               L=.NO.        20316113 E 02
            CRASH OF A I R FLORIDA                            YOU* NO.
            BOEING 737, FLIGHT 90,
            WASHINGTON, D. C .
            JANUARY 13, 1982



b d b KÃ‘Ã‘ by:                Addrefe
-
:                              L e t t a r & t a d March 11, 1982

-   h   U    ~     ~   U   *   Uiacellanaoua
~ C - U      =a-               January 25, 1982, parsonally delivarad by Mr. Paul C.
                               Turner, under Laboratory Number 20125005 E 02.
            015        One aaqment of 1/4-inch wide maqnetic tape on a 5-inch reel.
Specimen received:                Meroh 15, 1982, paraonally delivered by Mr. Paul C.
                                  Turner, under Laboratory N<mbÃ‡ 20316113 E 02.
            Oc31 One AropÃ§ 7-inch raal of 1/4-inch wide magnetic tap*
                 marked i n p e r t "Air Fla." on a red and white l a b e l .
            ALSO SUBMITTED:

                       One transcription.
RÃ§aulof Â¥xamiiution
               An a u r a l and e l e c t r o n i c examination of the deaiqnatad portion
of a p e c h o n 015 r e v l a that t h e recorded apoken word if "off."
                       Wo ucuuinaeion m a ooaductad of a p a c h a n -31,        mince it i a
a copy of a p e c l a m 015.
page One                                                              Continued Ovr
                                                              APPENDIX G




          SA Bruce E.   Koonig conducted the miscollanwus
Â¥xmiiution
          Specinen 015 has previously been delivered to Mr. Daniel C.
Buudette of the Federal Aviation Administration, Washington,
D. C. Specimen Oc31 will be forwarded to your office. The
transcription will be refined by the Technical Services Division.




Page Two
20316113 E 02
                                             APPENDIX H



                                                                                           BM^x~EllTill~
                                                                                                  WOCEDURES
                                                                                             ICE AND RAIN
                                                                                              PROTECTION
                                     OPERATIONS           MANUAL

    THERMAL ANTI-ICE SYSTEMS                          Â   BÃˆPt2EFRprobewill.IceUPl
                                                          icing condition* if e l - i c *       18 m t
    ENGINE AMTI-tCE OPERATION                             In me; tberefOix, tte firrt mticÃ‘
                                                          bls l n d l a t i a n c a U be an e m t l c
    teglr Mtl-1-           -be          -on               rodlng.
    din-lag ill ground openti-,           -ff
    Â¥a cilab when Icing condition* * A t
    or u c u ~ u c i p t e d .          icing
    occur 4 > i i the f o ~ ~ o v t a g
                                    candltioam
    e x i t Â¥Liiult&Deoucly

Â        The ambient t Ã § a p e n t u 18 below
         8": (46.4'~).



    ~ o igm cozuidcred viaibl* mi-
    when it U t a v i c i b u t y
    or bÂ¥Â  Snow 1Âvet
    ambient fapenture
    or above.
                              18
                                     -
                                    mm mue
                                  when the
                                   -1.c (3o*T)
                                                                 Check Ãˆ VALVE CFEN ll&tÂ
                                                                                    -
                                                                 lllumlmte briahtly, then lUa.
                                                              EPR Indicator* OBSERVE iECHEjlSS




                  TEMPSHAIURE (TAT)IS ABOVE
                  10Â° (50.F) UNLESS VISIBLE              Eaglr Start Svltche*..............of?
                  m1STURE IS PRESaiT. PRO-
                  LCtl'2-) OPERATION U1CER THESE
                  CWI?XONS M M REDUCE THE
                                                              EPS Indicator*        -
                                                                               OBSERVE IHCKEASS
                                                                  h t t tbrurt U reQulred.


    la the a,      be-         o r lnXÃ§pa%-
    chugen, the tof-~tir           -=-         1-n-
    dicator i m not            -te       ln d*tT-
    milrig ?& t o f l b l i l t y Of uglae ic*.
    However, the total *lr                     la-
    dilation and the pretence of v r i b l *
    mi*-        or 1-      am & b      m t m-
    *ria 8TkllJlib. Icing DY be i
    F e t e d with rn TAT Of 1 0 " ~  or lover
    ud v r i b l e Qirtuxc.




                                                                          AFW 2323
0 Erratic EPFI lrdlatlou or wi&ral
  m nlAt1m ta r- 4 b8 mn Â¶dl-
  u o o of Â¥     icing.



    79
    Urn 30/75
                                                                                                       APPENDIX H



SUWLEMINTARY
MtOCEDUKES
ICE AND RAIN
PROTECTION                      OPERATIONS MANUAL
ENGINE ANTI-ICE VALVES FAIL IN THE                      Wing &tl-Ice        Switch................a!
CLOSED POSITION (AVOID ICING A R E A Ã

If the Ã§nelo atti-Ice witch 1s 01
u     d     ~     V      ~     V     E     ~        ~     ~       l     l         -
l i i t l n a f l bright, the re*p*ctlTe wave
hu failed to open properly. Prolonged
holding in moderate Icing ~            r should ~
                                           e                     kiet throt, u c o v a f~o r
be avoided. Uw c o n t l n ~ ~ u *  Ignition                     inti-lee penalty.
on the affected ondAe In 1cl.q eon-
ditlons. Loss of l e f t or right inti-                  hen          inti-ice 1s no longer re-
Ice ~ a l v eshould hare l i t t l e effect             au^rw&:
on Inlet &ul&Tine ud Ocae inti-                                                                           Â
icmg.                                                   w i n e toti-ice antch...............err

WING ANTI-ICE OPERATION
                                                              IPB Icdicstor*             -
                                                                             OBSERVE DiCREASE
                                                                 Beset thrwt U required..
There are two methods recooDenld for                    During descent v l t h vine =ti-lee or
operating the wing inti-Ice Â¥ysfo                      de-ice opentlcm, m ~ l n t ~ lant l e u t
d e prl-     method 1s to me M a Ae-                    5% B1.
leer by Blloiring the Ice to iccmu-
bte.!before turning wing antl-lce on.                   Proloocd operation in icing condl-
ThU procedure vill prerIte the delft-                   tlons with the leodlna l i c e ud trail-
est llrtoi.1 surface, the l e u t po-I-                 Ice Ã§dÃflap8 srtenld is not recoo-
ble mbnck Ice f o ~ t i ~          ud ,the              merde4. After ladling, trailing edge
l e u t thrut ami fuel penalty. nor-                    retraction to l e e thin flaps 1; l a
Â¥ally I t will not be neceuaay to                      not recooBeziAeA wtll lee ham beer re-




                                   -
shed ice w l o d l c i l l y w i e u exttraltd          wved o r & ground. InÃ§pÃ§ctican be
flight through Icing condltlorf I s                     e.
necessary (holding). Ice lesa than
3 Inches thick v i l l h e l i t t l e ef-
fect on Crplrne hwuiw. me sec-                          WING ANTI-ICE VALVES FAIL I N THE
Ordary method is to turn the                            CLOSED POSITION (AVOID ICING AREAS)
anti-ice witch on vhen v l q icing
I s yiaalble rod w e the ty-ton M in                    It the wing wtl-Ice w i t c h is CH ud
intl-lcer.                                              the VALVE Was U t h t is l l l l i r t e i l
                                                        bright,. the wing urtl-ice valve hu
If the TAT r e f i n e Is st or below 1 V C             f i l l e d to open prwrly. Asymmtrl-
ud Tisible w l t u r e '-Â pmÂ¥ent                      c a l wine icing hu l i t t l a effect on
vine inti-Icing c m be Â¥ctlmte to                      flight Ch&YUC*rirtlC8.         Extended
frweut Ice Ã § c c d t i o on the vine                  holding In *rate       icing are- lioulA
leading Ã§dÃ§e The irlniJiileld vlper                   tee tTolltd.
TM or EPR Ã‡lv the tint irdlcstloa
of lee forzing on the airplane.




                                                        U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1982 361-8?8/319
Intentionally Left Blank
 in Original Document
