Aircraft Accident Report 2/2011 - Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma, G-REDL, 1 April 2009 - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK &times; Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Air Accidents Investigation Branch reports Aircraft Accident Report 2/2011 - Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma, G-REDL, 1 April 2009 Formal Report AAR 2/2011. Report on the accident to Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma, registration G-REDL, 11 nm NE of Peterhead, Scotland on 1 April 2009. From: Air Accidents Investigation Branch Published 10 December 2014 Category: Commercial - rotorcraft Report type: Formal report Date of occurrence: 1 April 2009 Aircraft type: Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma Location: 11 nm NE of Peterhead, Scotland Registration: G-REDL Contents Summary Download full report Download bulletin summary Download Safety Recommendation document Summary: The Air Accidents Investigation Branch ( AAIB ) was notified of the accident by Aeronautical Rescue Co-ordination Centre (ARCC) Kinloss at 1326 hrs on 1 April 2009 and the investigation began the same day. In accordance with established international arrangements the Bureau d’Enquetes et d’Analyses Pour la Securité de l’Aviation Civile (BEA), representing the State of Manufacture of the helicopter, and the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), the Regulator responsible for the certification and continued airworthiness of the helicopter, were informed of the accident. The BEA appointed an Accredited Representative to lead a team of investigators from the BEA, Eurocopter (the helicopter manufacturer) and Turbomeca (the engine manufacturer). The EASA, the helicopter operator and the UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) also provided assistance to the AAIB team. The accident occurred whilst the helicopter was operating a scheduled passenger flight from the Miller Platform in the North Sea, to Aberdeen. Whilst cruising at 2,000 ft amsl, and some 50 minutes into the flight, there was a catastrophic failure of the helicopter’s Main Rotor Gearbox (MGB). The helicopter departed from cruise flight and shortly after this the main rotor and part of the epicyclic module separated from the fuselage. The helicopter then struck the surface of the sea with a high vertical speed. An extensive and complex investigation revealed that the failure of the MGB initiated in one of the eight second stage planet gears in the epicyclic module. The planet gear had fractured as a result of a fatigue crack, the precise origin of which could not be determined. However, analysis indicated that this is likely to have occurred in the loaded area of the planet gear bearing outer race. A metallic particle had been discovered on the epicyclic chip detector during maintenance on 25 March 2009, some 36 flying hours prior to the accident. This was the only indication of the impending failure of the second stage planet gear. The lack of damage on the recovered areas of the bearing outer race indicated that the initiation was not entirely consistent with the understood characteristics of spalling (see 1.6.5.7). The possibility of a material defect in the planet gear or damage due to the presence of foreign object debris could not be discounted. The investigation identified the following causal factor: The catastrophic failure of the Main Rotor Gearbox was a result of a fatigue fracture of a second stage planet gear in the epicyclic module. In addition the investigation identified the following contributory factors: The actions taken following the discovery of a magnetic particle on the epicyclic module chip detector on 25 March 2009, 36 flying hours prior to the accident, resulted in the particle not being recognised as an indication of degradation of the second stage planet gear, which subsequently failed. After 25 March 2009, the existing detection methods did not provide any further indication of the degradation of the second stage planet gear. The ring of magnets installed on the AS332 L2 and EC225 main rotor gearboxes reduced the probability of detecting released debris from the epicyclic module. Seventeen Safety Recommendations are made. Download full report: AAR 2-2011 - Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma, G-REDL Download bulletin summary: Summary: AAR 2/2011 - Aerospatiale (Eurocopter) AS332 L2 Super Puma, G-REDL Download Safety Recommendation document: Safety Recommendation Document: AS332L2 Super Puma, G-REDL Updates to this page Published 10 December 2014 Contents Explore the topic Air accidents and serious incidents Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright